Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
SECTION I 
INTRODUCTION TO NEUROLOGY
 1 Approach to the Patient with Neurologic
 Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Daniel H. Lowenstein, Joseph B. Martin, Stephen L. 
Hauser
 2 The Neurologic Screening Exam . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Daniel H. Lowenstein
 3 Video Atlas of the Detailed Neurologic 
Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Martin A. Samuels
 4 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders . . . . . . .13
William P. Dillon
 5 Electrodiagnostic Studies of Nervous System 
Disorders: EEG, Evoked Potentials,  
and EMG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
Michael J. Aminoff
 6 Technique of Lumbar Puncture . . . . . . . . . . . . .35
Elizabeth Robbins, Stephen L. Hauser
SECTION II
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF  
NEUROLOGIC DISEASE
 7 Pain: Pathophysiology and Management . . . . . . .40
James P. Rathmell, Howard L. Fields
 8 Headache . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51
Peter J. Goadsby, Neil H. Raskin
 9 Back and Neck Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .71
John W. Engstrom, Richard A. Deyo
10 Syncope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89
Roy Freeman
11 Dizziness and Vertigo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .98
Mark F. Walker, Robert B. Daroff
12 Weakness and Paralysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Michael J. Aminoff
13 Gait and Balance Disorders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Lewis Sudarsky
14 Video Library of Gait Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Gail Kang, Nicholas B. Galiﬁanakis, Michael  
Geschwind
15 Numbness, Tingling, and Sensory Loss . . . . . . . 117
Michael J. Aminoff, Arthur K. Asbury
16 Confusion and Delirium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
S. Andrew Josephson, Bruce L. Miller
17 Coma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
Allan H. Ropper
18 Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal 
Cerebral Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
M.-Marsel Mesulam
19 Video Atlas: Primary Progressive Aphasia, 
Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral  
Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini, Jennifer Ogar, 
Joel Kramer, Bruce L. Miller, Gil Rabinovici,  
Maria Carmela Tartaglia
20 Sleep Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Charles A. Czeisler, John W. Winkelman, Gary S. 
Richardson
21 Disorders of Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
Jonathan C. Horton
22 Video Library of Neuro-Ophthalmology . . . . . 198
Shirley H. Wray
23 Disorders of Smell and Taste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
Richard L. Doty, Steven M. Bromley
24 Disorders of Hearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
Anil K. Lalwani
SECTION III  
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
25 Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases . . . . . . . . . 218
Stephen L. Hauser, M. Flint Beal
26 Seizures and Epilepsy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Daniel H. Lowenstein
27 Cerebrovascular Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
Wade S. Smith, Joey D. English, S. Claiborne Johnston
CONTENTS
Contents
28 Neurologic Critical Care, Including 
Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy,  
and Subarachnoid Hemorrhage . . . . . . . . . . . . 294
J. Claude Hemphill, III, Wade S. Smith,  
Daryl R. Gress
29 Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias . . . . 310
William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller
30 Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal 
Movement Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
C. Warren Olanow, Anthony H. V. Schapira
31 Ataxic Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357
Roger N. Rosenberg
32 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor 
Neuron Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
Robert H. Brown, Jr.
33 Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System . . . . 380
Phillip A. Low, John W. Engstrom
34 Trigeminal Neuralgia, Bell’s Palsy, and 
Other Cranial Nerve Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
M. Flint Beal, Stephen L. Hauser
35 Diseases of the Spinal Cord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400
Stephen L. Hauser, Allan H. Ropper
36 Concussion and Other Head Injuries . . . . . . . . 415
Allan H. Ropper
37 Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous 
System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
Lisa M. DeAngelis, Patrick Y. Wen
38 Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and 
Hypothalamus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 439
Shlomo Melmed, J. Larry Jameson
39 Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating 
Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 474
Stephen L. Hauser, Douglas S. Goodin
40 Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, 
and Empyema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 493
Karen L. Roos, Kenneth L. Tyler
41 Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis . . . . . . . . . . 527
Walter J. Koroshetz, Morton N. Swartz
42 HIV Neurology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 536
Anthony S. Fauci, H. Clifford Lane
43 Prion Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549
Stanley B. Prusiner, Bruce L. Miller
44 Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes. . . . . . . . 558
Josep Dalmau, Myrna R. Rosenfeld
45 Peripheral Neuropathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 566
Anthony A. Amato, Richard J. Barohn
46 Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other 
Immune-Mediated Neuropathies . . . . . . . . . . . 599
Stephen L. Hauser, Anthony A. Amato
47 Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of 
the Neuromuscular Junction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 609
Daniel B. Drachman
48 Muscular Dystrophies and Other 
Muscle Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618
Anthony A. Amato, Robert H. Brown, Jr.
49 Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion
Body Myositis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 648
Marinos C. Dalakas
50 Special Issues in Inpatient Neurologic 
Consultation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 660
S. Andrew Josephson, Martin A. Samuels
51 Atlas of Neuroimaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 668
Andre Furtado, William P. Dillon
SECTION IV 
 CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME
52 Chronic Fatigue Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704
Gijs Bleijenberg, Jos W. M. van der Meer
SECTION V  
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
53 Biology of Psychiatric Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . 710
Robert O. Messing, John H. Rubenstein, Eric J. Nestler
54 Mental Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 720
Victor I. Reus
55 Neuropsychiatric Illnesses in War Veterans . . . . 742
Charles W. Hoge
SECTION VI  
ALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY
56 Alcohol and Alcoholism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 752
Marc A. Schuckit
57 Opioid Drug Abuse and Dependence . . . . . . . . 761
Thomas R. Kosten
vi
Contents
58 Cocaine and Other Commonly 
Abused Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 767
Nancy K. Mello, Jack H. Mendelson
Appendix 
 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance . . . . . . . 775
Alexander Kratz, Michael A. Pesce, Robert C. Basner, 
Andrew J. Einstein
vii
Review and Self-Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 801
Charles Wiener,Cynthia D. Brown,  
Anna R. Hemnes
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 851
This page intentionally left blank 
ix
Anthony A. Amato, MD
Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School; Department of 
Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
[45, 46, 48]
Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc
Professor of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco 
School of Medicine, San Francisco, California [5, 12, 15]
Richard J. Barohn, MD
Chairman, Department of Neurology; Gertrude and Dewey Ziegler 
Professor of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center,  
Kansas City, Kansas [45]
Robert C. Basner, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and 
Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, New York, New York [Appendix]
M. Flint Beal, MD
Chairman of Neurology and Neuroscience; Neurologist-in-Chief, 
New York Presbyterian Hospital; Weill Cornell Medical College, 
New York, New York [25, 34]
Gijs Bleijenberg, PhD
Professor; Head, Expert Centre for Chronic Fatigue, Radboud  
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands [52]
Steven M. Bromley, MD
Clinical Assistant Professor of Neurology, Department of Medicine, 
New Jersey School of Medicine and Dentistry–Robert Wood  
Johnson Medical School, Camden, New Jersey [23]
Cynthia D. Brown, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
[Review and Self-Assessment]
Robert H. Brown, Jr., MD, PhD
Chairman, Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worchester, Massachusetts [32, 48]
Charles A. Czeisler, MD, PhD, FRCP
Baldino Professor of Sleep Medicine; Director, Division of Sleep 
Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Chief, Division of Sleep Medi-
cine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [20]
Marinos C. Dalakas, MD, FAAN
Professor of Neurology, Department of Pathophysiology, National 
University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece [49]
Josep Dalmau, MD, PhD
ICREA Research Professor, Institute for Biomedical Investiga-
tions, August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS)/Hospital Clinic, Department 
of Neurology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Adjunct 
Professor of Neurology University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania [44]
Robert B. Daroff, MD
Professor and Chair Emeritus, Department of Neurology, Case 
Western Reserve University School of Medicine; University  
Hospitals–Case Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio [11]
Lisa M. DeAngelis, MD
Professor of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medical College; Chair,  
Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer  
Center, New York, New York [37]
Richard A. Deyo, MD, MPH
Kaiser Permanente Professor of Evidence-Based Family Medi-
cine, Department of Family Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Center for 
Research in Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health and Science University; Clinical Investigator, Kaiser Perman-
ente Center for Health Research, Portland, Oregon [9]
William P. Dillon, MD
Elizabeth Guillaumin Professor of Radiology, Neurology and 
Neurosurgery; Executive Vice-Chair, Department of Radiology and 
Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California [4, 51]
Richard L. Doty, PhD
Professor, Department of Otorhinolaryngology: Head and Neck 
Surgery; Director, Smell and Taste Center, University of  
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [23]
Daniel B. Drachman, MD
Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience, W. W. Smith Charitable 
Trust Professor of Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland [47]
Andrew J. Einstein, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine, Columbia University  
College of Physicians and Surgeons; Department of Medicine, Divi-
sion of Cardiology, Department of Radiology, Columbia University 
Medical Center and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, 
New York [Appendix]
Joey D. English, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor, Department of Neurology, Univeristy of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [27]
John W. Engstrom, MD
Betty Anker Fife Distinguished Professor of Neurology; Neurology 
Residency Program Director; Clinical Chief of Service, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [9, 33]
Anthony S. Fauci, MD, DSc (Hon), DM&S (Hon), DHL 
(Hon), DPS (Hon), DLM (Hon), DMS (Hon)
Chief, Laboratory of Immunoregulation; Director, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland [42]
Howard L. Fields, MD, PhD
Professor of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California [7]
Roy Freeman, MBCHB
Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,  
Massachusetts [10]
Andre Furtado, MD
Associate Specialist at the Department of Radiology,  
Neuroradiology Section, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California [51]
Nicholas B. Galiﬁanakis, MD, MPH
Assistant Clinical Professor, Surgical Movement Disorders Center, 
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California [14]
CONTRIBUTORS
Numbers in brackets refer to the chapter(s) written or cowritten by the contributor.
Contributors
x
Michael Geschwind, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine, San 
Francisco, California [14]
Peter J. Goadsby, MD, PhD, DSc, FRACP FRCP
Professor of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 
California; Honorary Consultant Neurologist, Hospital for Sick 
Children, London, United Kingdom [8]
Douglas S. Goodin, MD
Professor of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco 
School of Medicine, San Francisco, California [39]
Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, Uni-
versity of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [19]
Daryl R. Gress, MD, FAAN, FCCM
Associate Professor of Neurology
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia [28]
Stephen L. Hauser, MD
Robert A. Fishman Distinguished Professor and Chairman, Depart-
ment of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California [1, 6, 25, 34, 35, 39, 46]
Anna R. Hemnes, MD
Assistant Professor, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical 
Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee [Review and Self-Assessment]
J. Claude Hemphill, III, MD, MAS
Professor of Clinical Neurology and Neurological Surgery, De-
partment of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco; 
Director of Neurocritical Care, San Francisco General Hospital, San 
Francisco, California [28]
Charles W. Hoge, MD
Senior Scientist and Staff Psychiatrist, Center for Psychiatry and 
Neuroscience, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and Water 
Reed Army Medical Center, Silver Spring, Maryland [55]
Jonathan C. Horton, MD, PhD
William F. Hoyt Professor of Neuro-ophthalmology, Profes-
sor of Ophthalmology, Neurology and Physiology, University 
of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, 
California [21]
J. Larry Jameson, MD, PhD
Robert G. Dunlop Professor of Medicine; Dean, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Executive Vice President of the 
University of Pennsylvania for the Health System, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania [38]
S. Claiborne Johnston, MD, PhD
Professor of Neurology and Epidemiology, University of California, 
San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California [27]
S. Andrew Josephson, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Neurology; Director, Neuro-
hospitalist Program, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California [16, 50]
Gail Kang, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor of Neurology, Memory and Aging 
Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California [14]
Walter J. Koroshetz, MD
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland [41]
Thomas R. Kosten, MD
Baylor College of Medicine; Veteran’s Administration Medical  
Center, Houston, Texas [57]
Joel Kramer, PsyD
Clinical Professor of Neuropsychology in Neurology; Director of 
Neuropsychology, Memory and Aging Center, University of  
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [19]
Alexander Kratz, MD, PhD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons; Director, Core 
Laboratory, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York [Appendix]
Anil K. Lalwani, MD
Professor, Departments of Otolaryngology, Pediatrics, and Physiol-
ogy and Neuroscience, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, New York [24]
H. Clifford Lane, MD
Clinical Director; Director, Division of Clinical Research; Deputy 
Director, Clinical Research and Special Projects; Chief, Clinical and 
Molecular Retrovirology Section, Laboratory of Immunoregula-
tion, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland [42]
Phillip A. Low, MD
Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Professor of Neurology, Mayo 
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota [33]
Daniel H. Lowenstein, MD
Dr. Robert B. and Mrs. Ellinor Aird Professor of Neurology; Direc-
tor, Epilepsy Center, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California [1, 2, 26]
Joseph B. Martin, MD, PhD
Edward R. and Anne G. Leﬂer Professor, Department of Neurobi-
ology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts [1]
Nancy K. Mello, PhD
Professor of Psychology (Neuroscience), Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts; Director, Alcohol and Drug Abuse Research 
Center, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts [58]
Shlomo Melmed, MD
Senior Vice President and Dean of the Medical Faculty, Cedars-
Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California [38]
Jack H. Mendelson,a MD
Professor of Psychiatry (Neuroscience), Harvard Medical School, 
Belmont, Massachusetts [58]
Robert O. Messing, MD
Professor, Department of Neurology; Senior Associate Director, 
Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California [53]
M.-Marsel Mesulam, MD
Professor of Neurology, Psychiatry and Psychology, Cognitive Neu-
rology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [18]
Bruce L. Miller, MD
AW and Mary Margaret Clausen Distinguished Professor of  
Neurology, University of California, San Francisco School of  
Medicine, San Francisco, California [16, 19, 29, 43]
a Deceased
Contributors
xi
Eric J. Nestler, MD, PhD
Nash Family Professor and Chair, Department of Neuroscience; Di-
rector, Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, New York [53]
Jennifer Ogar, MS
Speech Pathologist, Memory and Aging Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California; Acting Chief of 
Speech Pathology at the Department of Veterans Affairs, Martinez, 
California [19]
C. Warren Olanow, MD, FRCPC
Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, New York [30]
Michael A. Pesce, PhD
Professor Emeritus of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia Uni-
versity College of Physicians and Surgeons; Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, New York [Appendix]
Stanley B. Prusiner, MD
Director, Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases; Professor, De-
partment of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California [43]
Gil Rabinovici, MD
Attending Neurologist, Memory and Aging Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [19]
Neil H. Raskin, MD
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California [8]
James P. Rathmell, MD
Associate Professor of Anesthesia, Harvard Medical School; Chief, 
Division of Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts [7]
Victor I. Reus, MD, DFAPA, FACP
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco 
School of Medicine; Langley Porter Neuropsychiatric Institute, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California [54]
Gary S. Richardson, MD
Senior Research Scientist and Staff Physician, Henry Ford Hospital, 
Detroit, Michigan [20]
Elizabeth Robbins, MD
Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of California,  
San Francisco, San Francisco, California [6]
Karen L. Roos, MD
John and Nancy Nelson Professor of Neurology and Professor of 
Neurological Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana [40]
Allan H. Ropper, MD
Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School; Executive Vice 
Chair of Neurology, Raymond D. Adams Distinguished Clinician, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [17, 35, 36]
Roger N. Rosenberg, MD
Zale Distinguished Chair and Professor of Neurology, Department 
of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas [31]
Myrna R. Rosenfeld, MD, PhD
Professor of Neurology and Chief, Division of Neuro-oncology, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [44]
John H. Rubenstein, MD, PhD
Nina Ireland Distinguished Professor in Child Psychiatry, Center for 
Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [53]
Martin A. Samuels, MD, DSc(hon), FAAN, MACP, FRCP
Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School; Chairman, De-
partment of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts [3, 50]
Anthony H. V. Schapira, DSc, MD, FRCP, FMedSci
University Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University  
College London; National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosur-
gery, Queen’s Square, London, United Kingdom [30]
Marc A. Schuckit, MD
Distinguished Professor of Psychiatry, University of California, San 
Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California [56]
William W. Seeley, MD
Associate Professor of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center,  
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [29]
Wade S. Smith, MD, PhD
Professor of Neurology, Daryl R. Gress Endowed Chair of Neu-
rocritical Care and Stroke; Director, University of California, San 
Francisco Neurovascular Service, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California [27, 28]
Lewis Sudarsky, MD
Associate Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School; Director 
of Movement Disorders, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts [13]
Morton N. Swartz, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Chief, Jackson 
Firm Medical Service and Infectious Disease Unit, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [41]
Maria Carmela Tartaglia, MD, FRCPC
Clinical Instructor of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, Uni-
versity of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California [19]
Kenneth L. Tyler, MD
Reuler-Lewin Family Professor and Chair, Department of Neurol-
ogy; Professor of Medicine and Microbiology, University of Colo-
rado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado; Chief of Neurology, 
University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, Colorado [40]
Jos W. M. van der Meer, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine; Head, Department of General Internal Medi-
cine, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands [52]
Mark F. Walker, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Neurology, Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine; Daroff-Dell’ Osso Ocular 
Motility Laboratory, Louis Stokes Cleveland Department of Veter-
ans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio [11]
Patrick Y. Wen, MD
Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School; Dana-Farber Can-
cer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts [37]
Charles M. Wiener, MD
Dean/CEO Perdana University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Selangor, Malaysia; Professor of Medicine and Physiology,  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland  
[Review and Self-Assessment]
John W. Winkelman, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School; Medical 
Director, Sleep Health Centers, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [20]
Shirley H. Wray, MB, ChB, PhD, FRCP
Professor of Neurology, Harvard Medical School; Department of 
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
[22]
This page intentionally left blank 
xiii
The ﬁrst two editions of Harrison’s Neurology in Clinical 
Medicine were unqualiﬁed successes. Readers responded 
enthusiastically to the convenient, attractive, expanded, 
and updated stand-alone volume, which was based 
upon the neurology and psychiatry sections from Harri-
son’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Our original goal was 
to provide, in an easy-to-use format, full coverage of 
the most authoritative information available anywhere 
of clinically important topics in neurology and psychia-
try, while retaining the focus on pathophysiology and 
therapy that has always been characteristic of Harrison’s.
This new third edition of Harrison’s Neurology in Clinical 
Medicine has been extensively updated to highlight recent 
advances in the understanding, diagnosis, treatment, and 
prevention of neurologic and psychiatric diseases. New 
chapters discuss the pathogenesis and treatment of syn-
cope, dizziness and vertigo, smell and taste disorders, Par-
kinson’s disease, tumors of the nervous system, peripheral 
neuropathy, and neuropsychiatric problems among war 
veterans, among other topics. Extensively updated cover-
age of the dementias highlights new ﬁndings from genet-
ics, molecular imaging, cell biology, and clinical research 
that are transforming our understanding of these common 
problems. Neuroimmunology is another dynamic and 
rapidly changing ﬁeld of neurology, and the new edition 
of Harrison’s provides extensive coverage of progress in 
this area, including a practical guide to navigating the large 
number of treatment options now available for multiple 
sclerosis.  Another new chapter reviews advances in deci-
phering the pathogenesis of common psychiatric disorders 
and discusses challenges to the development of more ef-
fective treatments. Many illustrative neuroimaging ﬁgures 
appear throughout the section, and an updated and ex-
panded atlas of neuroimaging ﬁndings is also included. We 
are extremely pleased that readers of the new edition of 
Harrison’s will for the ﬁrst time be able to access a remark-
able series of high-deﬁnition video presentations including 
wonderful guides to screening and detailed neurological 
examinations, as well as video libraries illustrating gait dis-
orders, focal cerebral disorders, and neuro-ophthalmologic 
disturbances.
For many physicians, neurologic diseases represent 
particularly challenging problems. Acquisition of the req-
uisite clinical skills is often viewed as time-consuming, 
difﬁcult to master, and requiring a working knowledge 
of obscure anatomic facts and laundry lists of diagnostic 
possibilities. The patients themselves may be difﬁcult, as 
neurologic disorders often alter an individual’s capacity 
to recount the history of an illness or to even recognize 
that something is wrong. An additional obstacle is the 
development of independent neurology services, depart-
ments, and training programs at many medical centers, 
reducing the exposure of trainees in internal medicine to 
neurologic problems. All of these forces, acting within 
the fast paced environment of modern medical practice, 
can lead to an overreliance on unfocused neuroimaging 
tests, suboptimal patient care, and unfortunate outcomes. 
Because neurologists represent less than 1% of all physi-
cians, the vast majority of neurologic care must be de-
livered by nonspecialists who are often generalists and 
usually internists.
The old adage that neurologists “know everything but 
do nothing” has been rendered obsolete by advances in 
molecular medicine, imaging, bioengineering, and clinical 
research. Examples of new therapies include: thrombolytic 
therapy for acute ischemic stroke; endovascular recanaliza-
tion for cerebrovascular disorders; intensive monitoring of 
brain pressure and cerebral blood ﬂow for brain injury; 
effective therapies for immune-mediated neurologic dis-
orders; new designer drugs for migraine; the ﬁrst genera-
tion of rational therapies for neurodegenerative diseases; 
neural stimulators for Parkinson’s disease; drugs for narco-
lepsy and other sleep disorders; and control of epilepsy by 
surgical resection of small seizure foci precisely localized 
by functional imaging and electrophysiology. The pipeline 
continues to grow, stimulated by a quickening tempo of 
discoveries generating opportunities for rational design of 
new diagnostics, interventions, and drugs.
The founding editors of Harrison’s Principles of Inter-
nal Medicine acknowledged the importance of neurology 
but were uncertain as to its proper role in a textbook of 
internal medicine. An initial plan to exclude neurology 
from the ﬁrst edition (1950) was reversed at the eleventh 
hour, and a neurology section was hastily prepared by 
Houston Merritt. By the second edition, the section was 
considerably enlarged by Raymond D. Adams, whose 
inﬂuence on the textbook was profound. The third 
neurology editor, Joseph B. Martin, brilliantly led the 
book during the 1980s and 1990s as neurology was trans-
formed from a largely descriptive discipline to one of the 
most dynamic and rapidly evolving areas of medicine. 
With these changes, the growth of neurology coverage 
in Harrison’s became so pronounced that Harrison sug-
gested the book be retitled, The Details of Neurology and 
Some Principles of Internal Medicine. His humorous com-
ment, now legendary, underscores the depth of coverage 
of neurologic medicine in Harrison’s beﬁtting its critical 
role in the practice of internal medicine.
The Editors are indebted to our authors, a group 
of internationally recognized authorities who have 
PREFACE
magniﬁcently distilled a daunting body of information 
into the essential principles required to understand and 
manage commonly encountered neurologic problems. 
Thanks also to Dr. Elizabeth Robbins who has served for 
more than 15 years as managing editor of the neurology 
section of Harrison’s; she has overseen the complex logis-
tics required to produce a multiauthored textbook, and 
has promoted exceptional standards for clarity, language, 
and style. Finally, we wish to acknowledge and express 
our great appreciation to our colleagues at McGraw-Hill. 
This new volume was championed by James Shanahan 
and impeccably managed by Kim Davis.
We live in an electronic, wireless age. Information 
is downloaded rather than pulled from the shelf. Some 
have questioned the value of traditional books in this 
new era. We believe that as the volume of information, 
and the ways to access this information, continues to 
grow, the need to grasp the essential concepts of medi-
cal practice becomes even more challenging. One of 
our young colleagues recently remarked that he uses 
the Internet to ﬁnd facts, but that he reads Harrison’s 
to learn medicine. Our aim has always been to pro-
vide the reader with an integrated, organic summary 
of the science and the practice of medicine rather than 
a mere compendium of chapters, and we are delighted 
and humbled by the continuing and quite remarkable 
growth in popularity of Harrison’s at a time when many 
“classics” in medicine seem less relevant than in years 
past. We are of course cognizant of the ﬂexibility in in-
formation delivery that today’s readers seek, and so we 
have also made the third edition of Harrison’s Neurology 
in Clinical Medicine available in a number of eBook for-
mats for all major devices, including the iPad (available 
via the iBookstore).
It is our sincere hope that you will enjoy using Har-
rison’s Neurology in Clinical Medicine, Third Edition, as an 
authoritative source for the most up-to-date information 
in clinical neurology.
Stephen L. Hauser, MD
Preface
xiv
NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experi-
ence broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are re-
quired. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with sources 
believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is complete 
and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of publication. 
However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes in medical sci-
ences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other party who has been 
involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the in-
formation contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they 
disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained 
from use of the information contained in this work. Readers are encouraged 
to conﬁrm the information contained herein with other sources. For example 
and in particular, readers are advised to check the product information sheet 
included in the package of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that 
the information contained in this work is accurate and that changes have not 
been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for adminis-
tration. This recommendation is of particular importance in connection with 
new or infrequently used drugs. 
The global icons call greater attention to key epidemiologic and clinical differences in the practice of medicine 
throughout the world.
The genetic icons identify a clinical issue with an explicit genetic relationship.
Review and self-assessment questions and answers were taken from Wiener CM, 
Brown CD, Hemnes AR (eds). Harrison’s Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2012, ISBN 978-0-07-177195-5.
This page intentionally left blank 
SECTION I
 
INTRODUCTION TO 
NEUROLOGY
 Daniel H. Lowenstein 
■  Joseph B. Martin 
■  Stephen L. Hauser 
2
 Neurologic diseases are common and costly.  According 
to recent estimates by the World Health  Organization, 
neurologic disorders affect over 1 billion people world-
wide ( Table 1-1 ), constitute 6.3% of the global  burden 
of disease, and cause 12% of global deaths. Most patients 
with neurologic symptoms seek care from internists 
and other generalists rather than from neurologists. 
Because therapies now exist for many neurologic disor-
ders, a skillful approach to diagnosis is essential. Errors 
 commonly result from an overreliance on costly neuro-
imaging procedures and laboratory tests, which, while 
useful, do not substitute for an adequate history and 
examination. The proper approach to the patient with 
a neurologic illness begins with the patient and focuses 
the clinical problem ﬁ rst in anatomic and then in patho-
physiologic terms; only then should a speciﬁ c diagnosis 
be entertained. This method ensures that technology is 
judiciously applied, a correct diagnosis is established in 
an efﬁ cient manner, and treatment is promptly initiated. 
 
 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH 
NEUROLOGIC DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 1
TABLE 1-1
 PREVALENCE OF NEUROLOGIC AND PSYCHIATRIC 
DISEASES WORLDWIDE 
DISORDER
PATIENTS, MILLIONS
Nutritional disorders and 
 neuropathies
352
Migraine
326
Trauma
170
Cerebrovascular diseases
61
Epilepsy
50
Dementia
24
Neurologic infections
18
 Source: World Health Organization estimates, 2002–2005.
 THE NEUROLOGIC METHOD 
 LOCATE THE LESION(S) 
 The ﬁ rst priority is to identify the region of the nervous 
system that is likely to be responsible for the symptoms. 
Can the disorder be mapped to one speciﬁ c location, 
is it multifocal, or is a diffuse process present? Are the 
symptoms restricted to the nervous system, or do they 
arise in the context of a systemic illness? Is the prob-
lem in the central nervous system (CNS), the peripheral 
nervous system (PNS), or both? If in the CNS, is the 
cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, cerebellum, or 
spinal cord responsible? Are the pain-sensitive meninges 
involved? If in the PNS, could the disorder be located 
in peripheral nerves and, if so, are motor or sensory 
nerves primarily affected, or is a lesion in the neuromus-
cular junction or muscle more likely? 
 The ﬁ rst clues to deﬁ ning the anatomic area of 
involvement appear in the history, and the examination 
is then directed to conﬁ rm or rule out these impressions 
and to clarify uncertainties. A more detailed examina-
tion of a particular region of the CNS or PNS is often 
indicated. For example, the examination of a patient 
who presents with a history of ascending paresthesias and 
weakness should be directed toward  deciding, among 
other things, if the location of the lesion is in the spi-
nal cord or peripheral nerves. Focal back pain, a spinal 
cord sensory level, and incontinence suggest a spinal 
cord origin, whereas a stocking-glove pattern of sensory 
loss suggests peripheral nerve disease; areﬂ exia usually 
indicates peripheral neuropathy but may also be present 
with spinal shock in acute spinal cord disorders. 
 Deciding “where the lesion is” accomplishes the task 
of limiting the possible etiologies to a manageable, ﬁ nite 
number. In addition, this strategy safeguards against 
making serious errors. Symptoms of recurrent vertigo, 
 
CHAPTER 1
3
Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease
diplopia, and nystagmus should not trigger “multiple 
sclerosis” as an answer (etiology) but “brainstem” or 
“pons” (location); then a diagnosis of brainstem arte-
riovenous malformation will not be missed for lack of 
consideration. Similarly, the combination of optic neu-
ritis and spastic ataxic paraparesis should initially suggest 
optic nerve and spinal cord disease; multiple sclerosis 
(MS), CNS syphilis, and vitamin B12 deﬁciency are treat-
able disorders that can produce this syndrome. Once the 
question, “Where is the lesion?” is answered, then the 
question, “What is the lesion?” can be addressed.
DEFINE THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Clues to the pathophysiology of the disease process 
may also be present in the history. Primary neuronal 
(gray matter) disorders may present as early cogni-
tive disturbances, movement disorders, or seizures, 
whereas white matter involvement produces predomi-
nantly “long tract” disorders of motor, sensory, visual, 
and cerebellar pathways. Progressive and symmetric 
symptoms often have a metabolic or degenerative ori-
gin; in such cases lesions are usually not sharply cir-
cumscribed. Thus, a patient with paraparesis and a clear 
spinal cord sensory level is unlikely to have vitamin 
B12 deﬁciency as the explanation. A Lhermitte symptom 
(electric shock–like sensations evoked by neck ﬂexion) 
is due to ectopic impulse generation in white matter 
pathways and occurs with demyelination in the cervi-
cal spinal cord; among many possible causes, this symp-
tom may indicate MS in a young adult or compressive 
cervical spondylosis in an older person. Symptoms that 
worsen after exposure to heat or exercise may indicate 
conduction block in demyelinated axons, as occurs in 
MS. A patient with recurrent episodes of diplopia and 
dysarthria associated with exercise or fatigue may have 
a  disorder of neuromuscular transmission such as myas-
thenia gravis. Slowly advancing visual scotoma with 
luminous edges, termed fortiﬁcation spectra, indicates 
spreading cortical depression, typically with migraine.
THE NEUROLOGIC HISTORY
Attention to the description of the symptoms experienced 
by the patient and substantiated by family members 
and others often permits an accurate localization and 
determination of the probable cause of the complaints, 
even before the neurologic examination is performed. 
The history also helps to bring a focus to the neuro-
logic examination that follows. Each complaint should 
be pursued as far as possible to elucidate the location of 
the lesion, the likely underlying pathophysiology, and 
potential etiologies. For example, a patient complains 
of weakness of the right arm. What are the associated 
features? Does the patient have difﬁculty with brushing 
hair or reaching upward (proximal) or buttoning but-
tons or opening a twist-top bottle (distal)? Negative 
associations may also be crucial. A patient with a right 
hemiparesis without a language deﬁcit likely has a lesion 
(internal capsule, brainstem, or spinal cord) different 
from that of a patient with a right hemiparesis and apha-
sia (left hemisphere). Other pertinent features of the 
history include the following:
1. Temporal course of the illness. It is important to 
 determine the precise time of appearance and rate 
of progression of the symptoms experienced by the 
patient. The rapid onset of a neurologic complaint, 
occurring within seconds or minutes, usually indi-
cates a vascular event, a seizure, or migraine. The 
onset of sensory symptoms located in one extremity 
that spread over a few seconds to adjacent  portions 
of that extremity and then to the other regions of 
the body suggests a seizure. A more gradual onset 
and less well-localized symptoms point to the 
 possibility of a transient ischemic attack (TIA). A 
similar but slower temporal march of symptoms 
accompanied by headache, nausea, or visual dis-
turbance  suggests migraine. The presence of “posi-
tive” sensory symptoms (e.g., tingling or sensations 
that are difﬁcult to describe) or involuntary motor 
movements suggests a seizure; in contrast, tran-
sient loss of function (negative symptoms) suggests 
a TIA. A stuttering onset where symptoms appear, 
stabilize, and then progress over hours or days also 
suggests cerebrovascular disease; an additional history 
of transient remission or regression indicates that the 
process is more likely due to ischemia rather than 
hemorrhage. A gradual evolution of symptoms over 
hours or days suggests a toxic, metabolic, infectious, 
or inﬂammatory process. Progressing symptoms 
associated with the systemic manifestations of fever, 
stiff neck, and altered level of consciousness imply 
an infectious process. Relapsing and remitting symp-
toms involving different levels of the nervous system 
suggest MS or other inﬂammatory processes. Slowly 
progressive symptoms without remissions are char-
acteristic of neurodegenerative disorders, chronic 
infections, gradual intoxications, and neoplasms.
2. Patients’ descriptions of the complaint. The same words 
often mean different things to different patients. 
“Dizziness” may imply impending syncope, a 
sense of disequilibrium, or true spinning vertigo. 
 “Numbness” may mean a complete loss of feeling, a 
positive sensation such as tingling, or even weakness. 
“Blurred vision” may be used to describe unilat-
eral visual loss, as in transient monocular blindness, 
or diplopia. The interpretation of the true meaning 
of the words used by patients to describe symptoms 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
4
obviously becomes even more complex when there 
are differences in primary languages and cultures.
3. Corroboration of the history by others. It is almost always 
helpful to obtain additional information from family, 
friends, or other observers to corroborate or expand 
the patient’s description. Memory loss, aphasia, loss 
of insight, intoxication, and other factors may impair 
the patient’s capacity to communicate normally with 
the examiner or prevent openness about factors that 
have contributed to the illness. Episodes of loss of 
consciousness necessitate that details be sought from 
observers to ascertain precisely what has happened 
during the event.
4. Family history. Many neurologic disorders have an 
underlying genetic component. The presence of a 
Mendelian disorder, such as Huntington’s disease or 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy, is often obvious 
if family data are available. More detailed questions 
about family history are often necessary in polygenic 
disorders such as MS, migraine, and many types of 
epilepsy. It is important to elicit family history about 
all illnesses, in addition to neurologic and psychiatric 
disorders. A familial propensity to hypertension or 
heart disease is relevant in a patient who presents 
with a stroke. There are numerous inherited neu-
rologic diseases that are associated with multisystem 
manifestations that may provide clues to the correct 
diagnosis (e.g., neuroﬁbromatosis, Wilson’s disease, 
neuro-ophthalmic syndromes).
5. Medical illnesses. Many neurologic diseases occur in 
the context of systemic disorders. Diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, and abnormalities of blood lipids pre-
dispose to cerebrovascular disease. A solitary mass 
lesion in the brain may be an abscess in a patient 
with valvular heart disease, a primary hemorrhage in 
a patient with a coagulopathy, a lymphoma or toxo-
plasmosis in a patient with AIDS, or a metastasis in a 
patient with underlying cancer. Patients with malig-
nancy may also present with a neurologic paraneo-
plastic syndrome (Chap. 44) or complications from 
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Marfan’s syndrome 
and related collagen disorders predispose to dissection 
of the cranial arteries and aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage; the latter may also occur with polycystic 
kidney disease. Various neurologic disorders occur 
with dysthyroid states or other endocrinopathies. It is 
especially important to look for the presence of sys-
temic diseases in patients with peripheral neuropathy. 
Most patients with coma in a hospital setting have a 
metabolic, toxic, or infectious cause.
6. Drug use and abuse and toxin exposure. It is essential to 
inquire about the history of drug use, both prescribed 
and illicit. Sedatives, antidepressants, and other psy-
choactive medications are frequently associated with 
acute confusional states in the elderly.  Aminoglycoside 
antibiotics may exacerbate symptoms of weakness in 
patients with disorders of neuromuscular transmission, 
such as myasthenia gravis, and may cause dizziness 
secondary to ototoxicity. Vincristine and other anti-
neoplastic drugs can cause peripheral neuropathy, and 
immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine can 
produce encephalopathy. Excessive vitamin inges-
tion can lead to disease; for example vitamin A and 
pseudotumor cerebri, or pyridoxine and peripheral 
neuropathy. Many patients are unaware that over-
the-counter sleeping pills, cold preparations, and 
diet pills are actually drugs. Alcohol, the most prev-
alent  neurotoxin, is often not recognized as such by 
patients, and other drugs of abuse such as cocaine 
and heroin can cause a wide range of neurologic 
 abnormalities. A history of environmental or  industrial 
exposure to neurotoxins may provide an essential 
clue; consultation with the patient’s coworkers or 
employer may be required.
7. Formulating an impression of the patient. Use the 
opportunity while taking the history to form an 
impression of the patient. Is the information forth-
coming, or does it take a circuitous course? Is there 
evidence of anxiety, depression, or hypochondriasis? 
Are there any clues to defects in language, memory, 
insight, or inappropriate behavior? The neurologic 
assessment begins as soon as the patient comes into 
the room and the ﬁrst introduction is made.
THE NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
The neurologic examination is challenging and  complex; 
it has many components and includes a number of skills 
that can be mastered only through repeated use of the 
same techniques on a large number of individuals with 
and without neurologic disease. Mastery of the com-
plete neurologic examination is usually important only 
for physicians in neurology and associated specialties. 
However, knowledge of the basics of the examina-
tion, especially those components that are effective in 
screening for neurologic dysfunction, is essential for all 
 clinicians, especially generalists.
There is no single, universally accepted sequence of 
the examination that must be followed, but most clini-
cians begin with assessment of mental status followed by 
the cranial nerves, motor system, sensory system, coor-
dination, and gait. Whether the examination is basic or 
comprehensive, it is essential that it be performed in 
an orderly and systematic fashion to avoid errors and 
 serious omissions. Thus, the best way to learn and gain 
expertise in the examination is to choose one’s own 
approach and practice it frequently and do it in the 
same exact sequence each time.
The detailed description of the neurologic examina-
tion that follows describes the more commonly used 
 
CHAPTER 1
5
Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease
parts of the examination, with a particular emphasis on 
the components that are considered most helpful for 
the assessment of common neurologic problems. Each 
section also includes a brief description of the minimal 
examination necessary for adequate screening for abnor-
malities in a patient who has no symptoms suggesting 
neurologic dysfunction. A screening examination done 
in this way can be completed in 3–5 min.
Several additional points about the examination are 
worth noting. First, in recording observations, it is 
important to describe what is found rather than to apply 
a poorly deﬁned medical term (e.g., “patient groans to 
sternal rub” rather than “obtunded”). Second, subtle 
CNS abnormalities are best detected by carefully com-
paring a patient’s performance on tasks that require 
simultaneous activation of both cerebral hemispheres 
(e.g., eliciting a pronator drift of an outstretched arm 
with the eyes closed; extinction on one side of bilater-
ally applied light touch, also with eyes closed; or decreased 
arm swing or a slight asymmetry when walking). Third, if 
the patient’s complaint is brought on by some activity, 
reproduce the activity in the ofﬁce. If the complaint is 
of dizziness when the head is turned in one direction, 
have the patient do this and also look for associated 
signs on examination (e.g., nystagmus or  dysmetria). If 
pain occurs after walking two blocks, have the patient 
leave the ofﬁce and walk this distance and immediately 
return, and repeat the relevant parts of the examination. 
Finally, the use of tests that are individually  tailored 
to the patient’s problem can be of value in assessing 
changes over time. Tests of walking a 7.5-m (25-ft) 
distance (normal, 5–6 s; note assistance, if any), repeti-
tive ﬁnger or toe tapping (normal, 20–25 taps in 5 s), or 
handwriting are examples.
MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: During the interview, look for 
 difﬁculties with communication and determine whether the 
patient has recall and insight into recent and past events.
The mental status examination is underway as soon 
as the physician begins observing and talking with the 
patient. If the history raises any concern for abnormali-
ties of higher cortical function or if cognitive problems 
are observed during the interview, then detailed testing 
of the mental status is indicated. The patient’s ability to 
understand the language used for the examination, cul-
tural background, educational experience, sensory or 
motor problems, or comorbid conditions need to be 
factored into the applicability of the tests and interpreta-
tion of results.
The Folstein mini-mental status examination (MMSE) 
(Table 29-5) is a standardized screening examination of 
cognitive function that is extremely easy to adminis-
ter and takes <10 min to complete. Using age-adjusted 
values for deﬁning normal performance, the test is 
∼85% sensitive and 85% speciﬁc for making the diag-
nosis of dementia that is moderate or severe, espe-
cially in educated patients. When there is sufﬁcient 
time available, the MMSE is one of the best meth-
ods for documenting the current mental status of the 
patient, and this is especially useful as a baseline assess-
ment to which future scores of the MMSE can be 
compared.
Individual elements of the mental status examina-
tion can be subdivided into level of consciousness, 
 orientation, speech and language, memory, fund of 
information, insight and judgment, abstract thought, 
and calculations.
Level of consciousness is the patient’s relative state of 
awareness of the self and the environment, and ranges 
from fully awake to comatose. When the patient is 
not fully awake, the examiner should describe the 
responses to the minimum stimulus necessary to elicit 
a reaction, ranging from verbal commands to a brief, 
painful stimulus such as a squeeze of the trapezius 
muscle. Responses that are directed toward the stimu-
lus and signify some degree of intact cerebral function 
(e.g., opening the eyes and looking at the examiner 
or reaching to push away a painful stimulus) must be 
distinguished from reﬂex responses of a spinal origin 
(e.g., triple ﬂexion response—ﬂexion at the ankle, 
knee, and hip in response to a painful stimulus to 
the foot).
Orientation is tested by asking the person to state his 
or her name, location, and time (day of the week and 
date); time is usually the ﬁrst to be affected in a variety 
of conditions.
Speech is assessed by observing articulation, rate, 
rhythm, and prosody (i.e., the changes in pitch and 
accentuation of syllable and words).
Language is assessed by observing the content of 
the patient’s verbal and written output, response to 
 spoken commands, and ability to read. A typical test-
ing sequence is to ask the patient to name successively 
more detailed components of clothing, a watch, or a 
pen; repeat the phrase “No ifs, ands, or buts”; follow a 
three-step, verbal command; write a sentence; and read 
and respond to a written command.
Memory should be analyzed according to three main 
time scales: (1) immediate memory is assessed by say-
ing a list of three items and having the patient repeat 
the list immediately, (2) short-term memory is tested by 
asking the patient to recall the same three items 5 and 
15 min later, and (3) long-term memory is evaluated 
by determining how well the patient is able to provide 
a  coherent chronologic history of his or her illness or 
 personal events.
Fund of information is assessed by asking questions 
about major historic or current events, with special 
attention to educational level and life experiences.
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
6
Abnormalities of insight and judgment are usually 
detected during the patient interview; a more detailed 
assessment can be elicited by asking the patient to 
describe how he or she would respond to situations 
having a variety of potential outcomes (e.g., “What 
would you do if you found a wallet on the sidewalk?”).
Abstract thought can be tested by asking the patient 
to describe similarities between various objects or con-
cepts (e.g., apple and orange, desk and chair, poetry 
and sculpture) or to list items having the same attributes 
(e.g., a list of four-legged animals).
Calculation ability is assessed by having the patient 
carry out a computation that is appropriate to the 
patient’s age and education (e.g., serial subtraction of 
7 from 100 or 3 from 20; or word problems involving 
simple arithmetic).
CRANIAL NERVE EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Check the fundi, visual ﬁelds, pupil 
size and reactivity, extraocular movements, and facial 
 movements.
The cranial nerves (CN) are best examined in 
numerical order, except for grouping together CN III, 
IV, and VI because of their similar function.
CN I (olfactory)
Testing is usually omitted unless there is suspicion for 
inferior frontal lobe disease (e.g., meningioma). With 
eyes closed, ask the patient to sniff a mild stimulus such 
as toothpaste or coffee and identify the odorant.
CN II (optic)
Check visual acuity (with eyeglasses or contact lens cor-
rection) using a Snellen chart or similar tool. Test the 
visual ﬁelds by confrontation, i.e., by comparing the 
patient’s visual ﬁelds to your own. As a screening test, 
it is usually sufﬁcient to examine the visual ﬁelds of 
both eyes simultaneously; individual eye ﬁelds should 
be tested if there is any reason to suspect a problem of 
vision by the history or other elements of the examina-
tion, or if the screening test reveals an abnormality. Face 
the patient at a distance of approximately 0.6–1.0 m 
(2–3 ft) and place your hands at the periphery of your 
visual ﬁelds in the plane that is equidistant between you 
and the patient. Instruct the patient to look directly at 
the center of your face and to indicate when and where 
he or she sees one of your ﬁngers moving. Beginning 
with the two inferior quadrants and then the two supe-
rior quadrants, move your index ﬁnger of the right 
hand, left hand, or both hands simultaneously and 
observe whether the patient detects the movements. 
A single small-amplitude movement of the ﬁnger is 
sufﬁcient for a normal response. Focal perimetry and 
tangent screen examinations should be used to map out 
visual ﬁeld defects fully or to search for subtle abnor-
malities. Optic fundi should be examined with an oph-
thalmoscope, and the color, size, and degree of swelling 
or elevation of the optic disc noted, as well as the color 
and texture of the retina. The retinal vessels should be 
checked for size, regularity, arterial-venous nicking at 
crossing points, hemorrhage, exudates, etc.
CN III, IV, VI (oculomotor, trochlear, abducens)
Describe the size and shape of pupils and reaction to 
light and accommodation (i.e., as the eyes converge 
while following your ﬁnger as it moves toward the 
bridge of the nose). To check extraocular movements, 
ask the patient to keep his or her head still while track-
ing the movement of the tip of your ﬁnger. Move 
the target slowly in the horizontal and vertical planes; 
observe any paresis, nystagmus, or abnormalities of 
smooth pursuit (saccades, oculomotor ataxia, etc.). 
If necessary, the relative position of the two eyes, both 
in primary and multidirectional gaze, can be assessed 
by comparing the reﬂections of a bright light off both 
pupils. However, in practice it is typically more use-
ful to determine whether the patient describes diplopia 
in any direction of gaze; true diplopia should almost 
always resolve with one eye closed. Horizontal nystag-
mus is best assessed at 45° and not at extreme lateral 
gaze (which is uncomfortable for the patient); the target 
must often be held at the lateral position for at least a 
few seconds to detect an abnormality.
CN V (trigeminal)
Examine sensation within the three territories of the 
branches of the trigeminal nerve (ophthalmic, maxillary, 
and mandibular) on each side of the face. As with other 
parts of the sensory examination, testing of two sensory 
modalities derived from different anatomic pathways 
(e.g., light touch and temperature) is sufﬁcient for a 
screening examination. Testing of other modalities, the 
corneal reﬂex, and the motor component of CN V (jaw 
clench—masseter muscle) is indicated when suggested 
by the history.
CN VII (facial)
Look for facial asymmetry at rest and with spontaneous 
movements. Test eyebrow elevation, forehead wrin-
kling, eye closure, smiling, and cheek puff. Look in par-
ticular for differences in the lower versus upper facial 
muscles; weakness of the lower two-thirds of the face 
with preservation of the upper third suggests an upper 
motor neuron lesion, whereas weakness of an entire 
side suggests a lower motor neuron lesion.
 
CHAPTER 1
7
Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease
CN VIII (vestibulocochlear)
Check the patient’s ability to hear a ﬁnger rub or whis-
pered voice with each ear. Further testing for air versus 
mastoid bone conduction (Rinne) and lateralization of a 
512-Hz tuning fork placed at the center of the forehead 
(Weber) should be done if an abnormality is detected by 
history or examination. Any suspected problem should 
be followed up with formal audiometry. For further dis-
cussion of assessing vestibular nerve function in the set-
ting of dizziness, coma, or hearing loss, see Chaps. 11, 
17, and 24, respectively.
CN IX, X (glossopharyngeal, vagus)
Observe the position and symmetry of the palate and 
uvula at rest and with phonation (“aah”). The pha-
ryngeal (“gag”) reﬂex is evaluated by stimulating the 
 posterior pharyngeal wall on each side with a sterile, 
blunt object (e.g., tongue blade), but the reﬂex is often 
absent in normal individuals.
CN XI (spinal accessory)
Check shoulder shrug (trapezius muscle) and head rota-
tion to each side (sternocleidomastoid) against resistance.
CN XII (hypoglossal)
Inspect the tongue for atrophy or fasciculations, position 
with protrusion, and strength when extended against 
the inner surface of the cheeks on each side.
MOTOR EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Look for muscle atrophy and check 
extremity tone. Assess upper extremity strength by check-
ing for pronator drift and strength of wrist or ﬁnger exten-
sors. Tap the biceps, patellar, and Achilles reﬂexes. Test 
for lower extremity strength by having the patient walk 
normally and on heels and toes.
The motor examination includes observations of mus-
cle appearance, tone, strength, and reﬂexes. Although gait 
is in part a test of motor function, it is usually evaluated 
separately at the end of the examination.
Appearance
Inspect and palpate muscle groups under good light and 
with the patient in a comfortable and symmetric position. 
Check for muscle fasciculations, tenderness, and atrophy 
or hypertrophy. Involuntary  movements may be present at 
rest (e.g., tics, myoclonus, choreoathetosis),  during main-
tained posture (pill-rolling tremor of Parkinson’s disease), 
or with voluntary movements (intention tremor of cere-
bellar disease or familial tremor).
Tone
Muscle tone is tested by measuring the resistance to 
passive movement of a relaxed limb. Patients often 
have difﬁculty relaxing during this procedure, so it is 
useful to distract the patient to minimize active move-
ments. In the upper limbs, tone is assessed by rapid 
pronation and supination of the forearm and ﬂexion 
and extension at the wrist. In the lower limbs, while 
the patient is supine the examiner’s hands are placed 
behind the knees and rapidly raised; with normal tone 
the ankles drag along the table surface for a variable 
distance before rising, whereas increased tone results in 
an immediate lift of the heel off the surface. Decreased 
tone is most commonly due to lower motor neuron or 
peripheral nerve disorders. Increased tone may be evi-
dent as spasticity (resistance determined by the angle 
and velocity of motion; corticospinal tract disease), 
rigidity (similar resistance in all angles of motion; extra-
pyramidal disease), or paratonia (ﬂuctuating changes 
in resistance; frontal lobe pathways or normal difﬁ-
culty in relaxing). Cogwheel rigidity, in which passive 
motion elicits jerky interruptions in resistance, is seen 
in parkinsonism.
Strength
Testing for pronator drift is an extremely useful method 
for screening upper limb weakness. The patient is asked 
to hold both arms fully extended and parallel to the 
ground with eyes closed. This position should be main-
tained for ∼10 s; any ﬂexion at the elbow or ﬁngers or 
pronation of the forearm, especially if asymmetric, is a 
sign of potential weakness. Muscle strength is further 
assessed by having the patient exert maximal effort for 
the particular muscle or muscle group being tested. It 
is important to isolate the muscles as much as possible, 
i.e., hold the limb so that only the muscles of interest 
are active. It is also helpful to palpate accessible muscles 
as they contract. Grading muscle strength and evaluat-
ing the patient’s effort is an art that takes time and prac-
tice. Muscle strength is traditionally graded using the 
following scale:
0 = no movement
1 =  ﬂicker or trace of contraction but no associated 
movement at a joint
2 = movement with gravity eliminated
3 = movement against gravity but not against resistance
4− = movement against a mild degree of resistance
4 = movement against moderate resistance
4+ = movement against strong resistance
5 = full power
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
8
However, in many cases it is more practical to use 
the following terms:
Paralysis = no movement
Severe weakness = movement with gravity eliminated
Moderate weakness =  movement against gravity but not 
against mild resistance
Mild weakness =  movement against moderate 
resistance
Full strength
Noting the pattern of weakness is as important as 
assessing the magnitude of weakness. Unilateral or bilat-
eral weakness of the upper limb extensors and lower 
limb ﬂexors (“pyramidal weakness”) suggests a lesion of 
the pyramidal tract, bilateral proximal weakness suggests 
myopathy, and bilateral distal weakness suggests periph-
eral neuropathy.
Reﬂexes
Muscle stretch reﬂexes
Those that are typically assessed include the biceps (C5, 
C6), brachioradialis (C5, C6), and triceps (C7, C8) 
reﬂexes in the upper limbs and the patellar or quadri-
ceps (L3, L4) and Achilles (S1, S2) reﬂexes in the lower 
limbs. The patient should be relaxed and the muscle 
positioned midway between full contraction and exten-
sion. Reﬂexes may be enhanced by asking the patient 
to voluntarily contract other, distant muscle groups 
 (Jendrassik maneuver). For example, upper limb reﬂexes 
may be reinforced by voluntary teeth-clenching, and 
the Achilles reﬂex by hooking the ﬂexed ﬁngers of the 
two hands together and attempting to pull them apart. 
For each reﬂex tested, the two sides should be tested 
sequentially, and it is important to determine the small-
est stimulus required to elicit a reﬂex rather than the 
maximum response. Reﬂexes are graded according to 
the following scale:
0 = absent 
3 = exaggerated
1 = present but diminished 
4 = clonus
2 = normoactive
Cutaneous reﬂexes
The plantar reﬂex is elicited by stroking, with a nox-
ious stimulus such as a tongue blade, the lateral sur-
face of the sole of the foot beginning near the heel and 
moving across the ball of the foot to the great toe. The 
normal reﬂex consists of plantar ﬂexion of the toes. 
With upper motor neuron lesions above the S1 level 
of the spinal cord, a paradoxical extension of the toe is 
observed, associated with fanning and extension of the 
other toes (termed an extensor plantar response, or  Babinski 
sign). However, despite its popularity, the reliability 
and validity of the Babinski sign for identifying upper 
motor neuron weakness is limited—it is far more use-
ful to rely on tests of tone, strength, stretch reﬂexes, and 
coordination. Superﬁcial abdominal reﬂexes are elicited 
by gently stroking the abdominal surface near the umbi-
licus in a diagonal fashion with a sharp object (e.g., the 
wooden end of a cotton-tipped swab) and observing the 
movement of the umbilicus. Normally, the umbilicus 
will pull toward the stimulated quadrant. With upper 
motor neuron lesions, these reﬂexes are absent. They 
are most helpful when there is preservation of the upper 
(spinal cord level T9) but not lower (T12) abdomi-
nal reﬂexes, indicating a spinal lesion between T9 and 
T12, or when the response is asymmetric. Other use-
ful cutaneous reﬂexes include the cremasteric (ipsilateral 
elevation of the testicle following stroking of the medial 
thigh; mediated by L1 and L2) and anal (contraction of 
the anal sphincter when the perianal skin is scratched; 
mediated by S2, S3, S4) reﬂexes. It is particularly 
important to test for these reﬂexes in any patient with 
suspected injury to the spinal cord or lumbosacral roots.
Primitive reﬂexes
With disease of the frontal lobe pathways, several 
primitive reﬂexes not normally present in the adult 
may appear. The suck response is elicited by lightly 
touching the center of the lips, and the root response 
the corner of the lips, with a tongue blade; the patient 
will move the lips to suck or root in the direction of 
the stimulus. The grasp reﬂex is elicited by touching 
the palm between the thumb and index ﬁnger with the 
examiner’s ﬁngers; a positive response is a forced grasp 
of the examiner’s hand. In many instances stroking the 
back of the hand will lead to its release. The palmo-
mental response is contraction of the mentalis muscle 
(chin) ipsilateral to a scratch stimulus diagonally applied 
to the palm.
Sensory examination
• The bare minimum: Ask whether the patient can feel light 
touch and the temperature of a cool object in each distal 
extremity. Check double simultaneous stimulation using 
light touch on the hands.
Evaluating sensation is usually the most unreliable 
part of the examination, because it is subjective and is 
difﬁcult to quantify. In the compliant and discerning 
patient, the sensory examination can be extremely help-
ful for the precise localization of a lesion. With patients 
who are uncooperative or lack an understanding of 
the tests, it may be useless. The examination should be 
focused on the suspected lesion. For example, in spinal 
cord, spinal root, or peripheral nerve abnormalities, all 
major sensory modalities should be tested while looking 
for a pattern consistent with a spinal level and derma-
tomal or nerve distribution. In patients with lesions at 
or above the brainstem, screening the primary sensory 
modalities in the distal extremities along with tests of 
“cortical” sensation is usually sufﬁcient.
 
CHAPTER 1
9
Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease
The ﬁve primary sensory modalities—light touch, 
pain, temperature, vibration, and joint position—are 
tested in each limb. Light touch is assessed by stimu-
lating the skin with single, very gentle touches of the 
examiner’s ﬁnger or a wisp of cotton. Pain is tested 
using a new pin, and temperature is assessed using a 
metal object (e.g., tuning fork) that has been immersed 
in cold and warm water. Vibration is tested using a 
128-Hz tuning fork applied to the distal phalanx of the 
great toe or index ﬁnger just below the nail bed. By 
placing a ﬁnger on the opposite side of the joint being 
tested, the examiner compares the patient’s threshold 
of vibration perception with his or her own. For joint 
position testing, the examiner grasps the digit or limb 
laterally and distal to the joint being assessed; small 1- to 
2-mm excursions can usually be sensed. The  Romberg 
maneuver is primarily a test of proprioception. 
The patient is asked to stand with the feet as close 
together as necessary to maintain balance while the eyes 
are open, and the eyes are then closed. A loss of balance 
with the eyes closed is an abnormal response.
“Cortical” sensation is mediated by the  parietal 
lobes and represents an integration of the primary 
sensory modalities; testing cortical sensation is only 
meaningful when primary sensation is intact.  Double 
simultaneous stimulation is especially useful as a 
screening test for cortical function; with the patient’s 
eyes closed, the examiner lightly touches one or both 
hands and asks the patient to identify the stimuli. With 
a parietal lobe lesion, the patient may be unable to 
identify the stimulus on the contralateral side when 
both hands are touched. Other modalities relying 
on the parietal cortex include the discrimination of 
two closely placed stimuli as separate (two-point dis-
crimination), identiﬁcation of an object by touch and 
manipulation alone  (stereognosis), and the identiﬁca-
tion of numbers or  letters written on the skin surface 
(graphesthesia).
COORDINATION EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Test rapid alternating movements of the 
hands and the ﬁnger-to-nose and heel-knee-shin maneuvers.
Coordination refers to the orchestration and ﬂuid-
ity of movements. Even simple acts require coopera-
tion of agonist and antagonist muscles, maintenance of 
posture, and complex servomechanisms to control the 
rate and range of movements. Part of this integration 
relies on normal function of the cerebellar and basal 
ganglia systems. However, coordination also requires 
intact muscle strength and kinesthetic and proprio-
ceptive information. Thus, if the examination has dis-
closed abnormalities of the motor or sensory systems, 
the patient’s coordination should be assessed with these 
limitations in mind.
Rapid alternating movements in the upper limbs are 
tested separately on each side by having the patient make 
a ﬁst, partially extend the index ﬁnger, and then tap 
the index ﬁnger on the distal thumb as quickly as pos-
sible. In the lower limb, the patient rapidly taps the foot 
against the ﬂoor or the examiner’s hand.  Finger-to-nose 
testing is primarily a test of cerebellar function; the 
patient is asked to touch his or her index ﬁnger repeti-
tively to the nose and then to the examiner’s out-
stretched ﬁnger, which moves with each repetition. 
A similar test in the lower extremity is to have the 
patient raise the leg and touch the examiner’s ﬁnger with 
the great toe. Another cerebellar test in the lower limbs 
is the heel-knee-shin maneuver; in the supine position 
the patient is asked to slide the heel of each foot from 
the knee down the shin of the other leg. For all these 
movements, the accuracy, speed, and rhythm are noted.
GAIT EXAMINATION
• The bare minimum: Observe the patient while walking 
normally, on the heels and toes, and along a straight line.
Watching the patient walk is the most important part 
of the neurologic examination. Normal gait requires 
that multiple systems—including strength, sensation, and 
coordination—function in a highly integrated fashion. 
Unexpected abnormalities may be detected that prompt 
the examiner to return in more detail to other aspects of 
the examination. The patient should be observed while 
walking and turning normally, walking on the heels, 
walking on the toes, and walking heel-to-toe along a 
straight line. The examination may reveal decreased arm 
swing on one side (corticospinal tract disease), a stooped 
posture and short-stepped gait (parkinsonism), a broad-
based unstable gait (ataxia), scissoring (spasticity), or a 
high-stepped, slapping gait (posterior column or periph-
eral nerve disease), or the patient may appear to be stuck 
in place (apraxia with frontal lobe disease).
NEUROLOGIC DIAGNOSIS
The clinical data obtained from the history and exami-
nation are interpreted to arrive at an anatomic localiza-
tion that best explains the clinical ﬁndings (Table 1-2), 
to narrow the list of diagnostic possibilities, and to select 
the laboratory tests most likely to be informative. The 
laboratory assessment may include (1) serum electrolytes; 
complete blood count; and renal, hepatic, endocrine, 
and immune studies; (2) cerebrospinal ﬂuid  examination; 
(3) focused neuroimaging studies (Chap. 4); or (4) elec-
trophysiologic studies (Chap. 5). The anatomic localiza-
tion, mode of onset and course of illness, other medical 
data, and laboratory ﬁndings are then integrated to estab-
lish an etiologic diagnosis.
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
10
The neurologic examination may be normal even in 
patients with a serious neurologic disease, such as sei-
zures, chronic meningitis, or a TIA. A comatose patient 
may arrive with no available history, and in such cases 
the approach is as described in Chap. 17. In other 
patients, an inadequate history may be overcome by a 
succession of examinations from which the course of 
the illness can be inferred. In perplexing cases it is  useful 
to remember that uncommon presentations of com-
mon diseases are more likely than rare etiologies. Thus, 
even in tertiary care settings, multiple strokes are usu-
ally due to emboli and not vasculitis, and dementia with 
myoclonus is usually Alzheimer’s disease and not due to 
a prion disorder or a paraneoplastic cause. Finally, the 
most important task of a primary care physician faced 
with a patient who has a new neurologic complaint is 
to assess the urgency of referral to a specialist. Here, the 
imperative is to rapidly identify patients likely to have 
nervous system infections, acute strokes, and spinal cord 
compression or other treatable mass lesions and arrange 
for immediate care.
TABLE 1-2
FINDINGS HELPFUL FOR LOCALIZATION WITHIN THE 
NERVOUS SYSTEM
SIGNS
Cerebrum
Abnormal mental status or cognitive 
impairment
Seizures
Unilateral weaknessa and sensory 
abnormalities including head and limbs
Visual ﬁeld abnormalities
Movement abnormalities (e.g., diffuse 
incoordination, tremor, chorea)
Brainstem
Isolated cranial nerve abnormalities 
(single or multiple)
“Crossed” weaknessa and sensory 
abnormalities of head and limbs, e.g., 
weakness of right face and left arm 
and leg
Spinal cord
Back pain or tenderness
Weaknessa and sensory abnormalities 
sparing the head
Mixed upper and lower motor neuron 
ﬁndings
Sensory level
Sphincter dysfunction
Spinal roots
Radiating limb pain
Weaknessb or sensory abnormalities fol-
lowing root distribution (see Figs. 15-2 
and 15-3)
Loss of reﬂexes
Peripheral nerve
Mid or distal limb pain
Weaknessb or sensory abnormalities 
 following nerve distribution (see 
Figs. 15-2 and 15-3)
“Stocking or glove” distribution of 
 sensory loss
Loss of reﬂexes
Neuromuscular 
junction
Bilateral weakness including face 
 (ptosis, diplopia, dysphagia) and 
 proximal limbs
Increasing weakness with exertion
Sparing of sensation
Muscle
Bilateral proximal or distal weakness
Sparing of sensation
aWeakness along with other abnormalities having an “upper motor 
neuron” pattern, i.e., spasticity, weakness of extensors > ﬂexors in 
the upper extremity and ﬂexors > extensors in the lower extremity, 
hyperreﬂexia.
bWeakness along with other abnormalities having a “lower motor 
neuron” pattern, i.e., ﬂaccidity and hyporeﬂexia.
 Daniel H. Lowenstein 
11
 Knowledge of the basic neurologic examination is 
an essential clinical skill. A simple neurologic screen-
ing examination—assessment of mental status, cranial 
nerves, motor system, sensory system, coordination, 
and gait—can be reliably performed in 3–5 min. 
Although the components of the examination may 
appear daunting at ﬁ rst, skills usually improve rapidly 
with repetition and practice. In this video, the tech-
nique of performing a simple and efﬁ cient screen-
ing examination is presented. Videos for this chapter 
can be accessed at the following link: http://www
.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/.
 THE NEUROLOGIC SCREENING EXAM 
 CHAPTER 2 
 Martin A. Samuels 
12
 The comprehensive neurologic examination is an irreplace-
able tool for the efﬁ cient diagnosis of neurologic disorders. 
Mastery of its details requires knowledge of normal nervous 
system anatomy and physiology combined with personal 
experience performing orderly and systematic examinations 
on large numbers of patients and healthy individuals. In 
the hands of a great clinician, the neurologic examination 
also becomes a thing of beauty—the pinnacle of the art of 
medicine. In this video, the most commonly used compo-
nents of the examination are presented in detail, with a par-
ticular emphasis on those elements that are most helpful for 
assessment of common neurologic problems. Videos for this 
chapter can be accessed at the following link: http://www
.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/.
 VIDEO ATLAS OF THE DETAILED NEUROLOGIC 
EXAMINATION 
 CHAPTER 3 
 William P. Dillon 
13
 The clinician caring for patients with neurologic symptoms 
is faced with myriad imaging options, including com-
puted tomography (CT), CT angiography (CTA), per-
fusion CT (pCT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
MR angiography (MRA), functional MRI (fMRI), 
MR spectroscopy (MRS), MR neurography (MRN), 
diffusion and diffusion track imaging (DTI), susceptibil-
ity weighted MR imaging (SWI), and  perfusion MRI 
(pMRI). In addition, an increasing number of interven-
tional neuroradiologic techniques are available, includ-
ing angiography catheter embolization, coiling, and 
stenting of vascular structures; and spine diagnostic and 
interventional techniques such as diskography, transfo-
raminal and translaminar epidural and nerve root injec-
tions and blood patches. Recent developments such 
as multidetector CTA (MDCTA) and gadolinium-
enhanced MRA, have narrowed the  indications for 
conventional angiography, which is now reserved for 
patients in whom small-vessel detail is essential for diag-
nosis or for whom concurrent interventional therapy is 
planned  ( Table 4-1 ) . 
 In general, MRI is more sensitive than CT for the 
detection of lesions affecting the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS), particularly those of the spinal cord, 
 cranial nerves, and posterior fossa structures. Diffusion 
MR, a sequence sensitive to the microscopic motion 
of water, is the most sensitive technique for detect-
ing acute ischemic stroke of the brain or spinal cord, 
and it is also useful in the detection of encephalitis, 
abscesses, and prion diseases. CT, however, is quickly 
acquired and is widely available, making it a pragmatic 
choice for the initial evaluation of patients with acute 
changes in mental status, suspected acute stroke, hem-
orrhage, and intracranial or spinal trauma. CT is also 
more sensitive than MRI for visualizing ﬁ ne osseous 
detail and is indicated in the initial evaluation of con-
ductive hearing loss as well as lesions affecting the skull 
base and  calvarium. MR may, however, add important 
diagnostic information regarding bone marrow inﬁ ltra-
tive processes that are difﬁ cult to detect on CT. 
 COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
 TECHNIQUE 
 The CT image is a cross-sectional representation of 
anatomy created by a computer-generated analysis of 
the attenuation of x-ray beams passed through a sec-
tion of the body. As the x-ray beam, collimated to the 
desired slice width, rotates around the patient, it passes 
through selected regions in the body. X-rays that are 
not attenuated by body structures are detected by sensi-
tive x-ray detectors aligned 180° from the x-ray tube. 
A computer calculates a “back projection” image from 
the 360° x-ray attenuation proﬁ le. Greater x-ray attenu-
ation (e.g., as caused by bone) results in areas of high 
 “density,” while soft tissue structures that have poor 
attenuation of x-rays such as organs and air-ﬁ lled cavi-
ties are lower in density. The resolution of an image 
depends on the radiation dose, the detector size, colli-
mation (slice thickness), the ﬁ eld of view, and the matrix 
size of the display. A modern CT scanner is capable of 
obtaining sections as thin as 0.5–1 mm with submillime-
ter resolution at a speed of 0.3–1 s per rotation; complete 
studies of the brain can be completed in 2–10 s. 
 Multidetector CT (MDCT) is now standard in most 
radiology departments. Single or multiple (from 4 to 
256) detectors positioned 180° to the x-ray source result 
in multiple slices per revolution of the beam around 
the patient. The table moves continuously through the 
rotating x-ray beam, generating a continuous “helix” of 
information that can be reformatted into various slice 
thicknesses and planes. Advantages of MDCT include 
shorter scan times, reduced patient and organ motion, 
and the ability to acquire images dynamically during 
the infusion of intravenous contrast that can be used to 
 NEUROIMAGING IN NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 4 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
14
construct CT angiograms of vascular structures and CT 
perfusion images (Fig. 4-1B and C). CTA images are 
postprocessed for display in three dimensions to yield 
angiogram-like images (Fig. 4-1C, 4-2 E and F, and 
see Fig. 27-4). CTA has proved useful in assessing the 
cervical and intracranial arterial and venous anatomy.
Intravenous iodinated contrast is often administered 
prior to or during a CT study to identify vascular struc-
tures and to detect defects in the blood-brain barrier 
(BBB) that are associated with disorders such as tumors, 
infarcts, and infections. In the normal CNS, only  vessels 
and structures lacking a BBB (e.g., the pituitary gland, 
choroid plexus, and dura) enhance after contrast admin-
istration. The use of iodinated contrast agents car-
ries a small risk of allergic reaction and adds additional 
expense. While helpful in characterizing mass lesions as 
well as essential for the acquisition of CTA studies, the 
decision to use contrast material should always be con-
sidered carefully.
INDICATIONS
CT is the primary study of choice in the evaluation 
of an acute change in mental status, focal neurologic 
ﬁndings, acute trauma to the brain and spine, sus-
pected subarachnoid hemorrhage, and conductive hear-
ing loss (Table 4-1). CT is complementary to MR in 
the evaluation of the skull base, orbit, and osseous 
 structures of the spine. In the spine, CT is useful in 
evaluating patients with osseous spinal stenosis and 
spondylosis, but MRI is often preferred in those with 
 neurologic deﬁcits. CT can also be obtained following 
intrathecal contrast injection to evaluate the intracra-
nial cisterns (CT cisternography) for cerebrospinal ﬂuid 
(CSF) ﬁstula, as well as the spinal subarachnoid space 
(CT myelography).
COMPLICATIONS
CT is safe, fast, and reliable. Radiation exposure 
depends on the dose used but is normally between 
2 and 5 mSv (millisievert) for a routine brain CT study. 
Care must be taken to reduce exposure when imaging 
children. With the advent of MDCT, CTA, and CT 
perfusion, care must be taken to appropriately mini-
mize radiation dose whenever possible. Advanced soft-
ware that permits noise reduction may permit lower 
radiation doses. The most frequent complications are 
associated with use of intravenous contrast agents. Two 
broad categories of contrast media, ionic and non-
ionic, are in use. Although ionic agents are relatively 
safe and inexpensive, they are associated with a higher 
incidence of reactions and side effects. As a result, ionic 
agents have been largely replaced by safer nonionic 
compounds.
TABLE 4-1
GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF CT, ULTRASOUND, 
AND MRI
CONDITION
RECOMMENDED  
TECHNIQUE
Hemorrhage
 Acute parenchymal
CT, MR
 Subacute/chronic
MRI
  Subarachnoid  
  hemorrhage
CT, CTA, lumbar puncture → 
angiography
Aneurysm
Angiography > CTA, MRA
Ischemic infarction
 Hemorrhagic infarction
CT or MRI
 Bland infarction
MRI > CT, CTA, angiography
  Carotid or vertebral 
  dissection
MRI/MRA
  Vertebral basilar  
  insufﬁciency
CTA, MRI/MRA
 Carotid stenosis
CTA > Doppler ultrasound, 
MRA
Suspected mass lesion
 Neoplasm, primary or 
metastatic
MRI + contrast
 Infection/abscess
MRI + contrast
  Immunosuppressed with 
  focal ﬁndings
MRI + contrast
Vascular malformation
MRI ± angiography
White matter disorders
MRI
 Demyelinating disease
MRI ± contrast
Dementia
MRI > CT
Trauma
 Acute trauma
CT (noncontrast)
  Shear injury/chronic 
  hemorrhage
MRI + gradient echo imaging
Headache/migraine
CT (noncontrast)/MRI
Seizure
  First time, no focal 
  neurologic deﬁcits
?CT as screen ± contrast
 Partial complex/refrac-
tory
MRI with coronal T2W imag-
ing
Cranial neuropathy
MRI with contrast
Meningeal disease
MRI with contrast
Spine
Low back pain
 No neurologic deﬁcits
MRI or CT after 4 weeks
 With focal deﬁcits
MRI > CT
Spinal stenosis
MRI or CT
Cervical spondylosis
MRI or CT myelography
Infection
MRI + contrast, CT
Myelopathy
MRI + contrast
Arteriovenous malforma-
tion
MRI, angiography
Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; CTA, CT angiography; 
MRA, MR angiography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; T2W, 
T2-weighted.
 
CHAPTER 4
Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
15
FIGURE 4-1
CT angiography (CTA) of ruptured anterior cerebral artery 
aneurysm in a patient presenting with acute headache. 
A. Noncontrast CT demonstrates subarachnoid hemorrhage 
and mild obstructive hydrocephalus. B. Axial maximum-intensity 
projection from CT angiography demonstrates enlargement 
of the anterior cerebral artery (arrow). C. 3D surface recon-
struction using a workstation conﬁrms the anterior cerebral 
aneurysm and demonstrates its orientation and relationship to 
nearby vessels (arrow). CTA image is  produced by 0.5–1-mm 
helical CT scans performed during a rapid bolus infusion of 
intravenous  contrast medium.
Contrast nephropathy may result from hemodynamic 
changes, renal tubular obstruction and cell  damage, 
or immunologic reactions to contrast agents. A rise in 
serum creatinine of at least 85 μmol/L (1 mg/dL) within 
48 h of contrast administration is often used as a deﬁ-
nition of contrast nephropathy, although other causes 
of acute renal failure must be excluded. The prognosis 
is usually favorable, with serum creatinine levels return-
ing to baseline within 1–2 weeks. Risk factors for 
 contrast nephropathy include advanced age (>80 years), 
preexisting renal disease (serum creatinine exceeding 
2 mg/dL), solitary kidney, diabetes mellitus, dehydration, 
paraproteinemia, concurrent use of nephrotoxic medica-
tion or chemotherapeutic agents, and high contrast dose. 
Patients with diabetes and those with mild renal failure 
should be well hydrated prior to the administration of 
contrast agents, although careful consideration should 
be given to alternative imaging techniques such as MR 
imaging or noncontrast CT or ultrasound (US) exami-
nations. Nonionic, low-osmolar media produce fewer 
abnormalities in renal blood ﬂow and less endothelial 
cell damage but should still be used carefully in patients 
at risk for allergic reaction. Estimated glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate (eGFR) is a more reliable indicator of renal 
function compared to creatinine alone as it takes into 
account age, race, and sex. In one study, 15% of outpa-
tients with a normal serum creatinine had an estimated 
creatinine clearance of 50 mL/min/1.73 m2 or less (nor-
mal is 90 mL/min/1.73 m2 or more). The exact eGFR 
threshold, below which withholding intravenous con-
trast should be considered, is controversial. The risk of 
contrast nephropathy increases in patients with an eGFR 
<60 mL/min/1.732; however the majority of these 
patients will only have a temporary rise in creatinine. 
The risk of dialysis after receiving contrast signiﬁcantly 
increases in patients with eGFR <30 mL/min/1.732. 
Thus, an eGFR threshold between 60 and 30 mL/
min/1.732 is appropriate; however the exact number is 
somewhat arbitrary. A creatinine of 1.6 in a 70-year-old, 
non-African-American male corresponds to an eGFR of 
approximately 45 mL/min/1.732. The American College 
of Radiology suggests using an eGFR of 45 as a thresh-
old below which iodinated contrast should not be given 
without serious consideration of the potential for con-
trast nephropathy. If contrast must be administered to a 
patient with an eGRF below 45, the patient should be 
well hydrated, and a reduction in the dose of contrast 
should be considered. Use of other agents such as bicar-
bonate and acetylcysteine may reduce the incidence of 
contrast nephropathy. Other side effects of CT scanning 
are rare but include a sensation of warmth throughout 
the body and a metallic taste during intravenous adminis-
tration of iodinated contrast media. The most serious side 
effects are anaphylactic reactions, which range from mild 
hives to bronchospasm, acute anaphylaxis, and death. 
The pathogenesis of these allergic reactions is not fully 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
16
FIGURE 4-2
Acute left hemiparesis due to middle cerebral artery 
occlusion. A. Axial noncontrast CT scan demonstrates high 
density within the right middle cerebral artery (arrow) asso-
ciated with subtle low density involving the right putamen 
(arrowheads). B. Mean transit time CT perfusion paramet-
ric map indicating prolonged mean transit time involving the 
right middle cerebral territory (arrows). C. Cerebral blood 
volume map shows reduced CBV involving an area within 
the defect shown in B, indicating a high likelihood of infarc-
tion (arrows). D. Axial maximum-intensity projection from 
a CTA study through the circle of Willis demonstrates an 
abrupt occlusion of the proximal right middle cerebral artery 
(arrow). E. Sagittal reformation through the right internal 
carotid artery demonstrates a low-density lipid-laden plaque 
(arrowheads) narrowing the lumen (black arrow) F. 3D surface-
rendered CTA image demonstrates calciﬁcation and narrowing 
of the right internal carotid artery (arrow), consistent with ath-
erosclerotic disease. G. Coronal maximum-intensity projection 
from MRA shows right middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion 
(arrow). H and I. Axial diffusion-weighted image (H) and appar-
ent diffusion coefﬁcient image (I) document the presence of a 
right middle cerebral artery infarction.
 
CHAPTER 4
Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
17
understood but is thought to include the release of medi-
ators such as histamine, antibody-antigen reactions, and 
complement activation. Severe allergic reactions occur 
in ∼0.04% of patients receiving nonionic media, sixfold 
lower than with ionic media. Risk factors include a his-
tory of prior contrast reaction, food allergies to shellﬁsh, 
and atopy (asthma and hay fever). In such patients, a 
noncontrast CT or MRI procedure should be considered 
as an alternative to contrast administration. If iodinated 
contrast is absolutely required, a nonionic agent should 
be used in conjunction with pretreatment with gluco-
corticoids and antihistamines (Table 4-2). Patients with 
allergic reactions to iodinated contrast material do not 
usually react to gadolinium-based MR contrast material, 
although such reactions can occur. It would be wise to 
pretreat patients with a prior allergic history to MR con-
trast administration in a similar fashion.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
TECHNIQUE
MRI is a complex interaction between hydrogen pro-
tons in biologic tissues, a static magnetic ﬁeld (the 
 magnet), and energy in the form of radiofrequency (Rf) 
waves of a speciﬁc frequency introduced by coils placed 
next to the body part of interest. Images are made by 
computerized processing of resonance information 
received from protons in the body. Field strength of the 
magnet is directly related to signal-to-noise ratio. While 
1.5-Telsa magnets have become the standard high-
ﬁeld MRI units, 3T–8T magnets are now available and 
have distinct advantages in the brain and musculoskel-
etal  systems. Spatial localization is achieved by magnetic 
gradients surrounding the main magnet, which impart 
slight changes in magnetic ﬁeld throughout the imaging 
volume. Rf pulses transiently excite the energy state of 
the hydrogen protons in the body. Rf is administered 
at a frequency speciﬁc for the ﬁeld strength of the mag-
net. The subsequent return to equilibrium energy state 
(relaxation) of the hydrogen protons results in a release 
TABLE 4-2 
GUIDELINES FOR PREMEDICATION OF PATIENTS 
WITH PRIOR CONTRAST ALLERGY
12 h prior to examination:
 Prednisone, 50 mg PO or methylprednisolone, 32 mg PO
2 h prior to examination:
 Prednisone, 50 mg PO or methylprednisolone, 32 mg PO 
 and Cimetidine, 300 mg PO or ranitidine, 150 mg PO
Immediately prior to examination:
 Benadryl, 50 mg IV (alternatively, can be given PO 2 h prior 
 to exam)
of Rf energy (the echo), which is detected by the coils 
that delivered the Rf pulses. The echo is transformed 
by Fourier analysis into the information used to form 
an MR image. The MR image thus consists of a map of 
the distribution of hydrogen protons, with signal inten-
sity imparted by both density of hydrogen protons as 
well as differences in the relaxation times (see below) of 
hydrogen protons on different molecules. While clini-
cal MRI currently makes use of the ubiquitous hydro-
gen proton, research into sodium and carbon imaging 
appears promising.
T1 and T2 relaxation times
The rate of return to equilibrium of perturbed protons is 
called the relaxation rate. The relaxation rate varies among 
normal and pathologic tissues. The relaxation rate of a 
hydrogen proton in a tissue is inﬂuenced by local inter-
actions with surrounding molecules and atomic neigh-
bors. Two relaxation rates, T1 and T2, inﬂuence the 
signal intensity of the image. The T1 relaxation time 
is the time, measured in milliseconds, for 63% of the 
hydrogen protons to return to their normal equilib-
rium state, while the T2 relaxation is the time for 63% 
of the protons to become dephased owing to interac-
tions among nearby protons. The intensity of the signal 
within various tissues and image contrast can be mod-
ulated by altering acquisition parameters such as the 
interval between Rf pulses (TR) and the time between 
the Rf pulse and the signal reception (TE). So-called 
T1-weighted (T1W) images are produced by keeping 
the TR and TE relatively short. T2-weighted (T2W) 
images are produced by using longer TR and TE times. 
Fat and subacute hemorrhage have relatively shorter 
T1 relaxation rates and thus higher signal intensity than 
brain on T1W images. Structures containing more water 
such as CSF and edema, have long T1 and T2 relax-
ation rates, resulting in relatively lower signal intensity 
on T1W images and a higher signal intensity on T2W 
images (Table 4-3). Gray matter contains 10–15% 
TABLE 4-3
SOME COMMON INTENSITIES ON T1- AND 
T2-WEIGHTED MRI SEQUENCES
SIGNAL INTENSITY
IMAGE
TR
TE
CSF
FAT
BRAIN
EDEMA
T1W
Short Short Low
High
Low
Low
T2W
Long
Long
High
Low
High
High
FLAIR 
(T2)
Long
Long
Low
Medium High
High
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; TE, interval between Rf 
pulse and signal reception; TR, interval between radiofrequency (Rf) 
pulses; T1W and T2W, T1- and T2-weighted.
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
18
more water than white matter, which accounts for 
much of the intrinsic contrast between the two on MRI 
(Fig. 4-6B). T2W images are more sensitive than T1W 
images to edema, demyelination, infarction, and chronic 
hemorrhage, while T1W imaging is more sensitive to 
subacute hemorrhage and fat-containing structures.
Many different MR pulse sequences exist, and each 
can be obtained in various planes (Figs. 4-2, 4-3, 4-4).
The selection of a proper protocol that will best 
answer a clinical question depends on an accurate 
clinical history and indication for the examination. 
 Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) is a use-
ful pulse sequence that produces T2W images in which 
the normally high signal intensity of CSF is suppressed 
(Fig. 4-6B). FLAIR images are more than sensitive 
standard spin echo images for any water-containing 
lesions or edema. Susceptibility weighted imaging, such 
as gradient echo imaging, is most sensitive to magnetic 
susceptibility generated by blood, calcium, and air and is 
indicated in patients suspected of pathology that might 
result in microhemorrhages (Fig. 4-5C). MR images 
can be generated in any plane without changing the 
patient’s position. Each sequence, however, must be 
obtained separately and takes 1–10 min on average to 
complete. Three-dimensional volumetric imaging is also 
possible with MRI, resulting in a 3D volume of data 
that can be reformatted in any orientation to highlight 
certain disease processes.
FIGURE 4-3
Cerebral abscess in a patient with fever and a right 
hemiparesis. A. Coronal postcontrast T1-weighted image 
demonstrates a ring enhancing mass in the left frontal lobe. 
B. Axial diffusion-weighted image demonstrates restricted 
diffusion (high signal intensity) within the lesion, which in this 
setting is highly suggestive of cerebral abscess.
MR contrast material
The heavy-metal element gadolinium forms the 
basis of all currently approved intravenous MR con-
trast agents. Gadolinium is a paramagnetic substance, 
which means that it reduces the T1 and T2 relaxation 
times of nearby water protons, resulting in a high sig-
nal on T1W images and a low signal on T2W images 
(the latter requires a sufﬁcient local concentration, 
usually in the form of an intravenous bolus). Unlike 
iodinated contrast agents, the effect of MR contrast 
agents depends on the presence of local hydrogen 
protons on which it must act to achieve the desired 
effect.  Gadolinium is chelated to DTPA (diethylene-
triaminepentaacetic acid), which allows safe renal 
excretion. Approximately 0.2 mL/kg body weight 
is administered intravenously; the cost is ∼$60 per 
dose.  Gadolinium-DTPA does not normally cross 
the intact BBB immediately but will enhance lesions 
lacking a BBB (Fig. 4-3A) and areas of the brain that 
normally are devoid of the BBB (pituitary, choroid 
plexus). However, gadolinium contrast has been noted 
to slowly cross an intact BBB if given over time and 
especially in the setting of reduced renal clearance. 
The agents are generally well tolerated; severe aller-
gic reactions are rare but have been reported. The 
adverse reaction rate in patients with a prior history 
of atopy or asthma is 3.7%; however, the reaction rate 
 
CHAPTER 4
Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
19
increases to 6.3% in those patients with a prior history 
of unspeciﬁed allergic reaction to iodinated contrast 
agents. Gadolinium contrast material can be adminis-
tered safely to children as well as adults, although these 
agents are generally avoided in those under 6 months 
of age. Renal failure does not occur.
A rare complication, nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis 
(NSF), has recently been reported in patients with renal 
insufﬁciency who have been exposed to gadolinium 
contrast agents. The onset of NSF has been reported 
between 5 and 75 days following exposure; histologic 
features include thickened collagen bundles with sur-
rounding clefts, mucin deposition, and increased num-
bers of ﬁbrocytes and elastic ﬁbers in skin. In addition 
to dermatologic symptoms, other manifestations include 
widespread ﬁbrosis of the skeletal muscle, bone, lungs, 
pleura, pericardium, myocardium, kidney, muscle, 
bone, testes, and dura. For this reason, the American 
A
B
C
FIGURE 4-4
Herpes simplex encephalitis in a patient presenting with 
altered mental status and fever. A and B. Coronal (A) and 
axial (B) T2-weighted FLAIR images demonstrate expan-
sion and high signal intensity involving the right medial 
temporal lobe and insular cortex (arrows). C. Coronal dif-
fusion-weighted image demonstrates high signal intensity 
indicating restricted diffusion involving the right medial 
temporal lobe and hippocampus (arrows) as well as subtle 
involvement of the left inferior temporal lobe (arrowhead). 
This is most consistent with neuronal death and can be seen 
in acute infarction as well as encephalitis and other inﬂam-
matory conditions. The suspected diagnosis of herpes sim-
plex encephalitis was conﬁrmed by CSF PCR analysis.
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
20
College of Radiology recommends that prior to elec-
tive gadolinium-based MR contrast agent (GBMCA) 
administration, a recent (e.g., past 6 weeks) glomerular 
ﬁltration rate (GFR) assessment be obtained in patients 
with a history of:
1. Renal disease (including solitary kidney, renal trans-
plant, renal tumor)
2. Age >60 years
3. History of hypertension
4. History of diabetes
5. History of severe hepatic disease/liver transplant/
pending liver transplant: for these patients it is rec-
ommended that the patient’s GFR assessment be 
nearly contemporaneous with the MR examination.
The incidence of NSF in patients with severe renal 
dysfunction (GFR <30) varies from 0.19 to 4%. A 
recent meta-analysis reported an odds ratio of 26.7 (95% 
CI = 10.3–69.4) for development of NSF after gado-
linium administration in patients with impaired renal 
function (GFR <30 mL/min/1.72 m). Thus, it is not 
A
B
C
FIGURE 4-5
Susceptibility weighted imaging in a patient with familial 
cavernous malformations. A. Noncontrast CT scan shows 
one hyperdense lesion in the right hemisphere (arrow). B. 
T2-weighted fast spin echo image shows subtle low-intensity 
lesions (arrows). C. Susceptibility weighted image shows 
numerous low-intensity lesions consistent with hemosiderin-
laden cavernous malformations (arrow).
 
CHAPTER 4
Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
21
recommended to administer gadolinium to any patient 
with a GFR below 30. Caution is advised for patients 
with a GFR below 45.
COMPLICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
From the patient’s perspective, an MRI examination 
can be intimidating, and a higher level of cooperation 
is required than with CT. The patient lies on a table 
A
B
C
that is moved into a long, narrow gap within the mag-
net. Approximately 5% of the population experiences 
severe claustrophobia in the MR environment. This can 
be reduced by mild sedation but remains a problem for 
some. Unlike CT, movement of the patient during an 
MR sequence distorts all the images; therefore, unco-
operative patients should either be sedated for the MR 
study or scanned with CT. Generally, children under 
the age of 10 years usually require conscious sedation 
FIGURE 4-6
Diffusion tractography in cerebral glioma. A. An axial 
postcontrast T1-weighted image shows a nonenhancing gli-
oma (T) of the left temporal lobe cortex lateral to the ﬁbers of 
the internal capsule. B. Coronal T2 FLAIR image demonstrates 
high signal glioma in left temporal lobe. C. Axial diffusion 
fractional anisotropy image shows the position of the deep 
white matter ﬁbers (arrow) relative to the enhancing tumor (T).
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
22
in order to complete the MR examination without 
motion degradation.
MRI is considered safe for patients, even at very high 
ﬁeld strengths (>3–4 T). Serious injuries have been 
caused, however, by attraction of ferromagnetic objects 
into the magnet, which act as missiles if brought too 
close to the magnet. Likewise, ferromagnetic implants 
such as aneurysm clips, may torque within the mag-
net, causing damage to vessels and even death. Metallic 
 foreign bodies in the eye have moved and caused intra-
ocular hemorrhage; screening for ocular metallic frag-
ments is indicated in those with a history of metal work 
or ocular metallic foreign bodies. Implanted cardiac 
pacemakers are generally a contraindication to MRI 
owing to the risk of induced arrhythmias; however, 
some newer pacemakers have been shown to be safe. 
All health care personnel and patients must be screened 
and educated thoroughly to prevent such disasters as the 
magnet is always “on.” Table 4-4 lists common contra-
indications for MRI.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ANGIOGRAPHY
MR angiography is a general term describing several MR 
techniques that result in vascular-weighted images. 
These provide a vascular ﬂow map rather than the ana-
tomic map shown by conventional angiography. On 
routine spin echo MR sequences, moving protons 
(e.g., ﬂowing blood, CSF) exhibit complex MR sig-
nals that range from high- to low-signal intensity rela-
tive to background stationary tissue. Fast-ﬂowing blood 
returns no signal (ﬂow void) on routine T1W or T2W 
TABLE 4-4
COMMON CONTRAINDICATIONS TO MR IMAGING
Cardiac pacemaker or permanent pacemaker leads
Internal deﬁbrillatory device
Cochlear prostheses
Bone growth stimulators
Spinal cord stimulators
Electronic infusion devices
Intracranial aneurysm clips (some but not all)
Ocular implants (some) or ocular metallic foreign body
McGee stapedectomy piston prosthesis
Duraphase penile implant
Swan-Ganz catheter
Magnetic stoma plugs
Magnetic dental implants
Magnetic sphincters
Ferromagnetic IVC ﬁlters, coils, stents—safe 6 weeks after 
implantation
Tattooed eyeliner (contains ferromagnetic material and 
may irritate eyes)
Note: See also http://www.mrisafety.com.
spin echo MR images. Slower-ﬂowing blood, as occurs 
in veins or distal to arterial stenosis, may appear high in 
signal. However, using special pulse sequences called 
gradient echo sequences, it is possible to increase the signal 
intensity of moving protons in contrast to the low sig-
nal background intensity of stationary tissue. This cre-
ates angiography-like images, which can be manipulated 
in three dimensions to highlight vascular anatomy and 
relationships.
Time-of-ﬂight (TOF) imaging, currently the tech-
nique used most frequently, relies on the suppression 
of nonmoving tissue to provide a low-intensity back-
ground for the high signal intensity of ﬂowing blood 
entering the section; arterial or venous structures may 
be highlighted. A typical TOF angiography sequence 
results in a series of contiguous, thin MR sections 
(0.6–0.9 mm thick), which can be viewed as a stack 
and manipulated to create an angiographic image data 
set that can be reformatted and viewed in various planes 
and angles, much like that seen with conventional 
 angiography (Fig. 4-2G).
Phase-contrast MRA has a longer acquisition time 
than TOF MRA, but in addition to providing anatomic 
information similar to that of TOF imaging, it can be 
used to reveal the velocity and direction of blood ﬂow 
in a given vessel. Through the selection of different 
imaging parameters, differing blood velocities can be 
highlighted; selective venous and arterial MRA images 
can thus be obtained. One advantage of phase-contrast 
MRA is the excellent suppression of high-signal- 
intensity background structures.
MRA can also be acquired during infusion of 
 contrast material. Advantages include faster imaging 
times (1–2 min vs. 10 min), fewer ﬂow-related arti-
facts, and higher-resolution images. Recently, con-
trast-enhanced MRA has become the standard for 
extracranial vascular MRA. This technique entails 
rapid imaging using coronal three-dimensional TOF 
sequences during a bolus infusion of 15–20 mL of 
gadolinium-DTPA. Proper technique and timing 
of acquisition relative to bolus arrival are critical for 
success.
MRA has lower spatial resolution compared with 
conventional ﬁlm-based angiography, and therefore the 
detection of small-vessel abnormalities, such as vasculitis 
and distal vasospasm, is problematic. MRA is also less 
sensitive to slowly ﬂowing blood and thus may not reli-
ably differentiate complete from near-complete occlu-
sions. Motion, either by the patient or by anatomic 
structures, may distort the MRA images, creating arti-
facts. These limitations notwithstanding, MRA has 
proved useful in evaluation of the extracranial carotid 
and vertebral circulation as well as of larger-caliber 
intracranial arteries and dural sinuses. It has also proved 
useful in the noninvasive detection of intracranial aneu-
rysms and vascular malformations.
 
CHAPTER 4
Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
23
ECHO-PLANAR MR IMAGING
Recent improvements in gradients, software, and 
 high-speed computer processors now permit extremely 
rapid MRI of the brain. With echo-planar MRI (EPI), 
fast gradients are switched on and off at high speeds to 
create the information used to form an image. In rou-
tine spin echo imaging, images of the brain can be 
obtained in 5–10 min. With EPI, all of the informa-
tion required for processing an image is accumulated in 
50–150 ms, and the information for the entire brain is 
obtained in 1–2 min, depending on the degree of reso-
lution required or desired. Fast MRI reduces patient and 
organ motion, permitting diffusion imaging and tractog-
raphy (Figs. 4-2H, 4-3, 4-4C, 4-6; and see Fig. 27-16), 
perfusion imaging during contrast infusion, fMRI, and 
kinematic motion studies.
Perfusion and diffusion imaging are EPI techniques 
that are useful in early detection of ischemic injury of 
the brain and may be useful together to demonstrate 
infarcted tissue as well as ischemic but potentially viable 
tissue at risk of infarction (e.g., the ischemic penumbra). 
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) assesses microscopic 
motion of water; restriction of motion appears as rela-
tive high-signal intensity on diffusion-weighted images. 
Infarcted tissue reduces the water motion within cells 
and in the interstitial tissues, resulting in high signal on 
DWI. DWI is the most sensitive technique for detec-
tion of acute cerebral infarction of <7 days’ duration 
(Fig. 4-2H) and is also sensitive to encephalitis and abscess 
formation, which have reduced diffusion and result in 
high signal on diffusion-weighted images (Fig. 4-3B).
Perfusion MRI involves the acquisition of EPI 
images during a rapid intravenous bolus of gadolin-
ium contrast material. Relative perfusion abnormali-
ties can be identiﬁed on images of the relative cerebral 
blood volume, mean transit time, and cerebral blood 
ﬂow. Delay in mean transit time and reduction in cere-
bral blood volume and cerebral blood ﬂow are typi-
cal of infarction. In the setting of reduced blood ﬂow, 
a prolonged mean transit time of contrast but normal 
or elevated cerebral blood volume may indicate tissue 
supplied by collateral ﬂow that is at risk of infarction. 
Perfusion MRI imaging can also be used in the assess-
ment of brain tumors to differentiate intraaxial primary 
tumors from extraaxial tumors or metastasis.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a diffusion MRI 
technique that assesses the direction of microscopic 
motion of water along white matter tracts. This technique 
has great potential in the assessment of brain maturation 
as well as disease entities that undermine the integrity of 
the white matter architecture. It has proven valuable in 
preoperative assessment of subcortical white matter tract 
anatomy prior to brain tumor surgery (Fig.  4-6).
Functional MRI of the brain is an EPI technique 
that localizes regions of activity in the brain following 
task activation. Neuronal activity elicits a slight increase 
in the delivery of oxygenated blood ﬂow to a speciﬁc 
region of activated brain. This results in an alteration in 
the balance of oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin, 
which yields a 2–3% increase in signal intensity within 
veins and local capillaries. Further studies will determine 
whether these techniques are cost-effective or clinically 
useful, but currently preoperative somatosensory and 
auditory cortex localization is possible. This technique 
has proved useful to neuroscientists interested in inter-
rogating the localization of certain brain functions.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE 
NEUROGRAPHY
MRN is a T2-weighted MR technique that shows prom-
ise in detecting increased signal in irritated, inﬂamed, or 
inﬁltrated peripheral nerves. Images are obtained with 
fat-suppressed fast spin echo imaging or short inversion 
recovery sequences. Irritated or inﬁltrated nerves will 
demonstrate high signal on T2W imaging. This is indi-
cated in patients with radiculopathy whose conventional 
MR studies of the spine are normal, or in those suspected 
of peripheral nerve entrapment or trauma.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY 
(PET)
PET relies on the detection of positrons emitted during 
the decay of a radionuclide that has been injected into 
a patient. The most frequently used moiety is 2-[18F]
ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG), which is an analogue 
of glucose and is taken up by cells competitively with 
2-deoxyglucose. Multiple images of glucose uptake 
activity are formed after 45–60 min. Images reveal 
differences in regional glucose activity among nor-
mal and pathologic brain structures. A lower activity 
of FDG in the parietal lobes has been associated with 
Alzheimer’s disease. FDG PET is used primarily for the 
detection of extracranial metastatic disease. Combina-
tion PET-CT scanners, in which both CT and PET are 
obtained at one sitting, are replacing PET scans alone 
for most clinical indications. Functional images super-
imposed on high-resolution CT scans result in more 
precise anatomic diagnoses.
MYELOGRAPHY
TECHNIQUE
Myelography involves the intrathecal instillation of 
specially formulated water-soluble iodinated contrast 
medium into the lumbar or cervical subarachnoid space. 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
24
CT scanning is usually performed after myelography 
(CT myelography) to better demonstrate the spinal cord 
and roots, which appear as ﬁlling defects in the opaci-
ﬁed subarachnoid space. Low-dose CT myelography, in 
which CT is performed after the subarachnoid injec-
tion of a small amount of relatively dilute contrast mate-
rial, has replaced conventional myelography for many 
indications, thereby reducing exposure to radiation 
and contrast media. Newer multidetector scanners now 
obtain CT studies quickly so that reformations in sagit-
tal and coronal planes, equivalent to traditional myelog-
raphy projections, are now routine.
INDICATIONS
Myelography has been largely replaced by CT myelog-
raphy and MRI for diagnosis of diseases of the spinal 
canal and cord (Table 4-1). Remaining indications for 
conventional plain-ﬁlm myelography include the evalu-
ation of suspected meningeal or arachnoid cysts and the 
localization of spinal dural arteriovenous or CSF ﬁstulas. 
Conventional myelography and CT myelography pro-
vide the most precise information in patients with prior 
spinal fusion and spinal ﬁxation hardware.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Myelography is relatively safe; however, it should be 
performed with caution in any patient with elevated 
intracranial pressure, evidence of a spinal block, or a 
history of allergic reaction to intrathecal contrast media. 
In patients with a suspected spinal block, MR is the 
preferred technique. If myelography is necessary, only 
a small amount of contrast medium should be instilled 
below the lesion in order to minimize the risk of neu-
rologic deterioration. Lumbar puncture is to be avoided 
in patients with bleeding disorders, including patients 
receiving anticoagulant therapy, as well as in those with 
infections of the overlying soft tissues.
COMPLICATIONS
Headache, nausea, and vomiting are the most fre-
quent complications of myelography and are reported 
to occur in up to 38% of patients. These symptoms 
result from either neurotoxic effects of the contrast 
agent, persistent leakage of CSF at the puncture site, 
or psychological reactions to the procedure. Vasova-
gal syncope may occur during lumbar puncture; it is 
accentuated by the upright position used during lum-
bar myelography. Adequate hydration before and 
after myelography will reduce the incidence of this 
complication. Postural headache (post–lumbar punc-
ture headache) is generally due to leakage of CSF 
from the puncture site, resulting in CSF hypotension. 
Management of post–lumbar puncture headache is 
 discussed in Chap. 8.
If signiﬁcant headache persists for longer than 48 h, 
placement of an epidural blood patch should be con-
sidered. Hearing loss is a rare complication of myelog-
raphy. It may result from a direct toxic effect of the 
contrast medium or from an alteration of the  pressure 
equilibrium between CSF and perilymph in the inner 
ear. Puncture of the spinal cord is a rare but serious 
complication of cervical (C1–2) or high  lumbar punc-
ture. The risk of cord puncture is greatest in patients 
with spinal stenosis, Chiari malformations, or conditions 
that reduce CSF volume. In these settings, a low-dose 
lumbar injection followed by thin-section CT or MRI 
is a safer alternative to cervical puncture.  Intrathecal 
contrast reactions are rare, but aseptic  meningitis and 
encephalopathy may occur. The latter is usually dose 
related and associated with contrast entering the intra-
cranial subarachnoid space. Seizures occur follow-
ing myelography in 0.1–0.3% of patients. Risk factors 
include a preexisting seizure disorder and the use of a 
total iodine dose of >4500 mg. Other reported compli-
cations include hyperthermia, hallucinations, depression, 
and anxiety states. These side effects have been reduced 
by the development of nonionic, water-soluble contrast 
agents as well as by head elevation and generous hydra-
tion following myelography.
SPINE INTERVENTIONS
DISKOGRAPHY
The evaluation of back pain and radiculopathy may 
require diagnostic procedures that attempt either to 
reproduce the patient’s pain or relieve it, indicating 
its correct source prior to lumbar fusion. Diskography 
is performed by ﬂuoroscopic placement of a 22- to 
25-gauge needle into the intervertebral disk and sub-
sequent injection of 1–3 mL of contrast media. The 
intradiskal pressure is recorded, as is an assessment of the 
patient’s response to the injection of contrast material. 
Typically little or no pain is felt during injection of a 
normal disk, which does not accept much more than 
1 mL of contrast material, even at pressures as high as 
415–690 kPa (60–100 lb/in2). CT and plain ﬁlms are 
obtained following the procedure. Concerns have been 
raised that diskography may contribute to an accelerated 
rate of disk degeneration.
SELECTIVE NERVE ROOT AND EPIDURAL 
SPINAL INJECTIONS
Percutaneous selective nerve root and epidural blocks 
with glucocorticoid and anesthetic mixtures may be 
both therapeutic as well as diagnostic, especially if 
 
CHAPTER 4
Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders
25
a patient’s pain is relieved. Typically, 1–2 mL of an 
equal mixture of a long-acting glucocorticoid such as 
 betamethasone and a long-acting anesthetic such as 
bupivacaine 0.75% is instilled under CT or ﬂuoroscopic 
guidance in the intraspinal epidural space or adjacent to 
an existing nerve root.
ANGIOGRAPHY
Catheter angiography is indicated for evaluating intra-
cranial small-vessel pathology (such as vasculitis), for 
assessing vascular malformations and aneurysms, and 
in endovascular therapeutic procedures (Table 4-1). 
 Angiography has been replaced for many indications by 
CT/CTA or MRI/MRA.
Angiography carries the greatest risk of morbidity of 
all diagnostic imaging procedures, owing to the neces-
sity of inserting a catheter into a blood vessel, direct-
ing the catheter to the required location, injecting 
contrast material to visualize the vessel, and removing 
the catheter while maintaining hemostasis. Therapeu-
tic transcatheter procedures (see below) have become 
important options for the treatment of some cerebro-
vascular diseases. The decision to undertake a diag-
nostic or therapeutic angiographic procedure requires 
careful assessment of the goals of the investigation and 
its attendant risks.
To improve tolerance to contrast agents, patients 
undergoing angiography should be well hydrated before 
and after the procedure. Since the femoral route is used 
most commonly, the femoral artery must be compressed 
after the procedure to prevent a hematoma from devel-
oping. The puncture site and distal pulses should be 
evaluated carefully after the procedure; complications 
can include thigh hematoma or lower extremity emboli.
COMPLICATIONS
A common femoral arterial puncture provides retrograde 
access via the aorta to the aortic arch and great vessels. 
The most feared complication of cerebral angiography is 
stroke. Thrombus can form on or inside the tip of the 
catheter, and atherosclerotic thrombus or plaque can be 
dislodged by the catheter or guidewire or by the force 
of injection and can embolize distally in the cerebral cir-
culation. Risk factors for ischemic complications include 
limited experience on the part of the angiographer, ath-
erosclerosis, vasospasm, low cardiac output, decreased 
oxygen-carrying capacity, advanced age, and prior his-
tory of migraine. The risk of a neurologic complica-
tion varies but is ∼4% for transient ischemic attack and 
stroke, 1% for permanent deﬁcit, and <0.1% for death.
Ionic contrast material injected into the cerebral 
vasculature can be neurotoxic if the BBB is breached, 
either by an underlying disease or by the injection of 
hyperosmolar contrast agent. Ionic contrast media 
are less well tolerated than nonionic media, probably 
because they can induce changes in cell membrane 
electrical potentials. Patients with dolichoectasia of the 
basilar artery can suffer reversible brainstem dysfunction 
and acute short-term memory loss during angiography, 
owing to the slow percolation of the contrast material 
and the consequent prolonged exposure of the brain. 
Rarely, an intracranial aneurysm ruptures during an 
angiographic contrast injection, causing subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, perhaps as a result of injection under high 
pressure.
SPINAL ANGIOGRAPHY
Spinal angiography may be indicated to evaluate vascu-
lar malformations and tumors and to identify the artery of 
Adamkiewicz (Chap. 35) prior to aortic aneurysm repair. 
The procedure is lengthy and requires the use of relatively 
large volumes of contrast; the incidence of serious com-
plications, including paraparesis, subjective visual blurring, 
and altered speech, is ∼2%. Gadolinium-enhanced MRA 
has been used successfully in this setting, as has iodinated 
contrast CTA, which has promise for replacing diagnostic 
spinal angiography for some indications.
INTERVENTIONAL NEURORADIOLOGY
This rapidly developing ﬁeld is providing new 
 therapeutic options for patients with challenging neuro-
vascular problems. Available procedures include detach-
able coil therapy for aneurysms, particulate or liquid 
adhesive embolization of arteriovenous malformations, 
balloon angioplasty and stenting of arterial stenosis or 
vasospasm, transarterial or transvenous embolization 
of dural arteriovenous ﬁstulas, balloon occlusion of 
carotid-cavernous and vertebral ﬁstulas, endovascular 
treatment of vein-of-Galen malformations, preoperative 
embolization of tumors, and thrombolysis of acute arte-
rial or venous thrombosis. Many of these disorders place 
the patient at high risk of cerebral hemorrhage, stroke, 
or death.
The highest complication rates are found with the 
therapies designed to treat the highest-risk diseases. The 
advent of electrolytically detachable coils has  ushered 
in a new era in the treatment of cerebral aneurysms. 
One randomized trial found a 28% reduction of mor-
bidity and mortality at 1 year among those treated for 
anterior circulation aneurysm with detachable coils 
compared with neurosurgical clipping. It remains to be 
determined what the role of coils will be relative to sur-
gical options, but in many centers, coiling has become 
 standard therapy for many aneurysms.
 Michael J. Aminoff 
26
 ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
 The electrical activity of the brain (the electroen-
cephalogram [EEG]) is easily recorded from electrodes 
placed on the scalp. The potential difference between 
pairs of electrodes on the scalp (bipolar derivation) or 
between individual scalp electrodes and a relatively 
inactive common reference point (referential deriva-
tion) is ampliﬁ ed and displayed on a computer moni-
tor, oscilloscope, or paper. The characteristics of the 
normal EEG depend on the patient’s age and level of 
arousal. The rhythmic activity normally recorded rep-
resents the postsynaptic potentials of vertically oriented 
pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex and is character-
ized by its frequency. In normal awake adults lying 
quietly with the eyes closed, an 8- to 13-Hz alpha 
rhythm is seen posteriorly in the EEG, intermixed with 
a variable amount of generalized faster (beta) activ-
ity (>13 Hz); the alpha rhythm is attenuated when the 
eyes are opened  ( Fig. 5-1 ) . During drowsiness, the 
alpha rhythm is also attenuated; with light sleep, slower 
activity in the theta (4–7 Hz) and delta (<4 Hz) ranges 
becomes more conspicuous. 
 Digital systems are now widely used for recording 
the EEG. They allow the EEG to be reconstructed and 
displayed with any desired format and manipulated for 
more detailed analysis, and also permit computerized 
techniques to be used to detect certain abnormalities. 
Activating procedures are generally undertaken while 
the EEG is recorded in an attempt to provoke abnor-
malities. Such procedures commonly include hyperven-
tilation (for 3 or 4 min), photic stimulation, sleep, and 
sleep deprivation on the night prior to the recording. 
 Electroencephalography is relatively inexpensive and 
may aid clinical management in several different contexts. 
 ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES OF NERVOUS 
SYSTEM DISORDERS: EEG, E VOKED POTENTIALS, 
AND EMG 
 CHAPTER 5 
 THE EEG AND EPILEPSY 
 The EEG is most useful in evaluating patients with sus-
pected epilepsy. The presence of electrographic seizure 
activity—i.e., of abnormal, repetitive, rhythmic activity 
having an abrupt onset and termination and a charac-
teristic evolution—clearly establishes the diagnosis. The 
absence of such electrocerebral accompaniment does 
not exclude a seizure disorder, however, because there 
may be no change in the scalp-recorded EEG during 
certain focal seizures. With generalized tonic-clonic sei-
zures, the EEG is always abnormal during the episode. 
It is often not possible to obtain an EEG during clinical 
events that may represent seizures, especially when such 
events occur unpredictably or infrequently. Continuous 
monitoring for prolonged periods in video-EEG telem-
etry units has made it easier to capture the electrocere-
bral accompaniments of such clinical episodes. Monitor-
ing by these means is sometimes helpful in conﬁ rming 
that seizures are occurring, characterizing the nature of 
clinically equivocal episodes, and determining the fre-
quency of epileptic events. 
 The EEG ﬁ ndings may also be helpful in the inter-
ictal period by showing certain abnormalities that are 
strongly supportive of a diagnosis of epilepsy. Such  epi-
leptiform activity consists of bursts of abnormal discharges 
containing spikes or sharp waves. The presence of epi-
leptiform activity is not speciﬁ c for epilepsy, but it has 
a much greater prevalence in epileptic patients than in 
normal individuals. However, even in an individual 
who is known to have epilepsy, the initial routine inter-
ictal EEG may be normal up to 60% of the time. Thus, 
the EEG cannot establish the diagnosis of epilepsy in 
many cases. 
 The EEG ﬁ ndings have been used in classifying sei-
zure disorders and selecting appropriate anticonvulsant 
 
CHAPTER 5
Electrodiagnostic Studies of Nervous System Disorders: EEG, E voked Potentials, and EMG
27
medication for individual patients (Fig. 5-2). The epi-
sodic generalized spike-wave activity that occurs during 
and between seizures in patients with typical absence 
epilepsy contrasts with focal interictal epileptiform dis-
charges or ictal patterns found in patients with focal 
seizures. These latter seizures may have no correlates 
in the scalp-recorded EEG or may be associated with 
abnormal rhythmic activity of variable frequency, a 
localized or generalized distribution, and a stereotyped 
pattern that varies with the patient. Focal or lateral-
ized epileptogenic lesions are important to recognize, 
especially if surgical treatment is contemplated. Inten-
sive long-term monitoring of clinical behavior and the 
EEG is required for operative candidates, however, and 
this generally also involves recording from intracranially 
placed electrodes (which may be subdural, extradural, 
or intracerebral in location).
The ﬁndings in the routine scalp-recorded EEG may 
indicate the prognosis of seizure disorders: In general, 
a normal EEG implies a better prognosis than other-
wise, whereas an abnormal background or profuse epi-
leptiform activity suggests a poor outlook. The EEG 
ﬁndings are not helpful in determining which patients 
with head injuries, stroke, or brain tumors will go on 
to develop seizures, because in such circumstances epi-
leptiform activity is commonly encountered regardless 
of whether seizures occur. The EEG ﬁndings are some-
times used to determine whether anticonvulsant medi-
cation can be discontinued in epileptic patients who 
have been seizure-free for several years, but the ﬁnd-
ings provide only a general guide to prognosis. Further 
seizures may occur after withdrawal of anticonvulsant 
medication despite a normal EEG or, conversely, may 
not occur despite a continuing EEG abnormality. The 
decision to discontinue anticonvulsant medication is 
made on clinical grounds, and the EEG does not have a 
useful role in this context except for providing guidance 
when there is clinical ambiguity or the patient requires 
reassurance about a particular course of action.
The EEG has no role in the management of tonic-
clonic status epilepticus except when there is clinical 
uncertainty whether seizures are continuing in a coma-
tose patient. In patients treated by pentobarbital-induced 
coma for refractory status epilepticus, the EEG ﬁnd-
ings are useful in indicating the level of anesthesia and 
whether seizures are occurring. During status epilepticus, 
the EEG shows repeated electrographic seizures or con-
tinuous spike-wave discharges. In nonconvulsive status 
Eyes open
Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
F3-A1
C3-A1
P3-A1
O1-A1
F4-A2
C4-A2
P4-A2
O2-A2
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
T3-CZ
CZ-T4
Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 5-1 
A. Normal EEG showing a posteriorly situated 9-Hz alpha 
rhythm that attenuates with eye opening. B. Abnormal EEG 
showing irregular diffuse slow activity in an obtunded patient 
with encephalitis. C. Irregular slow activity in the right cen-
tral region, on a diffusely slowed background, in a patient with 
a right parietal glioma. D. Periodic complexes occurring once 
every second in a patient with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Hori-
zontal calibration: 1 s; vertical calibration: 200 μV in A, 300 μV 
in other panels. (From MJ Aminoff, ed: Electrodiagnosis in Clini-
cal Neurology, 5th ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 2005.) In 
this and the following ﬁgure, electrode placements are indicated 
at the left of each panel and accord with the international 10:20 
system. A, earlobe; C, central; F, frontal; Fp, frontal polar; P, pari-
etal; T, temporal; O, occipital. Right-sided placements are indi-
cated by even numbers, left-sided placements by odd numbers, 
and midline placements by Z.
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
28
epilepticus, a disorder that may not be recognized unless 
an EEG is performed, the EEG may also show continu-
ous spike-wave activity (“spike-wave stupor”) or, less 
commonly, repetitive electrographic seizures (focal status 
epilepticus).
THE EEG AND COMA
In patients with an altered mental state or some degree 
of obtundation, the EEG tends to become slower as 
consciousness is depressed, regardless of the underlying 
cause (Fig.  5-1). Other ﬁndings may also be present and 
may suggest diagnostic possibilities, as when electro-
graphic seizures are found or there is a focal abnormality 
indicating a structural lesion. The EEG generally slows 
in metabolic encephalopathies, and triphasic waves may 
be present. The ﬁndings do not permit differentiation 
of the underlying metabolic disturbance but help to 
exclude other encephalopathic processes by indicating 
the diffuse extent of cerebral dysfunction. The response 
of the EEG to external stimulation is helpful prognos-
tically because electrocerebral responsiveness implies 
a lighter level of coma than a nonreactive EEG. Serial 
records provide a better guide to prognosis than a sin-
gle record and supplement the clinical examination in 
following the course of events. As the depth of coma 
increases, the EEG becomes nonreactive and may show 
a burst-suppression pattern, with bursts of mixed-fre-
quency activity separated by intervals of relative cere-
bral inactivity. In other instances there is a reduction in 
amplitude of the EEG until eventually activity cannot 
be detected. Such electrocerebral silence does not nec-
essarily reﬂect irreversible brain damage, because it may 
occur in hypothermic patients or with drug overdose. 
The prognosis of electrocerebral silence, when recorded 
using an adequate technique, depends upon the clini-
cal context in which it is found. In patients with severe 
cerebral anoxia, for example, electrocerebral silence in a 
technically satisfactory record implies that useful cogni-
tive recovery will not occur.
In patients with clinically suspected brain death, an 
EEG, when recorded using appropriate technical stan-
dards, may be conﬁrmatory by showing electrocerebral 
silence. However, complicating disorders that may 
produce a similar but reversible EEG appearance (e.g., 
hypothermia or drug intoxication) must be excluded. 
The presence of residual EEG activity in suspected brain 
death fails to conﬁrm the diagnosis but does not exclude 
it. The EEG is usually normal in patients with locked-in 
syndrome and helps in distinguishing this disorder from 
the comatose state with which it is sometimes confused 
clinically.
THE EEG IN OTHER NEUROLOGIC 
DISORDERS
In the developed countries, CT scanning and MRI 
have taken the place of EEG as a noninvasive means 
of screening for focal structural abnormalities of the 
brain, such as tumors, infarcts, or hematomas (Fig.  5-1). 
Nonetheless, the EEG is still used for this purpose 
in many parts of the world, although infratentorial or 
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
F4-C4
C4-P4
P4-O2
T3-CZ
CZ-T4
Fp1-F7
F7-T3
T3-T5
T5-O1
Fp2-F8
F8-T4
T4-T6
T6-O2
Fp1-A1
F7-A1
T3-A1
T5-A1
Fp2-A2
F8-A2
T4-A2
T6-A2
A
B
C
FIGURE 5-2 
Electrographic seizures. A. Onset of a tonic seizure show-
ing generalized repetitive sharp activity with synchronous 
onset over both hemispheres. B. Burst of repetitive spikes 
occurring with sudden onset in the right temporal region dur-
ing a clinical spell characterized by transient impairment of 
external awareness. C. Generalized 3-Hz spike-wave activ-
ity occurring synchronously over both hemispheres during an 
absence (petit mal) attack. Horizontal calibration: 1 s; verti-
cal calibration: 400 mV in A, 200 mV in B, and 750 mV in C. 
(From MJ Aminoff, ed: Electrodiagnosis in Clinical Neurology, 
5th ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 2005.)
 
CHAPTER 5
Electrodiagnostic Studies of Nervous System Disorders: EEG, E voked Potentials, and EMG
29
slowly expanding lesions may fail to cause any abnor-
malities. Focal slow-wave disturbances, a localized loss 
of electrocerebral activity, or more generalized electro-
cerebral disturbances are common ﬁndings but provide 
no reliable indication about the nature of the underly-
ing pathology.
In patients with an acute encephalopathy, focal or 
lateralized periodic slow-wave complexes, sometimes 
with a sharpened outline, suggest a diagnosis of her-
pes simplex encephalitis, and periodic lateralizing epi-
leptiform discharges (PLEDs) are commonly found 
with acute hemispheric pathology such as a hematoma, 
abscess, or rapidly expanding tumor. The EEG ﬁndings 
in dementia are usually nonspeciﬁc and do not distin-
guish between the different causes of cognitive decline 
except in rare instances when, for example, the pres-
ence of complexes occurring with a regular repetition 
rate (so-called periodic complexes) supports a diagnosis 
of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (Fig.  5-1) or subacute scle-
rosing panencephalitis. In most patients with demen-
tias, the EEG is normal or diffusely slowed, and the 
EEG ﬁndings alone cannot indicate whether a patient 
is demented or distinguish between dementia and 
pseudodementia.
CONTINUOUS EEG MONITORING
The brief EEG obtained routinely in the laboratory 
often fails to reveal abnormalities that are transient and 
infrequent. Continuous monitoring over 12 or 24 h 
or longer may detect abnormalities or capture clini-
cal events that would otherwise be missed. The EEG is 
often recorded continuously in critically ill patients to 
detect early changes in neurologic status, which is par-
ticularly useful when the clinical examination is limited. 
Continuous EEG recording in this context has been 
used to detect acute events such as nonconvulsive sei-
zures or developing cerebral ischemia, to monitor cere-
bral function in patients with metabolic disorders such 
as liver failure, and to manage the level of anesthesia in 
pharmacologically induced coma.
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY AND 
MAGNETIC SOURCE IMAGING
Recording the magnetic ﬁeld of the electrical activity of 
the brain (magnetoencephalography [MEG]) provides a 
means of examining cerebral activity that is less subject 
to distortion by other biologic tissues than the EEG. 
MEG is used in only a few specialized centers because 
of the complexity and expense of the necessary equip-
ment. It permits the source of activity to be localized 
and coregistered with the MRI in a technique that is 
known as magnetic source imaging. In patients with focal 
epilepsy, MEG is useful in localizing epileptogenic foci 
for surgery and for guiding the placement of intracranial 
electrodes for electrophysiologic monitoring. MEG has 
also been used for mapping brain tumors, identifying 
the central ﬁssure preoperatively, and localizing func-
tionally eloquent cortical areas such as those concerned 
with language.
EVOKED POTENTIALS
SENSORY EVOKED POTENTIALS
The noninvasive recording of spinal or cerebral poten-
tials elicited by stimulation of speciﬁc afferent pathways 
is an important means of monitoring the functional 
integrity of these pathways but does not indicate the 
pathologic basis of lesions involving them. Such evoked 
potentials (EPs) are so small compared to the back-
ground EEG activity that the responses to a number of 
stimuli have to be recorded and averaged with a com-
puter in order to permit their recognition and deﬁni-
tion. The background EEG activity, which has no ﬁxed 
temporal relationship to the stimulus, is averaged out by 
this procedure.
Visual evoked potentials (VEPs) are elicited by mon-
ocular stimulation with a reversing checkerboard pat-
tern and are recorded from the occipital region in the 
midline and on either side of the scalp. The compo-
nent of major clinical importance is the so-called P100 
response, a positive peak having a latency of approxi-
mately 100 ms. Its presence, latency, and symmetry 
over the two sides of the scalp are noted. Amplitude 
may also be measured, but changes in size are much 
less helpful for the recognition of pathology. VEPs are 
most useful in detecting dysfunction of the visual path-
ways anterior to the optic chiasm. In patients with 
acute severe optic neuritis, the P100 is frequently lost 
or grossly attenuated; as clinical recovery occurs and 
visual acuity improves, the P100 is restored but with 
an increased latency that generally remains abnormally 
prolonged indeﬁnitely. The VEP ﬁndings are therefore 
helpful in indicating previous or subclinical optic neuri-
tis. They may also be abnormal with ocular abnormali-
ties and with other causes of optic nerve disease, such 
as ischemia or compression by a tumor. Normal VEPs 
may be elicited by ﬂash stimuli in patients with cortical 
blindness. Routine VEPs record a mass response over 
a relatively large cortical area and thus may be insen-
sitive to localized waveform abnormalities. A newer 
technique, multifocal VEP, measures responses from 120 
individual sectors within each affected eye, and thus is 
likely to be more sensitive than routine VEP.
Brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) are elic-
ited by monaural stimulation with repetitive clicks and 
are recorded between the vertex of the scalp and the 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
30
mastoid process or earlobe. A series of potentials, desig-
nated by roman numerals, occurs in the ﬁrst 10 ms after 
the stimulus and represents in part the sequential acti-
vation of different structures in the pathway between 
the auditory nerve (wave I) and the inferior colliculus 
(wave V) in the midbrain. The presence, latency, and 
interpeak latency of the ﬁrst ﬁve positive potentials 
recorded at the vertex are evaluated. The ﬁndings are 
helpful in screening for acoustic neuromas, detecting 
brainstem pathology, and evaluating comatose patients. 
The BAEPs are normal in coma due to metabolic/toxic 
disorders or bihemispheric disease but abnormal in the 
presence of brainstem pathology.
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) are recorded 
over the scalp and spine in response to electrical stimu-
lation of a peripheral (mixed or cutaneous) nerve. The 
conﬁguration, polarity, and latency of the responses 
depend on the nerve that is stimulated and on the 
recording arrangements. SSEPs are used to evaluate 
proximal (otherwise inaccessible) portions of the 
peripheral nervous system and the integrity of the cen-
tral somatosensory pathways.
Clinical utility of EPs
EP studies may detect and localize lesions in afferent 
pathways in the central nervous system (CNS). They 
have been used particularly to investigate patients 
with suspected multiple sclerosis (MS), the diagnosis 
of which requires the recognition of lesions involving 
several different regions of the central white matter. 
In patients with clinical evidence of only one lesion, 
the electrophysiologic recognition of abnormalities in 
other sites helps to suggest or support the diagnosis but 
does not establish it unequivocally. Multimodality EP 
abnormalities are not speciﬁc for MS; they may occur 
in AIDS, Lyme disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
neurosyphilis, spinocerebellar degenerations, famil-
ial spastic paraplegia, and deﬁciency of vitamin E or 
B12, among other disorders. The diagnostic utility of 
the electrophysiologic ﬁndings therefore depends on 
the circumstances in which they are found. Abnor-
malities may aid in the localization of lesions to broad 
areas of the CNS, but attempts at precise localization 
on electrophysiologic grounds are misleading because 
the generators of many components of the EP are 
unknown.
The EP ﬁndings are sometimes of prognostic rel-
evance. Bilateral loss of SSEP components that are 
generated in the cerebral cortex implies that cognition 
may not be regained in posttraumatic or postanoxic 
coma, and EP studies may also be useful in evaluating 
patients with suspected brain death. In patients who 
are comatose for uncertain reasons, preserved BAEPs 
suggest either a metabolic-toxic etiology or bihemi-
spheric disease. In patients with spinal cord injuries, 
SSEPs have been used to indicate the completeness of 
the lesion. The presence or early return of a cortically 
generated response to stimulation of a nerve below 
the injured segment of the cord indicates an incom-
plete lesion and thus a better prognosis for functional 
recovery than otherwise. In surgery, intraoperative EP 
monitoring of neural structures placed at risk by the 
procedure may permit the early recognition of dys-
function and thereby permit a neurologic complication 
to be averted or minimized.
Visual and auditory acuity may be determined using 
EP techniques in patients whose age or mental state 
precludes traditional ophthalmologic or audiologic 
examinations.
COGNITIVE EVOKED POTENTIALS
Certain EP components depend on the mental atten-
tion of the subject and the setting in which the stimulus 
occurs, rather than simply on the physical characteristics 
of the stimulus. Such “event-related” potentials (ERPs) 
or “endogenous” potentials are related in some manner 
to the cognitive aspects of distinguishing an infrequently 
occurring target stimulus from other stimuli occur-
ring more frequently. For clinical purposes, attention 
has been directed particularly at the so-called P3 com-
ponent of the ERP, which is also designated the P300 
component because of its positive polarity and latency 
of approximately 300–400 ms after onset of an audi-
tory target stimulus. The P3 component is prolonged 
in latency in many patients with dementia, whereas 
it is generally normal in patients with depression or 
other psychiatric disorders that might be mistaken for 
dementia. ERPs are, therefore, sometimes helpful in 
making this distinction when there is clinical uncer-
tainty, although a response of normal latency does not 
exclude dementia.
MOTOR EVOKED POTENTIALS
The electrical potentials recorded from muscle or the 
spinal cord following stimulation of the motor cor-
tex or central motor pathways are referred to as motor 
evoked potentials. For clinical purposes such responses are 
recorded most often as the compound muscle action 
potentials elicited by transcutaneous magnetic stimula-
tion of the motor cortex. A strong but brief magnetic 
ﬁeld is produced by passing a current through a coil, 
and this induces stimulating currents in the subjacent 
neural tissue. The procedure is painless and apparently 
safe. Abnormalities have been described in several neu-
rologic disorders with clinical or subclinical involve-
ment of central motor pathways, including MS and 
motor neuron disease. In addition to a possible role in 
the diagnosis of neurologic disorders or in evaluating 
 
CHAPTER 5
Electrodiagnostic Studies of Nervous System Disorders: EEG, E voked Potentials, and EMG
31
the extent of pathologic involvement, the technique 
provides information of prognostic relevance (e.g., in 
suggesting the likelihood of recovery of motor func-
tion after stroke) and provides a means of monitoring 
intraoperatively the functional integrity of central motor 
tracts. Nevertheless, it is not used widely for clinical 
purposes.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC STUDIES OF 
MUSCLE AND NERVE
The motor unit is the basic element subserving motor 
function. It is deﬁned as an anterior horn cell, its axon 
and neuromuscular junctions, and all the muscle ﬁbers 
innervated by the axon. The number of motor units in 
a muscle ranges from approximately 10 in the extraocu-
lar muscles to several thousand in the large muscles of 
the legs. There is considerable variation in the average 
number of muscle ﬁbers within the motor units of an 
individual muscle, i.e., in the innervation ratio of dif-
ferent muscles. Thus the innervation ratio is <25 in the 
human external rectus or platysma muscle and between 
1600 and 1700 in the medial head of the gastrocnemius 
muscle. The muscle ﬁbers of individual motor units are 
divided into two general types by distinctive contrac-
tile properties, histochemical stains, and characteristic 
responses to fatigue. Within each motor unit, all of the 
muscle ﬁbers are of the same type.
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
The pattern of electrical activity in muscle (i.e., the 
electromyogram [EMG]), both at rest and during activ-
ity, may be recorded from a needle electrode inserted 
into the muscle. The nature and pattern of abnormali-
ties relate to disorders at different levels of the motor 
unit.
Relaxed muscle normally is electrically silent except 
in the end plate region, but abnormal spontaneous 
activity (Fig. 5-3) occurs in various neuromuscular dis-
orders, especially those associated with denervation or 
inﬂammatory changes in affected muscle. Fibrillation 
potentials and positive sharp waves (which reﬂect mus-
cle ﬁber irritability) and complex repetitive discharges 
are most often—but not always—found in denervated 
muscle and may also occur after muscle injury and in 
certain myopathic disorders, especially inﬂammatory 
disorders such as polymyositis. After an acute neuro-
pathic lesion, they are found earlier in proximal rather 
than distal muscles and sometimes do not develop dis-
tally in the extremities for 4–6 weeks; once present, 
they may persist indeﬁnitely unless reinnervation occurs 
or the muscle degenerates so completely that no viable 
tissue remains. Fasciculation potentials (which reﬂect 
the spontaneous activity of individual motor units) are 
characteristic of slowly progressive neuropathic disor-
ders, especially those with degeneration of anterior horn 
cells (such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). Myotonic 
discharges—high-frequency discharges of potentials 
derived from single muscle ﬁbers that wax and wane 
in amplitude and frequency—are the signature of myo-
tonic disorders such as myotonic dystrophy or myoto-
nia congenita but occur occasionally in polymyositis or 
other, rarer, disorders.
Slight voluntary contraction of a muscle leads to acti-
vation of a small number of motor units. The potentials 
generated by any muscle ﬁbers of these units that are 
within the pickup range of the needle electrode will be 
recorded (Fig.  5-3). The parameters of normal motor 
unit action potentials depend on the muscle under study 
and age of the patient, but their duration is normally 
between 5 and 15 ms, amplitude is between 200 μV 
and 2 mV, and most are bi- or triphasic. The number 
of units activated depends on the degree of voluntary 
activity. An increase in muscle contraction is associated 
with an increase in the number of motor units that are 
activated (recruited) and in the frequency with which 
they discharge. With a full contraction, so many motor 
units are normally activated that individual motor unit 
action potentials can no longer be distinguished, and 
a complete interference pattern is said to have been 
produced.
The incidence of small, short-duration, polyphasic 
motor unit action potentials (i.e., having more than four 
phases) is usually increased in myopathic muscle, and an 
excessive number of units is activated for a speciﬁed degree 
A
B
C
10 ms
10 ms
100 ms
100 μV
100 μV
100 μV
D
E
FIGURE 5-3 
Activity recorded during EMG. A. Spontaneous ﬁbrillation 
potentials and positive sharp waves. B. Complex repetitive 
discharges recorded in partially denervated muscle at rest. 
C. Normal triphasic motor unit action potential. D. Small, 
short-duration, polyphasic motor unit action potential such 
as is commonly encountered in myopathic disorders. E. 
Long-duration polyphasic motor unit action potential such as 
may be seen in neuropathic disorders.
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
32
of voluntary activity. By contrast, the loss of motor units 
that occurs in neuropathic disorders leads to a reduction 
in number of units activated during a maximal contrac-
tion and an increase in their ﬁring rate, i.e., there is an 
incomplete or reduced interference pattern. The conﬁgu-
ration and dimensions of the potentials may also be abnor-
mal, depending on the duration of the neuropathic process 
and on whether reinnervation has occurred. The surviv-
ing motor units are initially normal in conﬁguration but, as 
reinnervation occurs, they increase in amplitude and dura-
tion and become polyphasic (Fig.  5-3).
Action potentials from the same motor unit some-
times ﬁre with a consistent temporal relationship to 
each other, so that double, triple, or multiple discharges 
are recorded, especially in tetany, hemifacial spasm, or 
myokymia.
Electrical silence characterizes the involuntary, sus-
tained muscle contraction that occurs in phosphorylase 
deﬁciency, which is designated a contracture.
EMG enables disorders of the motor units to be 
detected and characterized as either neurogenic or myo-
pathic. In neurogenic disorders, the pattern of affected 
muscles may localize the lesion to the anterior horn 
cells or to a speciﬁc site as the axons traverse a nerve 
root, limb plexus, and peripheral nerve to their termi-
nal arborizations. The ﬁndings do not enable a speciﬁc 
etiologic diagnosis to be made, however, except in con-
junction with the clinical ﬁndings and results of other 
laboratory studies.
The ﬁndings may provide a guide to the severity of 
an acute disorder of a peripheral or cranial nerve (by 
indicating whether denervation has occurred and the 
completeness of the lesion) and whether the pathologic 
process is active or progressive in chronic or degenera-
tive disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Such 
information is important for prognostic purposes.
Various quantitative EMG approaches have been 
developed. The most common is to determine the 
mean duration and amplitude of 20 motor unit action 
potentials using a standardized technique. The tech-
nique of macro-EMG provides information about the 
number and size of muscle ﬁbers in a larger volume of 
the motor unit territory and has also been used to esti-
mate the number of motor units in a muscle. Scanning 
EMG is a computer-based technique that has been used 
to study the topography of motor unit action potentials 
and, in particular, the spatial and temporal distribution 
of activity in individual units. The technique of single-
ﬁber EMG is discussed separately below.
NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES
Recording of the electrical response of a muscle 
to stimulation of its motor nerve at two or more 
points along its course (Fig. 5-4) permits conduction 
velocity to be determined in the fastest-conducting 
motor ﬁbers between the points of stimulation. The 
latency and amplitude of the electrical response of 
muscle (i.e., of the compound muscle action poten-
tial) to stimulation of its motor nerve at a distal site 
are also compared with values deﬁned in normal sub-
jects. Sensory nerve conduction studies are performed 
by determining the conduction velocity and ampli-
tude of action potentials in sensory ﬁbers when these 
ﬁbers are stimulated at one point and the responses 
are recorded at another point along the course of the 
nerve. In adults, conduction velocity in the arms is 
normally between 50 and 70 m/s, and in the legs is 
between 40 and 60 m/s.
Nerve conduction studies complement the EMG 
examination, enabling the presence and extent of periph-
eral nerve pathology to be determined. They are particu-
larly helpful in determining whether sensory symptoms are 
arising from pathology proximal or distal to the dorsal root 
ganglia (in the former instance, peripheral sensory conduc-
tion studies will be normal) and whether neuromuscular 
Ground
Recording
electrodes
Reference
Active
Cathode
Anode
Stimulating
electrodes
Stimulating
electrodes
Stimulation
site
Wrist
Below
elbow
Above
elbow
Axilla
5 mV
10 ms
FIGURE 5-4 
Arrangement for motor conduction studies of the ulnar 
nerve. Responses are recorded with a surface electrode 
from the abductor digiti minimi muscle to supramaximal 
stimulation of the nerve at different sites, and are shown in 
the lower panel. (From Aminoff MJ: Electromyography in 
Clinical Practice: Electrodiagnostic Aspects of Neuromuscular 
Disease, 3rd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1998.)
 
CHAPTER 5
Electrodiagnostic Studies of Nervous System Disorders: EEG, E voked Potentials, and EMG
33
dysfunction relates to peripheral nerve disease. In patients 
with a mononeuropathy, they are invaluable as a means 
of localizing a focal lesion, determining the extent and 
severity of the underlying pathology, providing a guide 
to prognosis, and detecting subclinical involvement of 
other peripheral nerves. They enable a polyneuropathy 
to be distinguished from a mononeuropathy multiplex 
when this is not possible clinically, an important distinc-
tion because of the etiologic implications. Nerve conduc-
tion studies provide a means of following the progression 
and therapeutic response of peripheral nerve disorders 
and are being used increasingly for this purpose in clinical 
trials. They may suggest the underlying pathologic basis 
in individual cases. Conduction velocity is often mark-
edly slowed, terminal motor latencies are prolonged, 
and compound motor and sensory nerve action poten-
tials may be dispersed in the demyelinative neuropathies 
(such as in Guillain-Barré syndrome, chronic inﬂamma-
tory polyneuropathy, metachromatic leukodystrophy, 
or certain hereditary neuropathies); conduction block 
is frequent in acquired varieties of these neuropathies. 
By contrast, conduction velocity is normal or slowed 
only mildly, sensory nerve action potentials are small or 
absent, and there is EMG evidence of denervation in 
axonal neuropathies such as occur in association with 
metabolic or toxic disorders.
The utility and complementary role of EMG and 
nerve conduction studies are best illustrated by refer-
ence to a common clinical problem. Numbness and 
paresthesias of the little ﬁnger and associated wasting 
of the intrinsic muscles of the hand may result from 
a spinal cord lesion, C8/T1 radiculopathy, brachial 
plexopathy (lower trunk or medial cord), or a lesion 
of the ulnar nerve. If sensory nerve action poten-
tials can be recorded normally at the wrist following 
stimulation of the digital ﬁbers in the affected ﬁn-
ger, the pathology is probably proximal to the dor-
sal root ganglia (i.e., there is a radiculopathy or more 
central lesion); absence of the sensory potentials, by 
contrast, suggests distal pathology. EMG examination 
will indicate whether the pattern of affected muscles 
conforms to radicular or ulnar nerve territory, or is 
more extensive (thereby favoring a plexopathy). 
Ulnar motor conduction studies will generally also 
distinguish between a radiculopathy (normal ﬁndings) 
and ulnar neuropathy (abnormal ﬁndings) and will 
often identify the site of an ulnar nerve lesion. The 
nerve is stimulated at several points along its course 
to determine whether the compound action potential 
recorded from a distal muscle that it supplies shows a 
marked alteration in size or area or a disproportion-
ate change in latency, with stimulation at a particu-
lar site. The electrophysiologic ﬁndings thus permit 
a deﬁnitive diagnosis to be made and speciﬁc treat-
ment instituted in circumstances where there is clini-
cal ambiguity.
F-WAVE STUDIES
Stimulation of a motor nerve causes impulses to travel 
antidromically (i.e., toward the spinal cord) as well as 
orthodromically (to the nerve terminals). Such anti-
dromic impulses cause a few of the anterior horn cells 
to discharge, producing a small motor response that 
occurs considerably later than the direct response elic-
ited by nerve stimulation. The F wave so elicited is 
sometimes abnormal (absent or delayed) with proximal 
pathology of the peripheral nervous system, such as a 
radiculopathy, and may therefore be helpful in detect-
ing abnormalities when conventional nerve conduc-
tion studies are normal. In general, however, the clinical 
utility of F-wave studies has been disappointing, except 
perhaps in Guillain-Barré syndrome, where they are 
often absent or delayed.
H-REFLEX STUDIES
The H reﬂex is easily recorded only from the soleus 
muscle (S1) in normal adults. It is elicited by low-
intensity stimulation of the tibial nerve and represents a 
monosynaptic reﬂex in which spindle (Ia) afferent ﬁbers 
constitute the afferent arc and alpha motor axons the 
efferent pathway. The H reﬂexes are often absent bilat-
erally in elderly patients or with polyneuropathies and 
may be lost unilaterally in S1 radiculopathies.
MUSCLE RESPONSE TO REPETITIVE 
NERVE STIMULATION
The size of the electrical response of a muscle to supra-
maximal electrical stimulation of its motor nerve relates 
to the number of muscle ﬁbers that are activated. Neu-
romuscular transmission can be tested by several dif-
ferent protocols, but the most helpful is to record with 
surface electrodes the electrical response of a muscle to 
supramaximal stimulation of its motor nerve by repeti-
tive (2–3 Hz) shocks delivered before and at selected 
intervals after a maximal voluntary contraction.
There is normally little or no change in size of the 
compound muscle action potential following repetitive 
stimulation of a motor nerve at 2–3 Hz with stimuli 
delivered at intervals after voluntary contraction of the 
muscle for about 20–30 s, even though preceding activ-
ity in the junctional region inﬂuences the release of ace-
tylcholine and thus the size of the end-plate potentials 
elicited by a test stimulus. This is because more acetyl-
choline is normally released than is required to bring the 
motor end-plate potentials to the threshold for generat-
ing muscle ﬁber action potentials. In disorders of neu-
romuscular transmission this safety factor is reduced. 
Thus in myasthenia gravis, repetitive stimulation, par-
ticularly at a rate of between 2 and 5 Hz, may lead to a 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
34
depression of neuromuscular transmission, with a dec-
rement in size of the response recorded from affected 
muscles. Similarly, immediately after a period of maxi-
mal voluntary activity, single or repetitive stimuli of 
the motor nerve may elicit larger muscle responses than 
before, indicating that more muscle ﬁbers are respond-
ing. This postactivation facilitation of neuromuscu-
lar transmission is followed by a longer-lasting period 
of depression, maximal between 2 and 4 min after the 
conditioning period and lasting for as long as 10 min or 
so, during which responses are reduced in size.
Decrementing responses to repetitive stimulation 
at 2–5 Hz are common in myasthenia gravis but may 
also occur in the congenital myasthenic syndromes. In 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, in which there is 
defective release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular 
junction, the compound muscle action potential elicited 
by a single stimulus is generally very small. With repeti-
tive stimulation at rates of up to 10 Hz, the ﬁrst few 
responses may decline in size, but subsequent responses 
increase. If faster rates of stimulation are used (20–50 
Hz), the increment may be dramatic so that the ampli-
tude of compound muscle action potentials eventually 
reaches a size that is several times larger than the ini-
tial response. In patients with botulism, the response to 
repetitive stimulation is similar to that in Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome, although the ﬁndings are some-
what more variable and not all muscles are affected.
SINGLE-FIBER ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
This technique is particularly helpful in detecting dis-
orders of neuromuscular transmission. A special needle 
electrode is placed within a muscle and positioned to 
record action potentials from two muscle ﬁbers belong-
ing to the same motor unit. The time interval between 
the two potentials will vary in consecutive discharges; 
this is called the neuromuscular jitter. The jitter can be 
quantiﬁed as the mean difference between consecutive 
interpotential intervals and is normally between 10 and 
50 μs. This value is increased when neuromuscular 
transmission is disturbed for any reason, and in some 
instances impulses in individual muscle ﬁbers may fail 
to occur because of impulse blocking at the neuromus-
cular junction. Single-ﬁber EMG is more sensitive than 
repetitive nerve stimulation or determination of acetyl-
choline receptor antibody levels in diagnosing myasthe-
nia gravis.
Single-ﬁber EMG can also be used to determine the 
mean ﬁber density of motor units (i.e., mean number of 
muscle ﬁbers per motor unit within the recording area) 
and to estimate the number of motor units in a muscle, 
but this is of less immediate clinical relevance.
BLINK REFLEXES
Electrical or mechanical stimulation of the supraorbital 
nerve on one side leads to two separate reﬂex responses 
of the orbicularis oculi—an ipsilateral R1 response hav-
ing a latency of approximately 10 ms and a bilateral 
R2 response with a latency in the order of 30 ms. The 
trigeminal and facial nerves constitute the afferent and 
efferent arcs of the reﬂex, respectively. Abnormalities of 
either nerve or intrinsic lesions of the medulla or pons 
may lead to uni- or bilateral loss of the response, and 
the ﬁndings may therefore be helpful in identifying or 
localizing such pathology.
 Elizabeth Robbins  ■   Stephen L. Hauser 
35
 In experienced hands, lumbar puncture (LP) is usually 
a safe procedure. Major complications are extremely 
uncommon but can include cerebral herniation, injury 
to the spinal cord or nerve roots, hemorrhage, or infec-
tion. Minor complications occur with greater frequency 
and can include backache, post-LP headache, and radic-
ular pain or numbness. 
 IMAGING AND LABORATORY STUDIES 
PRIOR TO LP 
 Patients with an altered level of consciousness, a focal 
neurologic deﬁ cit, new-onset seizure, papilledema, or 
an immunocompromised state are at increased risk for 
potentially fatal cerebellar or tentorial herniation fol-
lowing LP. Neuroimaging should be obtained in these 
patients prior to LP to exclude a focal mass lesion or 
diffuse swelling. Imaging studies should include the 
spine in patients with symptoms suggesting spinal cord 
compression, such as back pain, leg weakness, urinary 
retention, or incontinence. In patients with suspected 
meningitis who require neuroimaging prior to diag-
nostic LP, administration of antibiotics, preferably fol-
lowing blood culture, should precede the neuroimaging 
study. 
 Patients receiving therapeutic anticoagulation or 
those with coagulation defects including thrombocy-
topenia are at increased risk of post-LP spinal subdural 
or epidural hematomas, either of which can produce 
permanent nerve injury and/or paralysis. If a bleeding 
disorder is suspected, the platelet count, international 
normalized ratio (INR), and partial thromboplastin time 
should be checked prior to lumbar puncture. There are 
no data available to assess the safety of LP in patients 
with low platelet counts; a count of <20,000/μL is con-
sidered to be a contraindication to LP. Bleeding com-
plications rarely occur in patients with platelet counts 
≥50,000/μL and an INR ≤1.5. Patients receiving 
low-molecular-weight heparin are at increased risk of 
post-LP spinal or epidural hematoma, and doses should 
be held for 24 h before the procedure. 
 LP should not be performed through infected skin 
as organisms can be introduced into the subarachnoid 
space (SAS). 
 ANALGESIA 
 Anxiety and pain can be minimized prior to begin-
ning the procedure. Anxiety can be allayed by the use 
of lorazepam, 1–2 mg given PO 30 min prior to the 
procedure or IV 5 min prior to the procedure. Topi-
cal anesthesia can be achieved by the application of a 
lidocaine-based cream. Lidocaine 4% is effective when 
applied 30 min prior to the procedure; lidocaine/pri-
locaine requires 60–120 min. The cream should be 
applied in a thick layer so that it completely covers the 
skin; an occlusive dressing is used to keep the cream in 
place. 
 POSITIONING 
 Proper positioning of the patient is essential. The pro-
cedure should be performed on a ﬁ rm surface; if the 
procedure is to be performed at the bedside, the patient 
should be positioned at the edge of the bed and not 
in the middle. The patient is asked to lie on his or 
her side, facing away from the examiner, and to “roll 
up into a ball.” The neck is gently ante-ﬂ exed and the 
thighs pulled up toward the abdomen; the shoulders and 
pelvis should be vertically aligned without forward or 
backward tilt ( Fig. 6-1 ). The spinal cord terminates 
at approximately the L1 vertebral level in 94% of indi-
viduals. In the remaining 6%, the conus extends to the 
L2-L3 interspace. LP is therefore performed at or below 
the L3-L4 interspace. A useful anatomic guide is a line 
 TECHNIQUE OF LUMBAR PUNCTURE 
 CHAPTER 6 
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
36
drawn between the posterior superior iliac crests, which 
corresponds closely to the level of the L3-L4 interspace. 
The interspace is chosen following gentle palpation to 
identify the spinous processes at each lumbar level.
An alternative to the lateral recumbent position is the 
seated position. The patient sits at the side of the bed, 
with feet supported on a chair. The patient is instructed 
to curl forward, trying to touch the nose to the umbi-
licus. It is important that the patient not simply lean 
forward onto a bedside tabletop, as this is not an opti-
mal position for opening up the spinous processes. LP 
is sometimes more easily performed in obese patients if 
they are sitting. A disadvantage of the seated position is 
that measurement of opening pressure may not be accu-
rate. In situations in which LP is difﬁcult using palpable 
spinal landmarks, bedside ultrasound to guide needle 
placement may be employed.
TECHNIQUE
Once the desired target for needle insertion has been 
identiﬁed, the examiner should put on sterile gloves. 
After cleansing the skin with povidone-iodine or simi-
lar disinfectant, the area is draped with a sterile cloth; 
the needle insertion site is blotted dry using a sterile 
gauze pad. Proper local disinfection reduces the risk of 
introducing skin bacteria into the SAS or other sites. 
Local anesthetic, typically 1% lidocaine, 3–5 mL total, is 
injected into the subcutaneous tissue; in nonemergency 
situations a topical anesthetic cream can be applied (see 
above). When time permits, pain associated with the 
injection of lidocaine can be minimized by slow, serial 
injections, each one progressively deeper than the last, 
over a period of ∼5 min. Approximately 0.5–1 mL of 
lidocaine is injected at a time; the needle is not usu-
ally withdrawn between injections. A pause of ∼15 s 
between injections helps to minimize the pain of the 
subsequent injection. The goal is to inject each mini-
bolus of anesthetic into an area of skin that has become 
numb from the preceding injection. Approximately 
5–10 mini-boluses are injected, using a total of ∼5 mL 
of lidocaine.
If possible, the LP should be delayed for 10–15 min 
following the completion of the injection of anesthetic; 
this signiﬁcantly decreases and can even eliminate pain 
from the procedure. Even a delay of 5 min will help to 
reduce pain.
The LP needle (typically 20- to 22-gauge) is inserted 
in the midline, midway between two spinous processes, 
and slowly advanced. The bevel of the needle should be 
maintained in a horizontal position, parallel to the direc-
tion of the dural ﬁbers and with the ﬂat portion of the 
bevel pointed upward; this minimizes injury to the ﬁbers 
as the dura is penetrated. When lumbar puncture is per-
formed in patients who are sitting, the bevel should be 
maintained in the vertical position. In most adults, the 
needle is advanced 4–5 cm (1–2 in.) before the SAS is 
reached; the examiner usually recognizes entry as a sud-
den release of resistance, a “pop.” If no ﬂuid appears 
despite apparently correct needle placement, then the 
needle may be rotated 90°–180°. If there is still no ﬂuid, 
the stylet is reinserted and the needle is advanced slightly. 
Some examiners halt needle advancement periodically 
to remove the stylet and check for ﬂow of cerebrospinal 
ﬂuid (CSF). If the needle cannot be advanced because it 
hits bone, if the patient experiences sharp radiating pain 
down one leg, or if no ﬂuid appears (“dry tap”), the 
needle is partially withdrawn and reinserted at a differ-
ent angle. If on the second attempt the needle still hits 
bone (indicating lack of success in introducing it between 
the spinous processes), then the needle should be com-
pletely withdrawn and the patient should be repositioned. 
The second attempt is sometimes more successful if the 
patient straightens the spine completely prior to reposi-
tioning. The needle can then be reinserted at the same 
level or at an adjacent one.
Once the SAS is reached, a manometer is attached 
to the needle and the opening pressure measured. The 
examiner should look for normal oscillations in CSF 
pressure associated with pulse and respirations. The 
upper limit of normal opening pressure with the patient 
supine is 180 mmH2O in adults but may be as high as 
200–250 mmH2O in obese adults.
CSF is allowed to drip into collection tubes; it should 
not be withdrawn with a syringe. Depending on the 
clinical indication, ﬂuid is then obtained for studies 
including: (1) cell count with differential; (2) protein 
and glucose concentrations; (3) culture (bacterial, fun-
gal, mycobacterial, viral); (4) smears (e.g., Gram’s and 
acid-fast stained smears); (5) antigen tests (e.g., latex 
agglutination); (6) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
ampliﬁcation of DNA or RNA of microorganisms (e.g., 
herpes simplex virus, enteroviruses); (7) antibody lev-
els against microorganisms; (8) immunoelectrophoresis 
for determination of γ-globulin level and oligoclonal 
Level of the iliac crests
L3–L4 interspace
FIGURE 6-1 
Proper positioning of a patient in the lateral decubitus 
position. Note that the shoulders and hips are in a vertical 
plane; the torso is perpendicular to the bed. (From RP Simon 
et al [eds]: Clinical Neurology, 7th ed. New York, McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
CHAPTER 6
Technique of Lumbar Puncture
37
banding; and (9) cytology. Although 15 mL of CSF is 
sufﬁcient to obtain all of the listed studies, the yield of 
fungal and mycobacterial cultures and cytology increases 
when larger volumes are sampled. In general 20–30 mL 
may be safely removed from adults.
A bloody tap due to penetration of a meningeal ves-
sel (a “traumatic tap”) may result in confusion with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). In these situations 
a specimen of CSF should be centrifuged immediately 
after it is obtained; clear supernatant following CSF 
centrifugation supports the diagnosis of a bloody tap, 
whereas xanthochromic supernatant suggests SAH. In 
general, bloody CSF due to the penetration of a men-
ingeal vessel clears gradually in successive tubes, whereas 
blood due to SAH does not. In addition to SAH, xan-
thochromic CSF may also be present in patients with 
liver disease and when the CSF protein concentration is 
markedly elevated (>1.5–2 g/L [150–200 mg/dL]).
Prior to removing the LP needle, the stylet is rein-
serted to avoid the possibility of entrapment of a nerve 
root in the dura as the needle is being withdrawn; 
entrapment could result in a dural CSF leak, causing 
headache. Some practitioners question the safety of this 
maneuver, with its potential risk of causing a needle-
stick injury to the examiner. Injury is unlikely, how-
ever, given the ﬂexibility of the small-diameter stylet, 
which tends to bend, rather than penetrate, on contact. 
Following LP, the patient is customarily positioned in a 
comfortable, recumbent position for 1 h before rising, 
although this may be unnecessary as it does not appear 
to affect the development of headache (see below).
POST-LP HEADACHE
The principal complication of LP is headache, occur-
ring in 10–30% of patients. Younger age and female 
gender are associated with an increased risk of post-LP 
headache. Headache usually begins within 48 h but 
may be delayed for up to 12 days. Head pain is dramati-
cally positional; it begins when the patient sits or stands 
upright; there is relief upon reclining or with abdomi-
nal compression. The longer the patient is upright, the 
longer the latency before head pain subsides. The pain 
is usually a dull ache but may be throbbing; its location 
is occipitofrontal. Nausea and stiff neck often accom-
pany headache, and occasionally, patients report blurred 
vision, photophobia, tinnitus, and vertigo. In more than 
three-quarters of patients, symptoms completely resolve 
within a week, but in a minority they can persist for 
weeks or even months.
Post-LP headache is caused by a drop in CSF pres-
sure related to persistent leakage of CSF at the site where 
the needle entered the subarachnoid space. Loss of CSF 
volume decreases the brain’s supportive cushion, so that 
when a patient is upright there is probably dilation and 
tension placed on the brain’s anchoring structures, the 
pain-sensitive dural sinuses, resulting in pain. Although 
intracranial hypotension is the usual explanation for 
severe LP headache, the syndrome can occur in patients 
with normal CSF pressure.
Because post-LP headache usually resolves without 
speciﬁc treatment, care is largely supportive with oral 
analgesics (acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂamma-
tory drugs, opioids [Chap. 7]) and antiemetics. Patients 
may obtain relief by lying in a comfortable (especially a 
recumbent or head-down Trendelenburg) position. For 
some patients, beverages with caffeine can provide tem-
porary pain relief.
For patients with persistent pain, treatment with IV 
caffeine (500 mg in 500 mL saline administered over 
2 h) may be effective; atrial ﬁbrillation is a rare side effect. 
Alternatively, an epidural blood patch accomplished by 
injection of 15 mL of autologous whole blood is usu-
ally effective. This procedure is most often performed by 
a pain specialist or anesthesiologist. The blood patch has 
an immediate effect, making it unlikely that sealing off a 
dural hole with blood clot is its sole mechanism of action. 
The acute beneﬁt may be due to compression of the CSF 
space by the clot, increasing CSF pressure. Some clini-
cians reserve epidural blood patch for patients who do not 
respond to caffeine, while others prefer to use blood patch 
as initial management for unremitting post-LP symptoms.
Strategies to decrease the incidence of post-LP head-
ache are listed in Table 6-1. Use of a smaller caliber 
needle is associated with a lower risk: In one study, the 
risk of headache following use of a 24- to 27-gauge 
standard (Quincke) needle was 5–12%, compared 
to 20–40% when a 20- or 22-gauge needle was used. 
The smallest gauge needles usually require the use of 
an introducer needle and are associated with a slower 
CSF ﬂow rate. Use of an “atraumatic” (Sprotte, “pen-
cil point,” or “noncutting”) needle also reduces the 
incidence of moderate to severe headache compared 
TABLE 6-1
REDUCING THE INCIDENCE OF POST-LP HEADACHE
Effective Strategies
Use of small-diameter needle (22-gauge or smaller)
Use of atraumatic needle (Sprotte and others)
Replacement of stylet prior to removal of needle
Insertion of needle with bevel oriented in a cephalad to 
caudad direction (when using standard needle)
Ineffective Strategies
Bed rest (up to 4 h) following LP
Supplemental ﬂuids
Minimizing the volume of spinal ﬂuid removed
Immediate mobilization following LP
SECTION I
Introduction to Neurology
38
with standard LP (Quincke, or “traumatic”) needles 
(Fig. 6-2). However, because atraumatic needles are 
more difﬁcult to use, more attempts may be required 
to perform the LP, particularly in overweight patients. 
It may also be necessary to use an introducer with the 
atraumatic needle, which does not have the customary 
cutting, beveled tip. There is a low risk of needle dam-
age, e.g., breakage, with the Sprotte atraumatic needle. 
Another strategy to decrease the incidence of headache 
is to replace the stylet before removing the LP needle.
Patients are often advised to remain in a recumbent 
position for up to an hour following lumbar puncture. 
However, studies comparing mobilization immediately 
following LP with bed rest for periods up to 4 h show 
no signiﬁcant differences in the incidence of headache, 
suggesting that the customary practice of remaining in a 
recumbent position post-LP may be unnecessary.
NORMAL VALUES
(See Table 6-2) In uninfected CSF, the normal white 
blood cell count is fewer than ﬁve mononuclear cells 
(lymphocytes and monocytes) per μL. Polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes (PMNs) are not found in normal 
unconcentrated CSF; however, rare PMNs can be 
found in centrifuged or concentrated CSF specimens 
such as those utilized for cytologic examination. Red 
blood cells (RBCs) are not normally present in CSF; 
if RBCs are present from a traumatic tap, their num-
ber decreases as additional CSF is collected. CSF glu-
cose concentrations <2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL) are 
abnormal.
FIGURE 6-2 
Comparison of the standard (“traumatic” or Quincke) LP 
needle with the “atraumatic” (Sprotte). The “atraumatic” 
needle has its opening on the top surface of the needle, a 
design intended to reduce the chance of cutting dural ﬁbers 
that, by protruding through the dura, could be responsible 
for subsequent CSF ﬂuid leak and post-LP headache. (From 
SR Thomas et al: BMJ 321:986, 2000.)
TABLE 6-2
CEREBROSPINAL FLUIDa
CONSTITUENT
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL 
UNITS
Glucose
2.22–3.89 mmol/L
40–70 mg/dL
Lactate
1–2 mmol/L
10–20 mg/dL
Total protein
 Lumbar
0.15–0.5 g/L
15–50 mg/dL
 Cisternal
0.15–0.25 g/L
15–25 mg/dL
 Ventricular
0.06–0.15 g/L
6–15 mg/dL
Albumin
0.066–0.442 g/L
6.6–44.2 mg/dL
IgG
0.009–0.057 g/L
0.9–5.7 mg/dL
IgG indexb
0.29–0.59
Oligoclonal bands 
(OGB)
<2 bands not 
present in 
matched serum 
sample
Ammonia
15–47 μmol/L
25–80 μg/dL
CSF pressure
50–180 mmH2O
CSF volume (adult)
∼150 mL
Red blood cells
0
0
Leukocytes
 Total
0–5 mononuclear 
cells per mm3
 Differential
 Lymphocytes
60–70%
 Monocytes
30–50%
 Neutrophils
None
aBecause cerebrospinal ﬂuid concentrations are equilibrium values, 
measurements of the same parameters in blood plasma obtained 
at the same time are recommended. However, there is a time lag in 
attainment of equilibrium, and cerebrospinal levels of plasma con-
stituents that can ﬂuctuate rapidly (such as plasma glucose) may not 
achieve stable values until after a signiﬁcant lag phase.
bIgG index = CSF IgG (mg/dL) × serum albumin (g/dL)/serum IgG (g/
dL) × CSF albumin (mg/dL).
SECTION II
CLINICAL  
MANIFESTATIONS OF 
NEUROLOGIC DISEASE
 James P. Rathmell  ■  Howard L. Fields 
40
 The task of medicine is to preserve and restore health 
and to relieve suffering. Understanding pain is essen-
tial to both of these goals. Because pain is universally 
understood as a signal of disease, it is the most com-
mon symptom that brings a patient to a physician’s 
attention. The function of the pain sensory system is 
to protect the body and maintain homeostasis. It does 
this by detecting, localizing, and identifying potential or 
actual tissue-damaging processes. Because different dis-
eases produce characteristic patterns of tissue damage, 
the quality, time course, and location of a patient’s pain 
complaint provide important diagnostic clues. It is the 
physician’s responsibility to provide rapid and effective 
pain relief. 
 THE PAIN SENSORY SYSTEM 
 Pain is an unpleasant sensation localized to a part of the 
body. It is often described in terms of a penetrating or 
tissue-destructive process (e.g., stabbing, burning, twist-
ing, tearing, squeezing) and/or of a bodily or emotional 
reaction (e.g., terrifying, nauseating, sickening). Further-
more, any pain of moderate or higher intensity is accom-
panied by anxiety and the urge to escape or terminate the 
feeling. These properties illustrate the duality of pain: it 
is both sensation and emotion. When it is acute, pain is 
characteristically associated with behavioral arousal and 
a stress response consisting of increased blood pressure, 
heart rate, pupil diameter, and plasma cortisol levels. In 
addition, local muscle contraction (e.g., limb ﬂ exion, 
abdominal wall rigidity) is often present. 
 PERIPHERAL MECHANISMS 
 The primary afferent nociceptor 
 A peripheral nerve consists of the axons of three differ-
ent types of neurons: primary sensory afferents, motor 
neurons, and sympathetic postganglionic neurons 
( Fig. 7-1 ) . The cell bodies of primary sensory afferents 
are located in the dorsal root ganglia in the vertebral 
foramina. The primary afferent axon has two branches: 
one projects centrally into the spinal cord and the other 
projects peripherally to innervate tissues. Primary affer-
ents are classiﬁ ed by their diameter, degree of myelina-
tion, and conduction velocity. The largest-diameter 
afferent ﬁ bers, A-beta (Aβ), respond maximally to light 
touch and/or moving stimuli; they are present primarily 
in nerves that innervate the skin. In normal individuals, 
the activity of these ﬁ bers does not produce pain. There 
are two other classes of primary afferents: the small-
diameter myelinated A-delta (Aδ) and the unmyelin-
ated (C ﬁ ber) axons ( Fig.  7-1 ). These ﬁ bers are present 
in nerves to the skin and to deep somatic and visceral 
structures. Some tissues, such as the cornea, are inner-
vated only by Aδ and C ﬁ ber afferents. Most Aδ and C 
ﬁ ber afferents respond maximally only to intense (pain-
ful) stimuli and produce the subjective experience of 
pain when they are electrically stimulated; this deﬁ nes 
them as  primary afferent nociceptors ( pain receptors ). The 
ability to detect painful stimuli is completely abolished 
when conduction in Aδ and C ﬁ ber axons is blocked. 
 Individual primary afferent nociceptors can respond 
to several different types of noxious stimuli. For exam-
ple, most nociceptors respond to heat; intense cold; 
intense mechanical stimuli, such as a pinch; changes in 
pH, particularly an acidic environment; and application 
of chemical irritants including adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP), serotonin, bradykinin, and histamine. 
 Sensitization 
 When intense, repeated, or prolonged stimuli are 
applied to damaged or inﬂ amed tissues, the threshold 
for activating primary afferent nociceptors is lowered, 
and the frequency of ﬁ ring is higher for all stimulus 
intensities. Inﬂ ammatory mediators such as bradykinin, 
 PAIN: PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 
 CHAPTER 7 
 
CHAPTER 7
Pain: Pathophysiology and Management
41
nerve-growth factor, some prostaglandins, and leukotri-
enes contribute to this process, which is called sensitiza-
tion. Sensitization occurs at the level of the peripheral 
nerve terminal (peripheral sensitization) as well as at the 
level of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (central sensi-
tization). Peripheral sensitization occurs in damaged or 
inﬂamed tissues, when inﬂammatory mediators activate 
intracellular signal transduction in nociceptors, prompt-
ing an increase in the production, transport, and mem-
brane insertion of chemically gated and voltage-gated 
ion channels. These changes increase the excitability of 
nociceptor terminals and lower their threshold for acti-
vation by mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli. 
Central sensitization occurs when activity, generated by 
nociceptors during inﬂammation, enhances the excit-
ability of nerve cells in the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord. Following injury and resultant sensitization, nor-
mally innocuous stimuli can produce pain. Sensitiza-
tion is a clinically important process that contributes to 
tenderness, soreness, and hyperalgesia (increased pain 
intensity in response to the same noxious stimulus; e.g., 
moderate pressure causes severe pain). A striking exam-
ple of sensitization is sunburned skin, in which severe 
pain can be produced by a gentle slap on the back or a 
warm shower.
Sensitization is of particular importance for pain and 
tenderness in deep tissues. Viscera are normally relatively 
insensitive to noxious mechanical and thermal stimuli, 
although hollow viscera do generate signiﬁcant discomfort 
when distended. In contrast, when affected by a disease 
process with an inﬂammatory component, deep structures 
such as joints or hollow viscera characteristically become 
exquisitely sensitive to mechanical stimulation.
Peripheral nerve
Dorsal root
ganglion
Spinal
cord
Sympathetic
postganglionic
Aβ
Aδ
C
Sympathetic
preganglionic
FIGURE 7-1
Components of a typical cutaneous nerve. There are two 
distinct functional categories of axons: primary afferents 
with cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglion, and sympathetic 
postganglionic ﬁbers with cell bodies in the sympathetic 
A large proportion of Aδ and C ﬁber afferents inner-
vating viscera are completely insensitive in normal non-
injured, noninﬂamed tissue. That is, they cannot be 
activated by known mechanical or thermal stimuli and 
are not spontaneously active. However, in the presence 
of inﬂammatory mediators, these afferents become sen-
sitive to mechanical stimuli. Such afferents have been 
termed silent nociceptors, and their characteristic proper-
ties may explain how, under pathologic conditions, the 
relatively insensitive deep structures can become the 
source of severe and debilitating pain and tenderness. 
Low pH, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and other inﬂam-
matory mediators such as bradykinin play a signiﬁcant 
role in sensitization.
Nociceptor-induced inﬂammation
Primary afferent nociceptors also have a neuroeffec-
tor function. Most nociceptors contain polypeptide 
mediators that are released from their peripheral termi-
nals when they are activated (Fig. 7-2). An example 
is substance P, an 11-amino-acid peptide. Substance P 
is released from primary afferent nociceptors and has 
multiple biologic activities. It is a potent vasodilator, 
degranulates mast cells, is a chemoattractant for leu-
kocytes, and increases the production and release of 
inﬂammatory mediators. Interestingly, depletion of sub-
stance P from joints reduces the severity of experimen-
tal arthritis. Primary afferent nociceptors are not simply 
passive messengers of threats to tissue injury but also 
play an active role in tissue protection through these 
neuroeffector functions.
ganglion. Primary afferents include those with large-diameter 
myelinated (Aβ), small-diameter myelinated (Aδ), and unmy-
elinated (C) axons. All sympathetic postganglionic ﬁbers are 
unmyelinated.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
42
CENTRAL MECHANISMS
The spinal cord and referred pain
The axons of primary afferent nociceptors enter the 
spinal cord via the dorsal root. They terminate in the 
dorsal horn of the spinal gray matter (Fig. 7-3). The 
terminals of primary afferent axons contact spinal neu-
rons that transmit the pain signal to brain sites involved 
in pain perception. When primary afferents are acti-
vated by noxious stimuli, they release neurotransmit-
ters from their terminals that excite the spinal cord 
neurons. The major neurotransmitter released is gluta-
mate, which rapidly excites dorsal horn neurons. Pri-
mary afferent nociceptor terminals also release peptides, 
including substance P and calcitonin gene-related pep-
tide, which produce a slower and longer-lasting excita-
tion of the dorsal horn neurons. The axon of each pri-
mary afferent contacts many spinal neurons, and each 
spinal neuron receives convergent inputs from many 
primary afferents.
The convergence of sensory inputs to a single spinal 
pain-transmission neuron is of great importance because 
it underlies the phenomenon of referred pain. All spi-
nal neurons that receive input from the viscera and deep 
musculoskeletal structures also receive input from the 
skin. The convergence patterns are determined by the 
spinal segment of the dorsal root ganglion that supplies 
the afferent innervation of a structure. For example, the 
afferents that supply the central diaphragm are derived 
from the third and fourth cervical dorsal root ganglia. 
Primary afferents with cell bodies in these same ganglia 
supply the skin of the shoulder and lower neck. Thus, 
sensory inputs from both the shoulder skin and the cen-
tral diaphragm converge on pain-transmission neurons 
in the third and fourth cervical spinal segments. Because 
of this convergence and the fact that the spinal neurons are most 
often activated by inputs from the skin, activity evoked in spi-
nal neurons by input from deep structures is mislocalized by 
Primary activation
Secondary activation
A  
B
Platelet
Mast cell
SP
H
5HT
SP
BK
PG
K+
BK
H+
FIGURE 7-2 
Events leading to activation, sensitization, and spread 
of sensitization of primary afferent nociceptor terminals. 
A. Direct activation by intense pressure and consequent cell 
damage. Cell damage induces lower pH (H+) and leads to 
release of potassium (K+) and to synthesis of prostaglandins 
(PG) and bradykinin (BK). Prostaglandins increase the sensi-
tivity of the terminal to bradykinin and other pain-producing 
substances. B. Secondary activation. Impulses generated in 
the stimulated terminal propagate not only to the spinal cord 
but also into other terminal branches where they induce the 
release of peptides, including substance P (SP). Substance 
P causes vasodilation and neurogenic edema with further 
accumulation of bradykinin (BK). Substance P also causes 
the release of histamine (H) from mast cells and serotonin 
(5HT) from platelets.
Anterolateral
tract axon
Skin
Viscus
FIGURE 7-3 
The convergence-projection hypothesis of referred pain. 
According to this hypothesis, visceral afferent nociceptors 
converge on the same pain-projection neurons as the affer-
ents from the somatic structures in which the pain is per-
ceived. The brain has no way of knowing the actual source of 
input and mistakenly “projects” the sensation to the somatic 
structure.
 
CHAPTER 7
Pain: Pathophysiology and Management
43
the patient to a place that roughly corresponds with the region 
of skin innervated by the same spinal segment. Thus, inﬂam-
mation near the central diaphragm is usually reported as 
shoulder discomfort. This spatial displacement of pain 
sensation from the site of the injury that produces it is 
known as referred pain.
Ascending pathways for pain
A majority of spinal neurons contacted by primary affer-
ent nociceptors send their axons to the contralateral 
thalamus. These axons form the contralateral spinotha-
lamic tract, which lies in the anterolateral white matter 
of the spinal cord, the lateral edge of the medulla, and 
the lateral pons and midbrain. The spinothalamic path-
way is crucial for pain sensation in humans. Interruption 
of this pathway produces permanent deﬁcits in pain and 
temperature discrimination.
Spinothalamic tract axons ascend to several regions 
of the thalamus. There is tremendous divergence of the 
pain signal from these thalamic sites to broad areas of 
the cerebral cortex that subserve different aspects of the 
pain experience (Fig. 7-4). One of the thalamic pro-
jections is to the somatosensory cortex. This projec-
tion mediates the purely sensory aspects of pain, i.e., its 
location, intensity, and quality. Other thalamic neurons 
project to cortical regions that are linked to emotional 
responses, such as the cingulate gyrus and other areas 
of the frontal lobes, including the insular cortex. These 
pathways to the frontal cortex subserve the affective or 
unpleasant emotional dimension of pain. This affective 
dimension of pain produces suffering and exerts potent 
control of behavior. Because of this dimension, fear is a 
constant companion of pain. As a consequence, injury 
or surgical lesions to areas of the frontal cortex activated 
by painful stimuli diminish the emotional impact of pain 
while largely preserving the individual’s ability to rec-
ognize noxious stimuli as painful.
PAIN MODULATION
The pain produced by injuries of similar magnitude is 
remarkably variable in different situations and in differ-
ent individuals. For example, athletes have been known 
to sustain serious fractures with only minor pain, and 
Beecher’s classic World War II survey revealed that 
many soldiers in battle were unbothered by injuries 
that would have produced agonizing pain in civilian 
patients. Furthermore, even the suggestion that a treat-
ment will relieve pain can have a signiﬁcant analgesic 
effect (the placebo effect). On the other hand, many 
patients ﬁnd even minor injuries (such as venipunc-
ture) frightening and unbearable, and the expectation 
of pain can induce pain even without a noxious stim-
ulus. The suggestion that pain will worsen following 
administration of an inert substance can increase its per-
ceived intensity (the nocebo effect).
The powerful effect of expectation and other psy-
chological variables on the perceived intensity of pain 
is explained by brain circuits that modulate the activity 
of the pain-transmission pathways. One of these circuits 
has links to the hypothalamus, midbrain, and medulla, 
and it selectively controls spinal pain-transmission neu-
rons through a descending pathway (Fig.  7-4).
Human brain–imaging studies have implicated this 
pain-modulating circuit in the pain-relieving effect of 
attention, suggestion, and opioid analgesic medica-
tions (Fig. 7-5). Furthermore, each of the component 
structures of the pathway contains opioid receptors and 
is sensitive to the direct application of opioid drugs. 
In animals, lesions of this descending modulatory sys-
tem reduce the analgesic effect of systemically adminis-
tered opioids such as morphine. Along with the opioid 
receptor, the component nuclei of this pain-modulating 
Spinal 
cord
Medulla
Midbrain
Spinothalamic
tract
Hypothalamus
A  
B  
SS
Thalamus
C
F
Injury
FIGURE 7-4 
Pain transmission and modulatory pathways. A. Trans-
mission system for nociceptive messages. Noxious stimuli 
activate the sensitive peripheral ending of the primary afferent 
nociceptor by the process of transduction. The message 
is then transmitted over the peripheral nerve to the spi-
nal cord, where it synapses with cells of origin of the major 
ascending pain pathway, the spinothalamic tract. The mes-
sage is relayed in the thalamus to the anterior cingulate (C), 
frontal insular (F), and somatosensory cortex (SS). B. Pain-
modulation network. Inputs from frontal cortex and hypothal-
amus activate cells in the midbrain that control spinal pain-
transmission cells via cells in the medulla.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
44
circuit contain endogenous opioid peptides such as the 
enkephalins and β-endorphin.
The most reliable way to activate this endogenous 
opioid-mediated modulating system is by suggestion of 
pain relief or by intense emotion directed away from 
the pain-causing injury (e.g., during severe threat or 
an athletic competition). In fact, pain-relieving endog-
enous opioids are released following surgical procedures 
and in patients given a placebo for pain relief.
Pain-modulating circuits can enhance as well as sup-
press pain. Both pain-inhibiting and pain-facilitating neu-
rons in the medulla project to and control spinal pain-
transmission neurons. Because pain-transmission neurons 
can be activated by modulatory neurons, it is theoretically 
possible to generate a pain signal with no peripheral nox-
ious stimulus. In fact, human functional imaging studies 
have demonstrated increased activity in this circuit during 
migraine headaches. A central circuit that facilitates pain 
could account for the ﬁnding that pain can be induced 
by suggestion or enhanced by expectation and provides 
a framework for understanding how psychological factors 
can contribute to chronic pain.
NEUROPATHIC PAIN
Lesions of the peripheral or central nociceptive path-
ways typically result in a loss or impairment of pain sen-
sation. Paradoxically, damage to or dysfunction of these 
pathways can also produce pain. For example, damage 
to peripheral nerves, as occurs in diabetic neuropathy, 
or to primary afferents, as in herpes zoster, can result 
in pain that is referred to the body region innervated 
by the damaged nerves. Pain may also be produced by 
damage to the central nervous system (CNS), for exam-
ple, in some patients following trauma or cerebrovas-
cular injury to spinal cord, brainstem, or thalamic areas 
that contain central nociceptive pathways. Such neuro-
pathic pains are often severe and are typically resistant to 
standard treatments for pain.
Neuropathic pain typically has an unusual burning, 
tingling, or electric shock–like quality and may be trig-
gered by very light touch. These features are rare in 
other types of pain. On examination, a sensory deﬁcit 
is characteristically present in the area of the patient’s 
pain. Hyperpathia, a greatly exaggerated pain sensation 
to innocuous or mild nociceptive stimuli, is also char-
acteristic of neuropathic pain; patients often complain 
that the very lightest moving stimulus evokes exquisite 
pain (allodynia). In this regard, it is of clinical interest 
that a topical preparation of 5% lidocaine in patch form 
is effective for patients with postherpetic neuralgia who 
have prominent allodynia.
A variety of mechanisms contribute to neuropathic 
pain. As with sensitized primary afferent nociceptors, dam-
aged primary afferents, including nociceptors, become 
highly sensitive to mechanical stimulation and may gen-
erate impulses in the absence of stimulation. Increased 
sensitivity and spontaneous activity are due, in part, to an 
increased concentration of sodium channels. Damaged pri-
mary afferents may also develop sensitivity to norepineph-
rine. Interestingly, spinal cord pain-transmission neurons 
cut off from their normal input may also become sponta-
neously active. Thus, both CNS and peripheral nervous 
system hyperactivity contribute to neuropathic pain.
FIGURE 7-5 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) dem-
onstrates placebo-enhanced brain activity in anatomic 
regions correlating with the opioidergic descending 
pain control system. Top panel, Frontal fMRI image shows 
placebo-enhanced brain activity in the dorsal lateral prefron-
tal cortex (DLPFC). Bottom panel, Sagittal fMRI images show 
placebo-enhanced responses in the rostral anterior cingu-
late cortex (rACC), the rostral ventral medullae (RVM), the 
periaqueductal gray (PAG) area, and the hypothalamus. The 
placebo-enhanced activity in all areas was reduced by nalox-
one, demonstrating the link between the descending opioi-
dergic system and the placebo analgesic response. (Adapted 
with permission from F Eippert et al: Neuron 63:533, 2009.)
 
CHAPTER 7
Pain: Pathophysiology and Management
45
Sympathetically maintained pain
Patients with peripheral nerve injury occasionally develop 
spontaneous pain in the region innervated by the nerve. 
This pain is often described as having a burning quality. 
The pain typically begins after a delay of hours to days 
or even weeks and is accompanied by swelling of the 
extremity, periarticular bone loss, and arthritic changes 
in the distal joints. The pain may be relieved by a local 
anesthetic block of the sympathetic innervation to the 
affected extremity. Damaged primary afferent nocicep-
tors acquire adrenergic sensitivity and can be activated 
by stimulation of the sympathetic outﬂow. This con-
stellation of spontaneous pain and signs of sympathetic 
dysfunction following injury has been termed complex 
regional pain syndrome (CRPS). When this occurs after an 
identiﬁable nerve injury, it is termed CRPS type II (also 
known as posttraumatic neuralgia or, if severe, causalgia). 
When a similar clinical picture appears without obvi-
ous nerve injury, it is termed CRPS type I (also known 
as reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy). CRPS can be produced 
by a variety of injuries, including fractures of bone, 
soft tissue trauma, myocardial infarction, and stroke 
(Chap. 33). CRPS type I typically resolves with symp-
tomatic treatment; however, when it persists, detailed 
examination often reveals evidence of peripheral nerve 
injury. Although the pathophysiology of CRPS is 
poorly understood, the pain and the signs of inﬂam-
mation, when acute, can be rapidly relieved by block-
ing the sympathetic nervous system. This implies that 
sympathetic activity can activate undamaged nocicep-
tors when inﬂammation is present. Signs of sympathetic 
hyperactivity should be sought in patients with post-
traumatic pain and inﬂammation and no other obvious 
explanation.
TREATMENT 
Acute Pain
The ideal treatment for any pain is to remove the cause; 
thus, while treatment can be initiated immediately, 
efforts to establish the underlying etiology should 
always proceed as treatment begins. Sometimes, treat-
ing the underlying condition does not immediately 
relieve pain. Furthermore, some conditions are so pain-
ful that rapid and effective analgesia is essential (e.g., 
the postoperative state, burns, trauma, cancer, or sickle 
cell crisis). Analgesic medications are a first line of treat-
ment in these cases, and all practitioners should be 
familiar with their use.
ASPIRIN, 
ACETAMINOPHEN, 
AND 
NON-
STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS 
(NSAIDS) These drugs are considered together 
because they are used for similar problems and may 
have a similar mechanism of action (Table 7-1). All 
these compounds inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX), and, 
except for acetaminophen, all have anti-inflammatory 
actions, especially at higher dosages. They are particu-
larly effective for mild to moderate headache and for 
pain of musculoskeletal origin.
Because they are effective for these common types 
of pain and are available without prescription, COX 
inhibitors are by far the most commonly used analge-
sics. They are absorbed well from the gastrointestinal 
tract and, with occasional use, have only minimal side 
effects. With chronic use, gastric irritation is a common 
side effect of aspirin and NSAIDs and is the problem 
that most frequently limits the dose that can be given. 
Gastric irritation is most severe with aspirin, which may 
cause erosion and ulceration of the gastric mucosa lead-
ing to bleeding or perforation. Because aspirin irrevers-
ibly acetylates platelet cyclooxygenase and thereby 
interferes with coagulation of the blood, gastrointesti-
nal bleeding is a particular risk. Older age and history of 
gastrointestinal disease increase the risks of aspirin and 
NSAIDs. In addition to the well-known gastrointestinal 
toxicity of NSAIDs, nephrotoxicity is a significant prob-
lem for patients using these drugs on a chronic basis. 
Patients at risk for renal insufficiency, particularly those 
with significant contraction of their intravascular vol-
ume as occurs with chronic diuretic use or acute hypo-
volemia, should be monitored closely. NSAIDs can also 
increase blood pressure in some individuals. Long-term 
treatment with NSAIDs requires regular blood pressure 
monitoring and treatment if necessary. Although toxic 
to the liver when taken in high doses, acetaminophen 
rarely produces gastric irritation and does not interfere 
with platelet function.
The introduction of a parenteral form of NSAID, 
ketorolac, extends the usefulness of this class of com-
pounds in the management of acute severe pain. Ketor-
olac is sufficiently potent and rapid in onset to supplant 
opioids for many patients with acute severe headache 
and musculoskeletal pain.
There are two major classes of COX: COX-1 is consti-
tutively expressed, and COX-2 is induced in the inflam-
matory state. COX-2–selective drugs have similar anal-
gesic potency and produce less gastric irritation than 
the nonselective COX inhibitors. The use of COX-2–
selective drugs does not appear to lower the risk of 
nephrotoxicity compared to nonselective NSAIDs. On 
the other hand, COX-2–selective drugs offer a signifi-
cant benefit in the management of acute postopera-
tive pain because they do not affect blood coagulation. 
Nonselective COX inhibitors are usually contraindicated 
postoperatively because they impair platelet-mediated 
blood clotting and are thus associated with increased 
bleeding at the operative site. COX-2 inhibitors, includ-
ing celecoxib (Celebrex), are associated with increased 
cardiovascular risk. It is possible that this is a class effect 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
46
TABLE 7-1 
DRUGS FOR RELIEF OF PAIN
GENERIC NAME
DOSE, mg
INTERVAL
COMMENTS
Nonnarcotic Analgesics: Usual Doses and Intervals
Acetylsalicylic acid
650 PO
q 4 h
Enteric-coated preparations available
Acetaminophen
650 PO
q 4 h
Side effects uncommon
Ibuprofen
400 PO
q 4–6 h
Available without prescription
Naproxen
250–500 PO
q 12 h
Delayed effects may be due to long half-life
Fenoprofen
200 PO
q 4–6 h
Contraindicated in renal disease
Indomethacin
25–50 PO
q 8 h
Gastrointestinal side effects common
Ketorolac
15–60 IM/IV
q 4–6 h
Available for parenteral use
Celecoxib
100–200 PO
q 12–24 h
Useful for arthritis
Valdecoxib
10–20 PO
q12–24 h
Removed from U.S. market in 2005
GENERIC NAME
PARENTERAL DOSE, mg
PO DOSE, mg
COMMENTS
Narcotic Analgesics: Usual Doses and Intervals
Codeine
30–60 q 4 h
30–60 q 4 h
Nausea common
Oxycodone
—
5–10 q 4–6 h
Usually available with acetaminophen or aspirin
Morphine
5 q 4 h
30 q 4 h
Morphine sustained 
release
—
15–60 bid to tid
Oral slow-release preparation
Hydromorphone
1–2 q 4 h
2–4 q 4 h
Shorter acting than morphine sulfate
Levorphanol
2 q 6–8 h
4 q 6–8 h
Longer acting than morphine sulfate; absorbed 
well PO
Methadone
5–10 q 6–8 h
5–20 q 6–8 h
Delayed sedation due to long half-life; 
therapy should not be initiated with greater 
than 40 mg/day and dose escalation should 
be made no more frequently than every 3 
days
Meperidine
50–100 q 3–4 h
300 q 4 h
Poorly absorbed PO; normeperidine a toxic 
metabolite; routine use of this agent is not 
recommended
Butorphanol
—
1–2 q 4 h
Intranasal spray
Fentanyl
25–100 μg/h
—
72-h transdermal patch
Tramadol
—
50–100 q 4–6 h
Mixed opioid/adrenergic action
GENERIC NAME
UPTAKE BLOCKADE
SEDATIVE 
POTENCY
ANTICHOLINERGIC 
POTENCY
ORTHOSTATIC 
HYPOTENSION
CARDIAC 
ARRHYTHMIA
AVE. 
DOSE, 
mg/d
RANGE, 
mg/d
5-HT
NE
Antidepressantsa
Doxepin
++
+
High
Moderate
Moderate
Less
200
75–400
Amitriptyline
++++
++
High
Highest
Moderate
Yes
150
25–300
Imipramine
++++
++
Moderate
Moderate
High
Yes
200
75–400
Nortriptyline
+++
++
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Yes
100
40–150
Desipramine
+++
++++
Low
Low
Low
Yes
150
50–300
Venlafaxine
+++
++
Low
None
None
No
150
75–400
Duloxetine
+++
+++
Low
None
None
No
40
30–60
GENERIC NAME
PO DOSE, mg
INTERVAL
GENERIC NAME
PO DOSE, mg
INTERVAL
Anticonvulsants and Antiarrhythmicsa
Phenytoin
300
daily/qhs
Clonazepam
1
q 6 h
Carbamazepine
200–300
q 6 h
Gabapentinb
600–1200
q 8 h
Oxcarbazepine
300
bid
Pregabalin
150–600
bid
a Antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and antiarrhythmics have not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the 
treatment of pain.
bGabapentin in doses up to 1800 mg/d is FDA approved for postherpetic neuralgia.
Note: 5-HT, serotonin; NE, norepinephrine.
 
CHAPTER 7
Pain: Pathophysiology and Management
47
of NSAIDs, excluding aspirin. These drugs are contraindi-
cated in patients in the immediate period after coronary 
artery bypass surgery and should be used with caution 
in patients with a history of or significant risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease.
OPIOID ANALGESICS Opioids are the most potent 
pain-relieving drugs currently available. Of all analgesics, 
they have the broadest range of efficacy and provide the 
most reliable and effective method for rapid pain relief. 
Although side effects are common, most are reversible: 
nausea, vomiting, pruritus, and constipation are the most 
frequent and bothersome side effects. Respiratory depres-
sion is uncommon at standard analgesic doses, but can 
be life-threatening. Opioid-related side effects can be 
reversed rapidly with the narcotic antagonist naloxone. 
The physician should not hesitate to use opioid analgesics 
in patients with acute severe pain. Table 7-1 lists the most 
commonly used opioid analgesics.
Opioids produce analgesia by actions in the CNS. 
They activate pain-inhibitory neurons and directly 
inhibit pain-transmission neurons. Most of the commer-
cially available opioid analgesics act at the same opi-
oid receptor (μ-receptor), differing mainly in potency, 
speed of onset, duration of action, and optimal route 
of administration. Some side effects are due to accu-
mulation of nonopioid metabolites that are unique to 
individual drugs. One striking example of this is norme-
peridine, a metabolite of meperidine. Normeperidine 
produces hyperexcitability and seizures that are not 
reversible with naloxone. Normeperidine accumulation 
is increased in patients with renal failure.
The most rapid relief with opioids is obtained by 
intravenous administration; relief with oral administra-
tion is significantly slower. Common side effects include 
nausea, vomiting, constipation, and sedation. The most 
serious side effect is respiratory depression. Patients 
with any form of respiratory compromise must be kept 
under close observation following opioid administration; 
an oxygen-saturation monitor may be useful. Opioid-
induced respiratory depression is typically accompa-
nied by significant sedation and a reduction in respira-
tory rate. A fall in oxygen saturation represents a critical 
level of respiratory depression and the need for immedi-
ate intervention to prevent life-threatening hypoxemia. 
Ventilatory assistance should be maintained until the 
opioid-induced respiratory depression has resolved. The 
opioid antagonist naloxone should be readily available 
whenever opioids are used at high doses or in patients 
with compromised pulmonary function. Opioid effects 
are dose-related, and there is great variability among 
patients in the doses that relieve pain and produce side 
effects. Because of this, initiation of therapy requires titra-
tion to optimal dose and interval. The most important 
principle is to provide adequate pain relief. This requires 
determining whether the drug has adequately relieved 
the pain and frequent reassessment to determine the 
optimal interval for dosing. The most common error made 
by physicians in managing severe pain with opioids is to pre-
scribe an inadequate dose. Because many patients are reluc-
tant to complain, this practice leads to needless suffering. 
In the absence of sedation at the expected time of peak 
effect, a physician should not hesitate to repeat the initial 
dose to achieve satisfactory pain relief.
An innovative approach to the problem of achiev-
ing adequate pain relief is the use of patient-controlled 
analgesia (PCA). PCA uses a microprocessor-controlled 
infusion device that can deliver a baseline continuous 
dose of an opioid drug as well as preprogrammed addi-
tional doses whenever the patient pushes a button. The 
patient can then titrate the dose to the optimal level. 
This approach is used most extensively for the manage-
ment of postoperative pain, but there is no reason why 
it should not be used for any hospitalized patient with 
persistent severe pain. PCA is also used for short-term 
home care of patients with intractable pain, such as that 
caused by metastatic cancer.
It is important to understand that the PCA device 
delivers small, repeated doses to maintain pain relief; in 
patients with severe pain, the pain must first be brought 
under control with a loading dose before transitioning 
to the PCA device. The bolus dose of the drug (typically 1 
mg morphine, 0.2 mg hydromorphone, or 10 μg fentanyl) 
can then be delivered repeatedly as needed. To prevent 
overdosing, PCA devices are programmed with a lockout 
period after each demand dose is delivered (5–10 min) and 
a limit on the total dose delivered per hour. While some 
have advocated the use of a simultaneous continuous or 
basal infusion of the PCA drug, this increases the risk of 
respiratory depression and has not been shown to increase 
the overall efficacy of the technique.
Many physicians, nurses, and patients have a certain 
trepidation about using opioids that is based on an 
exaggerated fear of addiction. In fact, there is a vanish-
ingly small chance of patients becoming addicted to 
narcotics as a result of their appropriate medical use.
The availability of new routes of administration has 
extended the usefulness of opioid analgesics. Most 
important is the availability of spinal administration. 
Opioids can be infused through a spinal catheter placed 
either intrathecally or epidurally. By applying opioids 
directly to the spinal or epidural space adjacent to the 
spinal cord, regional analgesia can be obtained using 
relatively low total doses. Indeed, the dose required to 
produce effective localized analgesia when using mor-
phine intrathecally (0.1–0.3 mg) is a fraction of that 
required to produce similar analgesia when adminis-
tered intravenously (5–10 mg). In this way, side effects 
such as sedation, nausea, and respiratory depression can 
be minimized. This approach has been used extensively 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
48
in obstetric procedures and for postoperative pain relief 
following surgical procedures on the lower extremities. 
Continuous intrathecal delivery via implanted spinal drug-
delivery systems is now commonly used, particularly for 
the treatment of cancer-related pain that would require 
sedating doses for adequate pain control if given systemi-
cally. Opioids can also be given intranasally (butorpha-
nol), rectally, and transdermally (fentanyl), thus avoiding 
the discomfort of frequent injections in patients who 
cannot be given oral medication. The fentanyl transder-
mal patch has the advantage of providing fairly steady 
plasma levels, which maximizes patient comfort.
Recent additions to the armamentarium for treating 
opioid-induced side effects are the peripherally acting 
opioid antagonists alvimopan (Entereg) and methyl-
naltrexone (Rellistor). Alvimopan is available as an orally 
administered agent that is restricted to the intestinal 
lumen by limited absorption; methylnaltrexone is avail-
able in a subcutaneously administered form that has vir-
tually no penetration into the CNS. Both agents act by 
binding to peripheral μ-receptors, thereby inhibiting or 
reversing the effects of opioids at these peripheral sites. 
The action of both agents is restricted to receptor sites 
outside of the CNS; thus, these drugs can reverse the 
adverse effects of opioid analgesics that are mediated 
through their peripheral receptors without reversing 
their analgesic effects. Both agents are effective for per-
sistent ileus following abdominal surgery to the extent 
that opioid analgesics used for postoperative pain control 
contribute to this serious problem. Likewise, both agents 
have been tested for their effectiveness in treating opi-
oid-induced bowel dysfunction (constipation) in patients 
taking opioid analgesics on a chronic basis. Although 
contradictory, the weight of evidence indicates that alvi-
mopan can reduce the incidence and duration of ileus 
following major abdominal surgery and methylnaltrex-
one can produce rapid reversal of constipation in many 
patients receiving opioids on a chronic basis.
Opioid and COX Inhibitor Combinations
When used in combination, opioids and COX inhibitors 
have additive effects. Because a lower dose of each can be 
used to achieve the same degree of pain relief and their 
side effects are nonadditive, such combinations are used 
to lower the severity of dose-related side effects. However, 
fixed-ratio combinations of an opioid with acetaminophen 
carry a special risk. Dose escalation as a result of increased 
severity of pain or decreased opioid effect as a result of tol-
erance may lead to levels of acetaminophen that are toxic 
to the liver. Although acetaminophen-related hepatotoxicity 
is uncommon, it remains a leading cause for liver failure. 
Thus, many practitioners have moved away from the use 
of opioid-acetaminophen combination analgesics to avoid 
the risk of excessive acetaminophen exposure as the dose 
of the analgesic is escalated.
CHRONIC PAIN
Managing patients with chronic pain is intellectually 
and emotionally challenging. The patient’s problem is 
often difﬁcult or impossible to diagnose with certainty; 
such patients are demanding of the physician’s time and 
often appear emotionally distraught. The traditional 
medical approach of seeking an obscure organic pathol-
ogy is usually unhelpful. On the other hand, psycholog-
ical evaluation and behaviorally based treatment para-
digms are frequently helpful, particularly in the setting 
of a multidisciplinary pain-management center. Unfor-
tunately, this approach, while effective, remains largely 
underused in current medical practice.
There are several factors that can cause, perpetuate, 
or exacerbate chronic pain. First, of course, the patient 
may simply have a disease that is characteristically pain-
ful for which there is presently no cure. Arthritis, can-
cer, chronic daily headaches, ﬁbromyalgia, and diabetic 
neuropathy are examples of this. Second, there may be 
secondary perpetuating factors that are initiated by dis-
ease and persist after that disease has resolved. Examples 
include damaged sensory nerves, sympathetic efferent 
activity, and painful reﬂex muscle contraction. Finally, 
a variety of psychological conditions can exacerbate or 
even cause pain.
There are certain areas to which special attention 
should be paid in a patient’s medical history. Because 
depression is the most common emotional disturbance 
in patients with chronic pain, patients should be ques-
tioned about their mood, appetite, sleep patterns, and 
daily activity. A simple standardized questionnaire, 
such as the Beck Depression Inventory, can be a use-
ful screening device. It is important to remember that 
major depression is a common, treatable, and potentially 
fatal illness.
Other clues that a signiﬁcant emotional disturbance 
is contributing to a patient’s chronic pain complaint 
include pain that occurs in multiple, unrelated sites; a 
pattern of recurrent, but separate, pain problems begin-
ning in childhood or adolescence; pain beginning at a 
time of emotional trauma, such as the loss of a parent or 
spouse; a history of physical or sexual abuse; and past or 
present substance abuse.
On examination, special attention should be paid 
to whether the patient guards the painful area and 
whether certain movements or postures are avoided 
because of pain. Discovering a mechanical component 
to the pain can be useful both diagnostically and ther-
apeutically. Painful areas should be examined for deep 
tenderness, noting whether this is localized to muscle, 
ligamentous structures, or joints. Chronic myofascial 
pain is very common, and, in these patients, deep pal-
pation may reveal highly localized trigger points that 
are ﬁrm bands or knots in muscle. Relief of the pain 
 
CHAPTER 7
Pain: Pathophysiology and Management
49
following injection of local anesthetic into these trigger 
points supports the diagnosis. A neuropathic component 
to the pain is indicated by evidence of nerve damage, 
such as sensory impairment, exquisitely sensitive skin, 
weakness, and muscle atrophy, or loss of deep tendon 
reﬂexes. Evidence suggesting sympathetic nervous sys-
tem involvement includes the presence of diffuse swell-
ing, changes in skin color and temperature, and hyper-
sensitive skin and joint tenderness compared with the 
normal side. Relief of the pain with a sympathetic block 
is diagnostic.
A guiding principle in evaluating patients with 
chronic pain is to assess both emotional and organic fac-
tors before initiating therapy. Addressing these issues 
together, rather than waiting to address emotional 
issues after organic causes of pain have been ruled out, 
improves compliance in part because it assures patients 
that a psychological evaluation does not mean that the 
physician is questioning the validity of their complaint. 
Even when an organic cause for a patient’s pain can 
be found, it is still wise to look for other factors. For 
example, a cancer patient with painful bony metastases 
may have additional pain due to nerve damage and may 
also be depressed. Optimal therapy requires that each of 
these factors be looked for and treated.
TREATMENT 
Chronic Pain
Once the evaluation process has been completed and 
the likely causative and exacerbating factors identi-
fied, an explicit treatment plan should be developed. 
An important part of this process is to identify specific 
and realistic functional goals for therapy, such as get-
ting a good night’s sleep, being able to go shopping, 
or returning to work. A multidisciplinary approach that 
uses medications, counseling, physical therapy, nerve 
blocks, and even surgery may be required to improve 
the patient’s quality of life. There are also some newer, 
relatively invasive procedures that can be helpful for 
some patients with intractable pain. These include 
image-guided interventions such as epidural injec-
tion of glucocorticoids for acute radicular pain, radio-
frequency treatment of the facet joints for chronic 
facet-related pain, percutaneous intradiscal treatments 
for both axial and radicular pain, and placement of 
implanted intraspinal electrodes and implantation of 
intrathecal drug-delivery systems for severe and per-
sistent pain that is unresponsive to more conservative 
treatments. There are no set criteria for predicting which 
patients will respond to these procedures. They are gen-
erally reserved for patients who have not responded to 
conventional pharmacologic approaches. Referral to a 
multidisciplinary pain clinic for a full evaluation should 
precede any invasive procedures. Such referrals are 
clearly not necessary for all chronic pain patients. For 
some, pharmacologic management alone can provide 
adequate relief.
ANTIDEPRESSANT 
MEDICATIONS The tricy-
clic antidepressants (TCAs), particularly nortriptyline 
and desipramine (Table 7-1), are useful for the man-
agement of chronic pain. Although developed for the 
treatment of depression, the TCAs have a spectrum of 
dose-related biologic activities that include analgesia 
in a variety of chronic clinical conditions. Although the 
mechanism is unknown, the analgesic effect of TCAs 
has a more rapid onset and occurs at a lower dose 
than is typically required for the treatment of depres-
sion. Furthermore, patients with chronic pain who are 
not depressed obtain pain relief with antidepressants. 
There is evidence that TCAs potentiate opioid analge-
sia, so they may be useful adjuncts for the treatment of 
severe persistent pain such as occurs with malignant 
tumors. Table 7-2 lists some of the painful conditions 
that respond to TCAs. TCAs are of particular value in the 
management of neuropathic pain such as occurs in dia-
betic neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia, for which 
there are few other therapeutic options.
The TCAs that have been shown to relieve pain have 
significant side effects (Table 7-1; Chap. 53). Some of 
these side effects, such as orthostatic hypotension, 
drowsiness, cardiac-conduction delay, memory impair-
ment, constipation, and urinary retention, are particu-
larly problematic in elderly patients, and several are 
additive to the side effects of opioid analgesics. The 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as fluox-
etine (Prozac) have fewer and less serious side effects 
than TCAs, but they are much less effective for relieving 
pain. It is of interest that venlafaxine (Effexor) and dulox-
etine (Cymbalta), which are nontricyclic antidepressants 
that block both serotonin and norepinephrine reup-
take, appear to retain most of the pain-relieving effect 
of TCAs with a side-effect profile more like that of the 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. These drugs may 
TABLE 7-2
PAINFUL CONDITIONS THAT RESPOND TO 
TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Postherpetic neuralgiaa
Diabetic neuropathya
Tension headachea
Migraine headachea
Rheumatoid arthritisa,b
Chronic low back painb
Cancer 
Central post-stroke pain
aControlled trials demonstrate analgesia.
bControlled studies indicate beneﬁt but not analgesia.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
50
be particularly useful in patients who cannot tolerate 
the side effects of TCAs.
ANTICONVULSANTS 
AND 
ANTIARRHYTH-
MICS These drugs are useful primarily for patients 
with neuropathic pain. Phenytoin (Dilantin) and carbam-
azepine (Tegretol) were first shown to relieve the pain of 
trigeminal neuralgia. This pain has a characteristic brief, 
shooting, electric shock–like quality. In fact, anticonvul-
sants seem to be particularly helpful for pains that have 
such a lancinating quality. Newer anticonvulsants, gaba-
pentin (Neurontin) and pregabalin (Lyrica), are effective 
for a broad range of neuropathic pains. Furthermore, 
because of their favorable side-effect profile, these newer 
anticonvulsants are often used as first-line agents.
CHRONIC OPIOID MEDICATION The long-
term use of opioids is accepted for patients with pain 
due to malignant disease. Although opioid use for 
chronic pain of nonmalignant origin is controversial, 
it is clear that for many such patients, opioid analge-
sics are the best available option. This is understand-
able because opioids are the most potent and have 
the broadest range of efficacy of any analgesic medica-
tions. Although addiction is rare in patients who first 
use opioids for pain relief, some degree of tolerance 
and physical dependence is likely with long-term use. 
Therefore, before embarking on opioid therapy, other 
options should be explored, and the limitations and 
risks of opioids should be explained to the patient. It is 
also important to point out that some opioid analgesic 
medications have mixed agonist-antagonist properties 
(e.g., pentazocine and butorphanol). From a practical 
standpoint, this means that they may worsen pain by 
inducing an abstinence syndrome in patients who are 
physically dependent on other opioid analgesics.
With long-term outpatient use of orally administered 
opioids, it is desirable to use long-acting compounds 
such as levorphanol, methadone, or sustained-release 
morphine (Table 7-1). Transdermal fentanyl is another 
excellent option. The pharmacokinetic profile of these 
drug preparations enables prolonged pain relief, mini-
mizes side effects such as sedation that are associated 
with high peak plasma levels, and reduces the likelihood 
of rebound pain associated with a rapid fall in plasma 
opioid concentration. While long-acting opioid prepara-
tions may provide superior pain relief in patients with a 
continuous pattern of ongoing pain, others suffer from 
intermittent severe episodic pain and experience supe-
rior pain control and fewer side effects with the periodic 
use of short-acting opioid analgesics. Constipation is a 
virtually universal side effect of opioid use and should 
be treated expectantly. A recent advance for patients 
with chronic debilitating conditions is the development 
of methylnaltrexone, a peripherally acting mu opioid 
antagonist that blocks the constipation and itching 
associated with chronic opioid use without interfering with 
analgesia; the usual dose is 0.15 mg/kg of body weight 
given subcutaneously no more often than once daily.
TREATMENT OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN It is 
important to individualize treatment for patients with 
neuropathic pain. Several general principles should 
guide therapy: the first is to move quickly to provide 
relief, and the second is to minimize drug side effects. 
For example, in patients with postherpetic neuralgia 
and significant cutaneous hypersensitivity, topical lido-
caine (Lidoderm patches) can provide immediate relief 
without side effects. Anticonvulsants (gabapentin or 
pregabalin, see above) or antidepressants (nortripty-
line, desipramine, duloxetine, or venlafaxine) can be 
used as first-line drugs for patients with neuropathic 
pain. Systemically administered antiarrhythmic drugs 
such as lidocaine and mexiletene are less likely to be 
effective; although intravenous infusion of lidocaine 
predictably provides analgesia in those with many 
forms of neuropathic pain, the relief is usually tran-
sient, typically lasting just hours after the cessation of 
the infusion. The oral lidocaine congener mexiletene is 
poorly tolerated, producing frequent gastrointestinal 
adverse effects. There is no consensus on which class 
of drug should be used as a first-line treatment for any 
chronically painful condition. However, because rela-
tively high doses of anticonvulsants are required for 
pain relief, sedation is very common. Sedation is also a 
problem with TCAs but is much less of a problem with 
serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs, 
e.g., venlafaxine and duloxetine). Thus, in the elderly 
or in those patients whose daily activities require high-
level mental activity, these drugs should be considered 
the first line. In contrast, opioid medications should 
be used as a second- or third-line drug class. While 
highly effective for many painful conditions, opioids 
are sedating, and their effect tends to lessen over time, 
leading to dose escalation and, occasionally, a worsen-
ing of pain due to physical dependence. Drugs of dif-
ferent classes can be used in combination to optimize 
pain control.
It is worth emphasizing that many patients, espe-
cially those with chronic pain, seek medical attention 
primarily because they are suffering and because only 
physicians can provide the medications required for 
pain relief. A primary responsibility of all physicians is to 
minimize the physical and emotional discomfort of their 
patients. Familiarity with pain mechanisms and analgesic 
medications is an important step toward accomplishing 
this aim.
 Peter J. Goadsby  ■   Neil H. Raskin 
51
 Headache is among the most common reasons patients 
seek medical attention. Diagnosis and management are 
based on a careful clinical approach augmented by an 
understanding of the anatomy, physiology, and pharma-
cology of the nervous system pathways that mediate the 
various headache syndromes. 
 GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
 A classiﬁ cation system developed by the International 
Headache Society characterizes headache as primary 
or secondary ( Table 8-1 ) .  Primary headaches are those 
in which headache and its associated features are the 
disorder in itself, whereas  secondary headaches are those 
caused by exogenous disorders. Primary headache often 
results in considerable disability and a decrease in the 
patient’s quality of life. Mild secondary headache, such 
as that seen in association with upper respiratory tract 
infections, is common but rarely worrisome. Life-
threatening headache is relatively uncommon, but vigi-
lance is required in order to recognize and appropriately 
treat such patients. 
 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 
OF HEADACHE 
 Pain usually occurs when peripheral nociceptors are 
stimulated in response to tissue injury, visceral disten-
sion, or other factors ( Chap. 7 ). In such situations, pain 
perception is a normal physiologic response mediated 
by a healthy nervous system. Pain can also result when 
pain-producing pathways of the peripheral or central 
nervous system (CNS) are damaged or activated inap-
propriately. Headache may originate from either or 
both mechanisms. Relatively few cranial structures are 
pain-producing; these include the scalp, middle menin-
geal artery, dural sinuses, falx cerebri, and proximal seg-
ments of the large pial arteries. The ventricular epen-
dyma, choroid plexus, pial veins, and much of the brain 
parenchyma are not pain-producing. 
 The key structures involved in primary headache 
appear to be 
•  the large intracranial vessels and dura mater and the 
peripheral terminals of the trigeminal nerve that 
innervate these structures 
•  the caudal portion of the trigeminal nucleus, which 
extends into the dorsal horns of the upper cervical 
spinal cord and receives input from the ﬁ rst and sec-
ond cervical nerve roots (the trigeminocervical com-
plex) 
•  rostral pain-processing regions, such as the ventro-
posteromedial thalamus and the cortex 
•  the pain-modulatory systems in the brain that modu-
late input from trigeminal nociceptors at all levels of 
the pain-processing pathways 
 The innervation of the large intracranial vessels and 
dura mater by the trigeminal nerve is known as the 
 trigeminovascular system . Cranial autonomic symptoms, 
such as  lacrimation and  nasal congestion , are prominent 
in the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias, including 
cluster headache and paroxysmal hemicrania, and may 
 HEADACHE 
 CHAPTER 8 
TABLE 8-1
 COMMON CAUSES OF HEADACHE 
 PRIMARY HEADACHE 
 SECONDARY HEADACHE 
TYPE
%
TYPE
%
Tension-type
 69
Systemic infection
 63
Migraine
 16
Head injury
 4
Idiopathic stabbing
  2
Vascular disorders
  1
Exertional
   1
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
  <1
Cluster
0.1
Brain tumor
0.1
 Source: After J Olesen et al: The Headaches. Philadelphia, Lippin-
cott, Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
52
also be seen in migraine. These autonomic symptoms 
reﬂect activation of cranial parasympathetic pathways, 
and functional imaging studies indicate that vascu-
lar changes in migraine and cluster headache, when 
present, are similarly driven by these cranial auto-
nomic systems. Migraine and other primary headache 
types are not “vascular headaches”; these disorders 
do not reliably manifest vascular changes, and treat-
ment outcomes cannot be predicted by vascular effects. 
Migraine is a brain disorder, and best understood and 
managed as such.
CLINICAL EVALUATION OF ACUTE, NEW-
ONSET HEADACHE
The patient who presents with a new, severe headache 
has a differential diagnosis that is quite different from the 
patient with recurrent headaches over many years. In 
new-onset and severe headache, the probability of ﬁnd-
ing a potentially serious cause is considerably greater than 
in recurrent headache. Patients with recent onset of pain 
require prompt evaluation and appropriate treatment. 
Serious causes to be considered include meningitis, sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage, epidural or subdural hematoma, 
glaucoma, tumor, and purulent sinusitis. When worri-
some symptoms and signs are present (Table 8-2), rapid 
diagnosis and management are critical.
A complete neurologic examination is an essen-
tial ﬁrst step in the evaluation. In most cases, patients 
with an abnormal examination or a history of recent-
onset headache should be evaluated by a CT or MRI 
study. As an initial screening procedure for intracranial 
pathology in this setting, CT and MRI methods appear 
to be equally sensitive. In some circumstances, a lumbar 
puncture (LP) is also required, unless a benign etiology 
can be otherwise established. A general evaluation of 
acute headache might include the investigation of car-
diovascular and renal status by blood pressure monitor-
ing and urine examination; eyes by funduscopy, intra-
ocular pressure measurement, and refraction; cranial 
arteries by palpation; and cervical spine by the effect of 
passive movement of the head and by imaging.
The psychological state of the patient should also be 
evaluated since a relationship exists between head pain 
and depression. Many patients in chronic daily pain 
cycles become depressed, although depression itself is 
rarely a cause of headache. Drugs with antidepressant 
actions are also effective in the prophylactic treatment 
of both tension-type headache and migraine.
Underlying recurrent headache disorders may be 
activated by pain that follows otologic or endodontic 
surgical procedures. Thus, pain about the head as the 
result of diseased tissue or trauma may reawaken an oth-
erwise quiescent migrainous syndrome. Treatment of 
the headache is largely ineffective until the cause of the 
primary problem is addressed.
Serious underlying conditions that are associated with 
headache are described next. Brain tumor is a rare cause 
of headache and even less commonly a cause of severe 
pain. The vast majority of patients presenting with 
severe headache have a benign cause.
SECONDARY HEADACHE
The management of secondary headache focuses on 
diagnosis and treatment of the underlying condition.
MENINGITIS
Acute, severe headache with stiff neck and fever sug-
gests meningitis. Lumbar puncture is mandatory. Often 
there is striking accentuation of pain with eye move-
ment. Meningitis can be easily mistaken for migraine 
in that the cardinal symptoms of pounding headache, 
photophobia, nausea, and vomiting are frequently pres-
ent, perhaps reﬂecting the underlying biology of some 
of the patients.
Meningitis is discussed in Chaps. 40 and 41.
INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
Acute, severe headache with stiff neck but without 
fever suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage. A ruptured 
aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or intraparen-
chymal hemorrhage may also present with headache 
alone. Rarely, if the hemorrhage is small or below the 
foramen magnum, the head CT scan can be normal. 
TABLE 8-2
HEADACHE SYMPTOMS THAT SUGGEST A SERIOUS 
UNDERLYING DISORDER
“Worst” headache ever
First severe headache
Subacute worsening over days or weeks
Abnormal neurologic examination
Fever or unexplained systemic signs
Vomiting that precedes headache
Pain induced by bending, lifting, cough
Pain that disturbs sleep or presents immediately upon 
awakening
Known systemic illness
Onset after age 55
Pain associated with local tenderness, e.g., region of tem-
poral artery
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
53
Therefore, lumbar puncture may be required to diag-
nose deﬁnitively subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Intracranial hemorrhage is discussed in Chap. 28.
BRAIN TUMOR
Approximately 30% of patients with brain tumors con-
sider headache to be their chief complaint. The head 
pain is usually nondescript—an intermittent deep, dull 
aching of moderate intensity, which may worsen with 
exertion or change in position and may be associated 
with nausea and vomiting. This pattern of symptoms 
results from migraine far more often than from brain 
tumor. The headache of brain tumor disturbs sleep in 
about 10% of patients. Vomiting that precedes the 
appearance of headache by weeks is highly characteristic 
of posterior fossa brain tumors. A history of amenorrhea 
or galactorrhea should lead one to question whether a 
prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma (or the polycystic 
ovary syndrome) is the source of headache. Headache 
arising de novo in a patient with known malignancy 
suggests either cerebral metastases or carcinomatous 
meningitis, or both. Head pain appearing abruptly after 
bending, lifting, or coughing can be due to a posterior 
fossa mass, a Chiari malformation, or low CSF volume.
Brain tumors are discussed in Chap. 37.
TEMPORAL ARTERITIS
(See also Chap. 21) Temporal (giant cell) arteritis is 
an inﬂammatory disorder of arteries that frequently 
involves the extracranial carotid circulation. It is a com-
mon disorder of the elderly; its annual incidence is 77 
per 100,000 individuals age 50 and older. The average 
age of onset is 70 years, and women account for 65% 
of cases. About half of patients with untreated tempo-
ral arteritis develop blindness due to involvement of the 
ophthalmic artery and its branches; indeed, the isch-
emic optic neuropathy induced by giant cell arteritis is 
the major cause of rapidly developing bilateral blindness 
in patients >60 years. Because treatment with gluco-
corticoids is effective in preventing this complication, 
prompt recognition of the disorder is important.
Typical presenting symptoms include headache, 
polymyalgia rheumatica, jaw claudication, fever, and 
weight loss. Headache is the dominant symptom and 
often appears in association with malaise and muscle 
aches. Head pain may be unilateral or bilateral and is 
located temporally in 50% of patients but may involve 
any and all aspects of the cranium. Pain usually appears 
gradually over a few hours before peak intensity is 
reached; occasionally, it is explosive in onset. The qual-
ity of pain is only seldom throbbing; it is almost invari-
ably described as dull and boring, with superimposed 
episodic stabbing pains similar to the sharp pains that 
appear in migraine. Most patients can recognize that 
the origin of their head pain is superﬁcial, external to 
the skull, rather than originating deep within the cra-
nium (the pain site for migraineurs). Scalp tenderness is 
present, often to a marked degree; brushing the hair or 
resting the head on a pillow may be impossible because 
of pain. Headache is usually worse at night and often 
aggravated by exposure to cold. Additional ﬁndings may 
include reddened, tender nodules or red streaking of the 
skin overlying the temporal arteries, and tenderness of 
the temporal or, less commonly, the occipital arteries.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often, 
though not always, elevated; a normal ESR does not 
exclude giant cell arteritis. A temporal artery biopsy fol-
lowed by immediate treatment with prednisone 80 mg 
daily for the ﬁrst 4–6 weeks should be initiated when clini-
cal suspicion is high. The prevalence of migraine among 
the elderly is substantial, considerably higher than that of 
giant cell arteritis. Migraineurs often report amelioration 
of their headaches with prednisone; thus, caution must be 
used when interpreting the therapeutic response.
GLAUCOMA
Glaucoma may present with a prostrating headache 
associated with nausea and vomiting. The headache 
often starts with severe eye pain. On physical exami-
nation, the eye is often red with a ﬁxed, moderately 
dilated pupil.
Glaucoma is discussed in Chap. 21.
PRIMARY HEADACHE SYNDROMES
Primary headaches are disorders in which headache 
and associated features occur in the absence of any 
exogenous cause (Table  8-1). The most common are 
migraine, tension-type headache, and cluster headache.
MIGRAINE
Migraine, the second most common cause of head-
ache, afﬂicts approximately 15% of women and 6% of 
men over a 1-year period. It is usually an episodic head-
ache associated with certain features such as sensitiv-
ity to light, sound, or movement; nausea and vomiting 
often accompany the headache. A useful description of 
migraine is a benign and recurring syndrome of head-
ache associated with other symptoms of neurologic dys-
function in varying admixtures (Table 8-3). Migraine 
can often be recognized by its activators, referred to as 
triggers.
The brain of the migraineur is particularly sensi-
tive to environmental and sensory stimuli; migraine-
prone patients do not habituate easily to sensory stimuli. 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
54
This sensitivity is ampliﬁed in females during the men-
strual cycle. Headache can be initiated or ampliﬁed by 
various triggers, including glare, bright lights, sounds, or 
other afferent stimulation; hunger; excess stress; physi-
cal exertion; stormy weather or barometric pressure 
changes; hormonal ﬂuctuations during menses; lack of 
or excess sleep; and alcohol or other chemical stimula-
tion. Knowledge of a patient’s susceptibility to speciﬁc 
triggers can be useful in management strategies involv-
ing lifestyle adjustments.
Pathogenesis
The sensory sensitivity that is characteristic of migraine 
is probably due to dysfunction of monoaminergic sen-
sory control systems located in the brainstem and thala-
mus (Fig. 8-1).
Activation of cells in the trigeminal nucleus results 
in the release of vasoactive neuropeptides, particularly 
calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP), at vascular 
terminations of the trigeminal nerve and within the tri-
geminal nucleus. CGRP receptor antagonists have now 
been shown to be effective in the acute treatment of 
migraine. Centrally, the second-order trigeminal neu-
rons cross the midline and project to ventrobasal and 
posterior nuclei of the thalamus for further process-
ing. Additionally, there are projections to the periaq-
ueductal gray and hypothalamus, from which recipro-
cal descending systems have established antinociceptive 
effects. Other brainstem regions likely to be involved in 
descending modulation of trigeminal pain include the 
nucleus locus coeruleus in the pons and the rostroven-
tromedial medulla.
Pharmacologic and other data point to the involve-
ment of the neurotransmitter 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(5-HT; also known as serotonin) in migraine. Approxi-
mately 60 years ago, methysergide was found to antago-
nize certain peripheral actions of 5-HT and was intro-
duced as the ﬁrst drug capable of preventing migraine 
attacks. The triptans are designed to selectively stimulate 
subpopulations of 5-HT receptors; at least 14 different 
5-HT receptors exist in humans. The triptans are potent 
agonists of 5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT1F receptors and 
are less potent at the 5-HT1A receptor. A growing body 
of data indicates that the antimigraine efﬁcacy of the 
triptans relates to their ability to stimulate 5-HT1B/1D 
receptors, which are located on both blood vessels and 
nerve terminals. Separately, it has now been shown that 
selective 5-HT1F receptor activation, which has a purely 
neural effect, can terminate acute migraine.
Data also support a role for dopamine in the patho-
physiology of migraine. Most migraine symptoms 
can be induced by dopaminergic stimulation. More-
over, there is dopamine receptor hypersensitivity in 
migraineurs, as demonstrated by the induction of yawn-
ing, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, and other symp-
toms of a migraine attack by dopaminergic agonists at 
doses that do not affect nonmigraineurs. Dopamine 
receptor antagonists are effective therapeutic agents in 
migraine, especially when given parenterally or concur-
rently with other antimigraine agents.
Migraine genes identiﬁed by studying families with 
familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) reveal involvement 
of ion channels, suggesting that alterations in mem-
brane excitability can predispose to migraine. Mutations 
involving the Cav2.1 (P/Q)–type voltage-gated calcium 
channel CACNA1A gene are now known to cause 
FHM 1; this mutation is responsible for about 50% of 
FHM. Mutations in the Na+-K+ATPase ATP1A2 gene, 
designated FHM 2, are responsible for about 20% of 
FHM. Mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium 
channel SCN1A cause FHM 3. Functional neuroim-
aging has suggested that brainstem regions in migraine 
(Fig. 8-2) and the posterior hypothalamic gray mat-
ter region close to the human circadian pacemaker 
cells of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in cluster headache 
(Fig. 8-3) are good candidates for speciﬁc involvement 
in primary headache.
Diagnosis and clinical features
Diagnostic criteria for migraine headache are listed in 
Table 8-4. A high index of suspicion is required to 
diagnose migraine: the migraine aura, consisting of 
visual disturbances with ﬂashing lights or zigzag lines 
TABLE 8-3
SYMPTOMS ACCOMPANYING SEVERE MIGRAINE 
ATTACKS IN 500 PATIENTS
SYMPTOM
PATIENTS AFFECTED, %
Nausea
  
87
Photophobia
  
82
Lightheadedness
  
72
Scalp tenderness
  
65
Vomiting
  
56
Visual disturbances
  
36
Paresthesias
  
33
Vertigo
  
33
Photopsia
  
26
Alteration of consciousness
  
18
Diarrhea
  
16
Fortiﬁcation spectra
  
10
Syncope
  
10
Seizure
  
4
Confusional state
  
4
Source: From NH Raskin, Headache, 2nd ed. New York, Churchill 
Livingston, 1988; with permission.
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
55
Dura
Cortex
Dorsal raphe
nucleus
Locus
coeruleus
Superior
salivatory nucleus
Magnus raphe
nucleus
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Cortex
Dorsal raphe
nucleus
Locus
coeruleus
Superior
salivatory nucleus
Magnus raphe
nucleus
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Trigeminal
ganglion
TCC
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Quintothalamic
tract
Quintothalamic
tract
FIGURE 8-1
Brainstem pathways that modulate sensory input. The 
key pathway for pain in migraine is the trigeminovascular 
input from the meningeal vessels, which passes through the 
trigeminal ganglion and synapses on second-order neurons 
in the trigeminocervical complex (TCC). These neurons in 
turn project in the quintothalamic tract and, after decussat-
ing in the brainstem, synapse on neurons in the thalamus. 
Important modulation of the trigeminovascular nociceptive 
input comes from the dorsal raphe nucleus, locus coeruleus, 
and nucleus raphe magnus.
FIGURE 8-2
Positron emission tomography (PET) activation in 
migraine. In spontaneous attacks of episodic migraine there 
is activation of the region of the dorsolateral pons; an iden-
tical pattern is found in chronic migraine (not shown). This 
area, which includes the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, 
is fundamental to the expression of migraine. Moreover, 
lateralization of changes in this region of the brainstem cor-
relates with lateralization of the head pain in hemicranial 
migraine; the scans shown in panels A and B are of patients 
with acute migraine headache on the right and left side, 
respectively. (From S Afridi et al: Brain 128:932, 2005.)
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
56
moving across the visual ﬁeld or of other neurologic 
symptoms, is reported in only 20–25% of patients. A 
headache diary can often be helpful in making the diag-
nosis; this is also helpful in assessing disability and the 
frequency of treatment for acute attacks. Patients with 
episodes of migraine that occur daily or near-daily are 
considered to have chronic migraine (see “Chronic 
Daily Headache,” later in this chapter). Migraine must 
be differentiated from tension-type headache (discussed 
later), the most common primary headache syndrome 
seen in clinical practice. Migraine at its most basic level is 
headache with associated features, and tension-type headache is 
headache that is featureless. Most patients with disabling head-
ache probably have migraine.
Patients with acephalgic migraine experience recurrent 
neurologic symptoms, often with nausea or vomiting, 
but with little or no headache. Vertigo can be promi-
nent; it has been estimated that one-third of patients 
referred for vertigo or dizziness have a primary diagnosis 
of migraine.
TREATMENT 
Migraine Headaches
Once a diagnosis of migraine has been established, it 
is important to assess the extent of a patient’s disease 
and disability. The Migraine Disability Assessment Score 
(MIDAS) is a well-validated, easy-to-use tool (Fig. 8-4).
Patient education is an important aspect of migraine 
management. Information for patients is available at 
www.achenet.org, the website of the American Council 
for Headache Education (ACHE). It is helpful for patients 
to understand that migraine is an inherited tendency to 
headache; that migraine can be modified and controlled 
by lifestyle adjustments and medications, but it cannot 
be eradicated; and that, except in some occasions in 
women on oral estrogens or contraceptives, migraine is 
not associated with serious or life-threatening illnesses.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT Mi-
graine can often be managed to some degree by a vari-
ety of nonpharmacologic approaches. Most patients 
benefit by the identification and avoidance of spe-
cific headache triggers. A regulated lifestyle is helpful, 
including a healthful diet, regular exercise, regular sleep 
patterns, avoidance of excess caffeine and alcohol, and 
avoidance of acute changes in stress levels.
The measures that benefit a given individual 
should be used routinely since they provide a simple, 
TABLE 8-4
SIMPLIFIED DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR MIGRAINE
Repeated attacks of headache lasting 4–72 h in patients with a 
normal physical examination, no other reasonable cause for the 
headache, and:
AT LEAST 2 OF THE 
FOLLOWING FEATURES:
PLUS AT LEAST 1 OF THE 
FOLLOWING FEATURES:
Unilateral pain
Nausea/vomiting
Throbbing pain
Photophobia and phonophobia
Aggravation by movement
Moderate or severe 
intensity
Source: Adapted from the International Headache Society Clas-
siﬁcation (Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International 
Headache Society, 2004).
A
B
FIGURE 8-3
Posterior hypothalamic gray matter activation on positron 
emission tomography (PET) in a patient with acute clus-
ter headache (A). (From A May et al: Lancet 352:275, 1998.) 
High-resolution T1-weighted MRI obtained using voxel-based 
morphometry demonstrates increased gray matter activity, 
lateralized to the side of pain in a patient with cluster head-
ache (B). (From A May et al: Nat Med 5:836, 1999.)
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
57
cost-effective approach to migraine management. 
Patients with migraine do not encounter more stress 
than headache-free individuals; overresponsiveness 
to stress appears to be the issue. Since the stresses of 
everyday living cannot be eliminated, lessening one’s 
response to stress by various techniques is helpful for 
many patients. These may include yoga, transcenden-
tal meditation, hypnosis, and conditioning techniques 
such as biofeedback. For most patients, this approach 
is, at best, an adjunct to pharmacotherapy. Nonphar-
macologic measures are unlikely to prevent all migraine 
attacks. If these measures fail to prevent an attack, 
pharmacologic approaches are then needed to abort 
an attack.
ACUTE ATTACK THERAPIES FOR MIGRAINE 
The mainstay of pharmacologic therapy is the judicious 
use of one or more of the many drugs that are effective 
in migraine (Table 8-5). The selection of the optimal 
regimen for a given patient depends on a number of 
factors, the most important of which is the severity of 
the attack. Mild migraine attacks can usually be man-
aged by oral agents; the average efficacy rate is 50–70%. 
Severe migraine attacks may require parenteral therapy. 
Most drugs effective in the treatment of migraine are 
members of one of three major pharmacologic classes: 
anti-inflammatory agents, 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists, 
and dopamine receptor antagonists.
In general, an adequate dose of whichever agent 
is chosen should be used as soon as possible after the 
onset of an attack. If additional medication is required 
within 60 min because symptoms return or have not 
abated, the initial dose should be increased for subse-
quent attacks. Migraine therapy must be individualized; 
a standard approach for all patients is not possible. A 
therapeutic regimen may need to be constantly refined 
until one is identified that provides the patient with 
rapid, complete, and consistent relief with minimal side 
effects (Table 8-6).
NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DR- 
UGS (NSAIDs) Both the severity and duration of 
a migraine attack can be reduced significantly by non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (Table 8-5). Indeed, 
many undiagnosed migraineurs are self-treated with 
nonprescription NSAIDs. A general consensus is that 
NSAIDs are most effective when taken early in the 
migraine attack. However, the effectiveness of anti-
inflammatory agents in migraine is usually less than 
optimal in moderate or severe migraine attacks. The 
combination of acetaminophen, aspirin, and caffeine 
has been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug 
On how many days in the last 3 months did you miss work or school because 
of your headaches?
How many days in the last 3 months was your productivity at work or school 
reduced by half or more because of your headaches (do not include days 
you counted in question 1 where you missed work or school)?
On how many days in the last 3 months did you not do household work 
because of your headaches?
How many days in the last 3 months was your productivity in household work 
reduced by half or more because of your headaches (do not include days 
you counted in question 3 where you did not do household work)?
On how many days in the last 3 months did you miss family, social, or leisure 
activities because of your headaches?
On how many days in the last 3 months did you have a headache? (If a 
headache lasted more than one day, count each day.)
On a scale of 0–10, on average how painful were these headaches? (Where 
0 = no pain at all, and 10 = pain as bad as it can be.)
*Migraine Disability Assessment Score
(Questions 1−5 are used to calculate the MIDAS score.)
Grade I—Minimal or Infrequent Disability: 0–5
Grade II—Mild or Infrequent Disability: 6–10
Grade III—Moderate Disability: 11–20
Grade IV—Severe Disability: > 20
© Innovative Medical Research 1997
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
A.
B.
days
days
days
days
days
days
...............................................................................................
............................
................................................................................
.....................
.................................................................
.........................................
..........................................
INSTRUCTIONS: Please answer the following questions about ALL headaches you have had 
over the last 3 months. Write zero if you did not do the activity in the last 3 months.
*MIDAS Questionnaire
FIGURE 8-4 
MIDAS Questionnaire.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
58
TABLE 8-5
TREATMENT OF ACUTE MIGRAINE
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSAGE
Simple Analgesics
Acetaminophen, aspirin, caffeine
Excedrin
Migraine
Two tablets or caplets q6h (max 8 per day)
NSAIDs
Naproxen
Aleve, Anaprox, generic
220–550 mg PO bid
Ibuprofen
Advil, Motrin, Nuprin, generic
400 mg PO q3–4h
Tolfenamic acid
Clotam Rapid
200 mg PO. May repeat ×1 after 1–2 h
5-HT1 Agonists
Oral
Ergotamine
Ergomar
One 2 mg sublingual tablet at onset and q1/2h (max 3 per day, 5 per week)
Ergotamine 1 mg, 
caffeine 100 mg
Ercaf, Wigraine
One or two tablets at onset, then one tablet q1/2h (max 6 per day, 10 per week)
Naratriptan
Amerge
2.5 mg tablet at onset; may repeat once after 4 h
Rizatriptan
Maxalt
5–10 mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 30 mg/d)
Maxalt-MLT
Sumatriptan
Imitrex
50–100 mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 200 mg/d)
Frovatriptan
Frova
2.5 mg tablet at onset, may repeat after 2 h (max 5 mg/d)
Almotriptan
Axert
12.5 mg tablet at onset, may repeat after 2 h (max 25 mg/d)
Eletriptan
Relpax
40 or 80 mg
Zolmitriptan
Zomig
Zomig Rapimelt
2.5 mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 10 mg/d)
Nasal
Dihydroergotamine
Migranal Nasal Spray
Prior to nasal spray, the pump must be primed 4 times; 1 spray (0.5 mg) is 
administered, followed in 15 min by a second spray
Sumatriptan
Imitrex Nasal Spray
5–20 mg intranasal spray as 4 sprays of 5 mg or a single 20 mg spray 
(may repeat once after 2 h, not to exceed a dose of 40 mg/d)
Zolmitriptan
Zomig
5 mg intranasal spray as one spray (may repeat once after 2 h, not to 
exceed a dose of 10 mg/d)
Parenteral
Dihydroergotamine
DHE-45
1 mg IV, IM, or SC at onset and q1h (max 3 mg/d, 6 mg per week)
Sumatriptan
Imitrex Injection
6 mg SC at onset (may repeat once after 1 h for max of 2 doses in 24 h)
Dopamine Antagonists
Oral
Metoclopramide
Reglan,a generica
5–10 mg/d
Prochlorperazine
Compazine,a generica
1–25 mg/d
Parenteral
Chlorpromazine
Generica
0.1 mg/kg IV at 2 mg/min; max 35 mg/d
Metoclopramide
Reglan,a generic
10 mg IV
Prochlorperazine
Compazine,a generica
10 mg IV
Other
Oral
Acetaminophen, 325 mg, plus 
dichloralphenazone, 100 mg, 
plus isometheptene, 65 mg
Midrin, Duradrin, generic
Two capsules at onset followed by 1 capsule q1h (max 5 capsules)
Nasal
Butorphanol
Stadola
1 mg (1 spray in 1 nostril), may repeat if necessary in 1–2 h
Parenteral
Narcotics
Generica
Multiple preparations and dosages; see Table 7-1
aNot all drugs are speciﬁcally indicated by the FDA for migraine. Local regulations and guidelines should be consulted.
Note: Antiemetics (e.g., domperidone 10 mg or ondansetron 4 or 8 mg) or prokinetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg) are sometimes useful adjuncts.
Abbreviations: NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine.
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
59
tans are selective 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists. A variety 
of triptans, 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists—naratriptan, 
rizatriptan, eletriptan, sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, almo-
triptan, and frovatriptan—are now available for the 
treatment of migraine.
Each drug in the triptan class has similar pharmaco-
logic properties but varies slightly in terms of clinical 
efficacy. Rizatriptan and eletriptan are the most effica-
cious of the triptans currently available in the United 
States. Sumatriptan and zolmitriptan have similar rates 
of efficacy as well as time to onset, with an advantage 
of having multiple formulations, whereas almotriptan, 
frovatriptan, and naratriptan are somewhat slower in 
onset and are better tolerated. Clinical efficacy appears 
to be related more to the tmax (time to peak plasma 
level) than to the potency, half-life, or bioavailability. 
This observation is consistent with a large body of data 
indicating that faster-acting analgesics are more effec-
tive than slower-acting agents.
Unfortunately, monotherapy with a selective oral 
5-HT1B/1D agonist does not result in rapid, consistent, 
and complete relief of migraine in all patients. Triptans 
are not effective in migraine with aura unless given 
after the aura is completed and the headache initiated. 
Side effects are common though often mild and tran-
sient. Moreover, 5-HT1B/1D agonists are contraindicated 
in individuals with a history of cardiovascular and cere-
brovascular disease. Recurrence of headache is another 
important limitation of triptan use and occurs at least 
occasionally in most patients. Evidence from random-
ized controlled trials show that coadministration of a 
longer-acting NSAID, naproxen 500 mg, with sumatrip-
tan will augment the initial effect of sumatriptan and, 
importantly, reduce rates of headache recurrence.
Ergotamine preparations offer a nonselective means 
of stimulating 5-HT1 receptors. A nonnauseating dose 
of ergotamine should be sought since a dose that pro-
vokes nausea is too high and may intensify head pain. 
Except for a sublingual formulation of ergotamine, oral 
formulations of ergotamine also contain 100 mg caf-
feine (theoretically to enhance ergotamine absorption 
and possibly to add additional analgesic activity). The 
average oral ergotamine dose for a migraine attack is 
2 mg. Since the clinical studies demonstrating the effi-
cacy of ergotamine in migraine predated the clinical 
trial methodologies used with the triptans, it is difficult 
to assess the clinical efficacy of ergotamine versus the 
triptans. In general, ergotamine appears to have a much 
higher incidence of nausea than triptans, but less head-
ache recurrence.
Nasal The fastest-acting nonparenteral antimigraine 
therapies that can be self-administered include nasal 
formulations of dihydroergotamine (Migranal), zolmi-
triptan (Zomig nasal), or sumatriptan. The nasal sprays 
TABLE 8-6
CLINICAL STRATIFICATION OF ACUTE SPECIFIC 
MIGRAINE TREATMENTS
CLINICAL SITUATION
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Failed NSAIDs/anal-
gesics
First tier
Sumatriptan 50 mg or 100 mg PO
Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
Rizatriptan 10 mg PO
Eletriptan 40 mg PO
Zolmitriptan 2.5 mg PO
Slower effect/better tolerability
Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
Frovatriptan 2.5 mg PO
Infrequent headache
Ergotamine 1–2 mg PO
Dihydroergotamine nasal 
spray 2 mg
Early nausea or difﬁ-
culties taking tablets
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 20 mg nasal spray
Rizatriptan 10 mg MLT wafer
Headache recurrence
Ergotamine 2 mg (most effective 
PR/usually with caffeine)
Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
Eletriptan 40 mg
Tolerating acute treat-
ments poorly
Naratriptan 2.5 mg
Almotriptan 12.5 mg
Early vomiting
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 25 mg PR
Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
Menses-related 
headache
Prevention
Ergotamine PO at night
Estrogen patches
Treatment
Triptans
Dihydroergotamine nasal spray
Very rapidly develop-
ing symptoms
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
Dihydroergotamine 1 mg IM
Administration (FDA) for the treatment of mild to mod-
erate migraine. The combination of aspirin and metoclo-
pramide has been shown to be comparable to a single 
dose of sumatriptan. Important side effects of NSAIDs 
include dyspepsia and gastrointestinal irritation.
5-HT1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Oral Stimulation of 5-HT1B/1D receptors can stop an 
acute migraine attack. Ergotamine and dihydroergota-
mine are nonselective receptor agonists, while the trip-
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
60
result in substantial blood levels within 30–60 min. 
Although in theory nasal sprays might provide faster 
and more effective relief of a migraine attack than oral 
formulations, their reported efficacy is only approxi-
mately 50–60%. Studies with an inhalational formula-
tion of dihydroergotamine indicate that its absorption 
problems can be overcome to produce rapid onset of 
action with good tolerability.
Parenteral Parenteral administration of drugs such 
as dihydroergotamine and sumatriptan is approved by 
the FDA for the rapid relief of a migraine attack. Peak 
plasma levels of dihydroergotamine are achieved 3 min 
after IV dosing, 30 min after IM dosing, and 45 min after 
SC dosing. If an attack has not already peaked, SC or 
IM administration of 1 mg dihydroergotamine suffices 
for about 80–90% of patients. Sumatriptan, 6 mg SC, is 
effective in ∼70–80% of patients.
DOPAMINE ANTAGONISTS
Oral Oral dopamine antagonists should be consid-
ered as adjunctive therapy in migraine. Drug absorption 
is impaired during migraine because of reduced gas-
trointestinal motility. Delayed absorption occurs even 
in the absence of nausea and is related to the sever-
ity of the attack and not its duration. Therefore, when 
oral NSAIDs and/or triptan agents fail, the addition of a 
dopamine antagonist such as metoclopramide 10 mg 
should be considered to enhance gastric absorption. In 
addition, dopamine antagonists decrease nausea/vom-
iting and restore normal gastric motility.
Parenteral Parenteral dopamine antagonists (e.g., 
chlorpromazine, 
prochlorperazine, 
metoclopramide) 
can also provide significant acute relief of migraine; they 
can be used in combination with parenteral 5-HT1B/1D 
agonists. A common IV protocol used for the treatment 
of severe migraine is the administration over 2 min of a 
mixture of 5 mg of prochlorperazine and 0.5 mg of dihy-
droergotamine.
OTHER MEDICATIONS FOR 
ACUTE MIGRAINE
Oral The combination of acetaminophen, dichloral-
phenazone, and isometheptene, one to two capsules, 
has been classified by the FDA as “possibly” effective in 
the treatment of migraine. Since the clinical studies dem-
onstrating the efficacy of this combination analgesic in 
migraine predated the clinical trial methodologies used 
with the triptans, it is difficult to compare the efficacy of 
this sympathomimetic compound to other agents.
Nasal A nasal preparation of butorphanol is available 
for the treatment of acute pain. As with all narcotics, the 
use of nasal butorphanol should be limited to a select 
group of migraineurs, as described next.
Parenteral Narcotics are effective in the acute treat-
ment of migraine. For example, IV meperidine (50–100 
mg) is given frequently in the emergency room. This 
regimen “works” in the sense that the pain of migraine is 
eliminated. However, this regimen is clearly suboptimal 
for patients with recurrent headache. Narcotics do not 
treat the underlying headache mechanism; rather, they 
act to alter the pain sensation. Moreover, in patients tak-
ing oral narcotics such as oxycodone or hydrocodone, 
narcotic addiction can greatly confuse the treatment 
of migraine. Narcotic craving and/or withdrawal can 
aggravate and accentuate migraine. Therefore, it is rec-
ommended that narcotic use in migraine be limited to 
patients with severe, but infrequent, headaches that are 
unresponsive to other pharmacologic approaches.
MEDICATION-OVERUSE 
HEADACHE Acute 
attack medications, particularly codeine or barbiturate-
containing compound analgesics, have a propensity 
to aggravate headache frequency and induce a state 
of refractory daily or near-daily headache called med-
ication-overuse headache. This condition is likely not a 
separate headache entity but a reaction of the migraine 
patient to a particular medicine. Migraine patients who 
have two or more headache days a week should be cau-
tioned about frequent analgesic use (see “Chronic Daily 
Headache,” later in this chapter).
PREVENTIVE TREATMENTS FOR MIGRAINE  
Patients with an increasing frequency of migraine attacks, 
or with attacks that are either unresponsive or poorly 
responsive to abortive treatments, are good candidates 
for preventive agents. In general, a preventive medica-
tion should be considered in the subset of patients with 
five or more attacks a month. Significant side effects are 
associated with the use of many of these agents; further-
more, determination of dose can be difficult since the 
recommended doses have been derived for conditions 
other than migraine. The mechanism of action of these 
drugs is unclear; it seems likely that the brain sensitivity 
that underlies migraine is modified. Patients are usually 
started on a low dose of a chosen treatment; the dose is 
then gradually increased, up to a reasonable maximum to 
achieve clinical benefit.
Drugs that have the capacity to stabilize migraine are 
listed in Table 8-7. Drugs must be taken daily, and there 
is usually a lag of at least 2–12 weeks before an effect is 
seen. The drugs that have been approved by the FDA for 
the prophylactic treatment of migraine include propran-
olol, timolol, sodium valproate, topiramate, and methy-
sergide (not available in the United States). In addition, 
a number of other drugs appear to display prophylactic 
efficacy. This group includes amitriptyline, nortripty-
line, flunarizine, phenelzine, gabapentin, and cypro-
heptadine. Placebo-controlled trials of onabotulinum 
toxin type A in episodic migraine were negative, while, 
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
61
TABLE 8-7
PREVENTIVE TREATMENTS IN MIGRAINEa
DRUG
DOSE
SELECTED SIDE EFFECTS
Pizotifenb
0.5–2 mg qd
Weight gain
Drowsiness
Beta blocker
Propranolol
40–120 mg bid
Reduced energy
Tiredness
Postural symptoms
Contraindicated in asthma
Tricyclics
Amitriptyline
10–75 mg at night
Drowsiness
Dothiepin
25–75 mg at night
Nortriptyline
25–75 mg at night
Note: Some patients may only need a total dose of 10 mg, 
although generally 1–1.5 mg/kg body weight is required
Anticonvulsants
Topiramate
25–200 mg/d
Paresthesias
Cognitive symptoms
Weight loss
Glaucoma
Caution with nephrolithiasis
Valproate
400–600 mg bid
Drowsiness
Weight gain
Tremor
Hair loss
Fetal abnormalities
Hematologic or liver abnormalities
Gabapentin
900–3600 mg qd
Dizziness
Sedation
Serotonergic drugs
Methysergide
1–4 mg qd
Drowsiness
Leg cramps
Hair loss
Retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis (1-month drug holiday is required 
every 6 months)
Flunarizineb
5–15 mg qd
Drowsiness
Weight gain
Depression
Parkinsonism
No convincing evidence from controlled trials
Verapamil
Controlled trials demonstrate no effect
Nimodipine
Clonidine
SSRIs: ﬂuoxetine
a Commonly used preventives are listed with typical doses and common side effects. Not all listed medicines are approved by the FDA; local 
regulations and guidelines should be consulted.
bNot available in the United States.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
62
overall, placebo-controlled trials in chronic migraine 
were positive. Phenelzine and methysergide are usually 
reserved for recalcitrant cases because of their serious 
potential side effects. Phenelzine is a monoamine oxi-
dase inhibitor (MAOI); therefore, tyramine-containing 
foods, decongestants, and meperidine are contraindi-
cated. Methysergide may cause retroperitoneal or car-
diac valvular fibrosis when it is used for >6 months, and 
thus monitoring is required for patients using this drug; 
the risk of fibrosis is about 1:1500 and is likely to reverse 
after the drug is stopped.
The probability of success with any one of the anti-
migraine drugs is 50–75%. Many patients are managed 
adequately with low-dose amitriptyline, propranolol, 
topiramate, gabapentin, or valproate. If these agents fail 
or lead to unacceptable side effects, second-line agents 
such as methysergide or phenelzine can be used. Once 
effective stabilization is achieved, the drug is continued 
for ∼6 months and then slowly tapered to assess the 
continued need. Many patients are able to discontinue 
medication and experience fewer and milder attacks for 
long periods, suggesting that these drugs may alter the 
natural history of migraine.
TENSION-TYPE HEADACHE
Clinical features
The term tension-type headache (TTH) is commonly used 
to describe a chronic head-pain syndrome characterized 
by bilateral tight, bandlike discomfort. The pain typically 
builds slowly, ﬂuctuates in severity, and may persist more 
or less continuously for many days. The headache may 
be episodic or chronic (present >15 days per month).
A useful clinical approach is to diagnose TTH in 
patients whose headaches are completely without 
accompanying features such as nausea, vomiting, pho-
tophobia, phonophobia, osmophobia, throbbing, and 
aggravation with movement. Such an approach neatly 
separates migraine, which has one or more of these fea-
tures and is the main differential diagnosis, from TTH. 
The International Headache Society’s main deﬁnition 
of TTH allows an admixture of nausea, photophobia, 
or phonophobia in various combinations, although the 
appendix deﬁnition does not; this illustrates the dif-
ﬁculty in distinguishing these two clinical entities. In 
clinical practice, dichotomizing patients on the basis of 
the presence of associated features (migraine) and the 
absence of associated features (TTH) is highly recom-
mended. Indeed patients whose headaches ﬁt the TTH 
phenotype and who have migraine at other times, along 
with a family history of migraine, migrainous illnesses of 
childhood, or typical migraine triggers to their migraine 
attacks, may be biologically different from those who 
have TTH headache with none of the features.
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of TTH is incompletely under-
stood. It seems likely that TTH is due to a primary dis-
order of CNS pain modulation alone, unlike migraine, 
which involves a more generalized disturbance of sen-
sory modulation. Data suggest a genetic contribution 
to TTH, but this may not be a valid ﬁnding: given 
the current diagnostic criteria, the studies undoubtedly 
included many migraine patients. The name tension-type 
headache implies that pain is a product of nervous tension, 
but there is no clear evidence for tension as an etiology. 
Muscle contraction has been considered to be a feature 
that distinguishes TTH from migraine, but there appear 
to be no differences in contraction between the two 
headache types.
TREATMENT 
Tension-Type Headache
The pain of TTH can generally be managed with simple 
analgesics such as acetaminophen, aspirin, or NSAIDs. 
Behavioral approaches including relaxation can also be 
effective. Clinical studies have demonstrated that trip-
tans in pure TTH are not helpful, although triptans are 
effective in TTH when the patient also has migraine. 
For chronic TTH, amitriptyline is the only proven treat-
ment (Table 8-7); other tricyclics, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, and the benzodiazepines have not 
been shown to be effective. There is no evidence for 
the efficacy of acupuncture. Placebo-controlled trials 
of onabotulinum toxin type A in chronic TTH have not 
shown benefit.
TRIGEMINAL AUTONOMIC CEPHALALGIAS, 
INCLUDING CLUSTER HEADACHE
The trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs) describe 
a grouping of primary headaches including cluster head-
ache, paroxysmal hemicrania, and SUNCT (short-
lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with 
conjunctival injection and tearing)/SUNA (short-lasting 
unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial 
autonomic symptoms). TACs are characterized by rela-
tively short-lasting attacks of head pain associated with 
cranial autonomic symptoms, such as lacrimation, con-
junctival injection, or nasal congestion (Table 8-8). 
Pain is usually severe and may occur more than once a 
day. Because of the associated nasal congestion or rhi-
norrhea, patients are often misdiagnosed with “sinus 
headache” and treated with decongestants, which are 
ineffective.
TACs must be differentiated from short-lasting head-
aches that do not have prominent cranial autonomic 
syndromes, notably trigeminal neuralgia, primary stab-
bing headache, and hypnic headache. The cycling 
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
63
pattern and length, frequency, and timing of attacks are 
useful in classifying patients. Patients with TACs should 
undergo pituitary imaging and pituitary function tests as 
there is an excess of TAC presentations in patients with 
pituitary tumor–related headache.
Cluster headache
Cluster headache is a rare form of primary headache 
with a population frequency of approximately 0.1%. 
The pain is deep, usually retroorbital, often excruciat-
ing in intensity, nonﬂuctuating, and explosive in qual-
ity. A core feature of cluster headache is periodicity. At 
least one of the daily attacks of pain recurs at about the 
same hour each day for the duration of a cluster bout. 
The typical cluster headache patient has daily bouts of 
one to two attacks of relatively short-duration unilateral 
pain for 8 to 10 weeks a year; this is usually followed 
by a pain-free interval that averages a little less than 1 
year. Cluster headache is characterized as chronic when 
there is no signiﬁcant period of sustained remission. 
Patients are generally perfectly well between episodes. 
Onset is nocturnal in about 50% of patients, and men 
are affected three times more often than women. 
Patients with cluster headache tend to move about dur-
ing attacks, pacing, rocking, or rubbing their head for 
relief; some may even become aggressive during attacks. 
This is in sharp contrast to patients with migraine, who 
prefer to remain motionless during attacks.
Cluster headache is associated with ipsilateral symp-
toms of cranial parasympathetic autonomic activa-
tion: conjunctival injection or lacrimation, rhinorrhea 
or nasal congestion, or cranial sympathetic dysfunc-
tion such as ptosis. The sympathetic deﬁcit is periph-
eral and likely to be due to parasympathetic activation 
with injury to ascending sympathetic ﬁbers surrounding 
a dilated carotid artery as it passes into the cranial cavity. 
When present, photophobia and phonophobia are far 
more likely to be unilateral and on the same side of the 
pain, rather than bilateral, as is seen in migraine. This 
phenomenon of unilateral photophobia/phonophobia is 
characteristic of TACs. Cluster headache is likely to be 
a disorder involving central pacemaker neurons in the 
region of the posterior hypothalamus (Fig.  8-3).
TABLE 8-8
CLINICAL FEATURES OF THE TRIGEMINAL AUTONOMIC CEPHALALGIAS
CLUSTER HEADACHE
PAROXYSMAL HEMICRANIA
SUNCT
Gender 
Pain
M > F
F = M
F ∼ M
Type
Stabbing, boring
Throbbing, boring, stabbing
Burning, stabbing, sharp
Severity
Excruciating
Excruciating
Severe to excruciating
Site
Orbit, temple
Orbit, temple
Periorbital
Attack frequency
1/alternate day–8/d
1–40/d (>5/d for more than 
half the time)
3–200/d
Duration of attack
15–180 min
2–30 min
5–240 s
Autonomic features
Yes
Yes
Yes (prominent conjunctival 
injection and lacrimation)a
Migrainous featuresb
Yes
Yes
Yes
Alcohol trigger
Yes
No
No
Cutaneous triggers
No
No
Yes
Indomethacin effect
—
Yesc
—
Abortive treatment
Sumatriptan injection 
or nasal spray
No effective treatment
Lidocaine (IV)
Oxygen
Prophylactic treatment
Verapamil
Indomethacin
Lamotrigine
Methysergide
Topiramate
Lithium
Gabapentin
aIf conjunctival injection and tearing not present, consider SUNA.
bNausea, photophobia, or phonophobia; photophobia and phonophobia are typically unilateral on the side of the pain.
cIndicates complete response to indomethacin.
Abbreviation: SUNCT, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
64
TREATMENT 
Cluster Headache
The most satisfactory treatment is the administration of 
drugs to prevent cluster attacks until the bout is over. 
However, treatment of acute attacks is required for all 
cluster headache patients at some time.
ACUTE ATTACK TREATMENT Cluster head-
ache attacks peak rapidly, and thus a treatment with 
quick onset is required. Many patients with acute clus-
ter headache respond very well to oxygen inhalation. 
This should be given as 100% oxygen at 10–12 L/min for 
15–20 min. It appears that high flow and high oxygen 
content are important. Sumatriptan 6 mg SC is rapid in 
onset and will usually shorten an attack to 10–15 min; 
there is no evidence of tachyphylaxis. Sumatriptan (20 
mg) and zolmitriptan (5 mg) nasal sprays are both effec-
tive in acute cluster headache, offering a useful option 
for patients who may not wish to self-inject daily. Oral 
sumatriptan is not effective for prevention or for acute 
treatment of cluster headache.
PREVENTIVE 
TREATMENTS (Table 8-9) The 
choice of a preventive treatment in cluster headache 
depends in part on the length of the bout. Patients with 
long bouts or those with chronic cluster headache require 
medicines that are safe when taken for long periods. For 
patients with relatively short bouts, limited courses of 
oral glucocorticoids or methysergide (not available in the 
United States) can be very useful. A 10-day course of pred-
nisone, beginning at 60 mg daily for 7 days and followed 
by a rapid taper, may interrupt the pain bout for many 
patients. When ergotamine (1–2 mg) is used, it is most 
effective when given 1–2 h before an expected attack. 
Patients who use ergotamine daily must be educated 
TABLE 8-9
PREVENTIVE MANAGEMENT OF CLUSTER 
HEADACHE
SHORT-TERM PREVENTION LONG-TERM PREVENTION
EPISODIC CLUSTER 
HEADACHE
EPISODIC CLUSTER 
HEADACHE & PROLONGED 
CHRONIC CLUSTER 
HEADACHE
Prednisone 1 mg/kg up to 
60 mg qd, tapering over 
21 days
Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
Lithium 400–800 mg/d
Methysergide 3–12 mg/d
Methysergide 3–12 mg/d
Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
Topiramatea 100–400 mg/d
Greater occipital nerve 
injection
Gabapentina 1200–3600 mg/d
Melatonina 9–12 mg/d
aUnproven but of potential beneﬁt.
regarding the early symptoms of ergotism, which may 
include vomiting, numbness, tingling, pain, and cyanosis 
of the limbs; a weekly limit of 14 mg should be adhered to. 
Lithium (600–900 mg qd) appears to be particularly useful 
for the chronic form of the disorder.
Many experts favor verapamil as the first-line pre-
ventive treatment for patients with chronic cluster 
headache or prolonged bouts. While verapamil com-
pares favorably with lithium in practice, some patients 
require verapamil doses far in excess of those admin-
istered for cardiac disorders. The initial dose range is 
40–80 mg twice daily; effective doses may be as high 
as 960 mg/d. Side effects such as constipation and leg 
swelling can be problematic. Of paramount concern, 
however, is the cardiovascular safety of verapamil, 
particularly at high doses. Verapamil can cause heart 
block by slowing conduction in the atrioventricular 
node, a condition that can be monitored by following 
the PR interval on a standard ECG. Approximately 20% 
of patients treated with verapamil develop ECG abnor-
malities, which can be observed with doses as low as 
240 mg/d; these abnormalities can worsen over time 
in patients on stable doses. A baseline ECG is recom-
mended for all patients. The ECG is repeated 10 days 
after a dose change in those patients whose dose is 
being increased above 240 mg daily. Dose increases 
are usually made in 80-mg increments. For patients on 
long-term verapamil, ECG monitoring every 6 months 
is advised.
NEUROSTIMULATION THERAPY When medical 
therapies fail in chronic cluster headache, neurostimula-
tion strategies can be employed. Deep-brain stimulation of 
the region of the posterior hypothalamic gray matter has 
proven successful in a substantial proportion of patients. 
Favorable results have also been reported with the less-
invasive approach of occipital nerve stimulation.
PAROXYSMAL HEMICRANIA
Paroxysmal hemicrania (PH) is characterized by fre-
quent unilateral, severe, short-lasting episodes of head-
ache. Like cluster headache, the pain tends to be ret-
roorbital but may be experienced all over the head and 
is associated with autonomic phenomena such as lacri-
mation and nasal congestion. Patients with remissions 
are said to have episodic PH, whereas those with the 
nonremitting form are said to have chronic PH. The 
essential features of PH are unilateral, very severe pain; 
short-lasting attacks (2–45 min); very frequent attacks 
(usually more than ﬁve a day); marked autonomic fea-
tures ipsilateral to the pain; rapid course (<72 h); and 
excellent response to indomethacin. In contrast to clus-
ter headache, which predominantly affects males, the 
male:female ratio in PH is close to 1:1.
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
65
Indomethacin (25–75 mg tid), which can completely 
suppress attacks of PH, is the treatment of choice. 
Although therapy may be complicated by indometh-
acin-induced gastrointestinal side effects, currently 
there are no consistently effective alternatives. Topira-
mate is helpful in some cases. Piroxicam has been used, 
although it is not as effective as indomethacin. Vera-
pamil, an effective treatment for cluster headache, does 
not appear to be useful for PH. In occasional patients, 
PH can coexist with trigeminal neuralgia (PH-tic syn-
drome); similar to cluster-tic syndrome, each compo-
nent may require separate treatment.
Secondary PH has been reported with lesions in the 
region of the sella turcica, including arteriovenous mal-
formation, cavernous sinus meningioma, and epider-
moid tumors. Secondary PH is more likely if the patient 
requires high doses (>200 mg/d) of indomethacin. In 
patients with apparent bilateral PH, raised CSF pressure 
should be suspected. It is important to note that indo-
methacin reduces CSF pressure. When a diagnosis of 
PH is considered, MRI is indicated to exclude a pitu-
itary lesion.
SUNCT/SUNA
SUNCT (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache 
attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing) is a rare 
primary headache syndrome characterized by severe, uni-
lateral orbital or temporal pain that is stabbing or throb-
bing in quality. Diagnosis requires at least 20 attacks, 
lasting for 5–240 s; ipsilateral conjunctival injection and 
lacrimation should be present. In some patients conjunc-
tival injection or lacrimation is missing, and the diagnosis 
of SUNA (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache 
attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms) can be made.
Diagnosis
The pain of SUNCT/SUNA is unilateral and may be 
located anywhere in the head. Three basic patterns 
can be seen: single stabs, which are usually short-lived; 
groups of stabs; or a longer attack comprising many 
stabs between which the pain does not completely 
resolve, thus giving a “saw-tooth” phenomenon with 
attacks lasting many minutes. Each pattern may be seen 
in the context of an underlying continuous head pain. 
Characteristics that lead to a suspected diagnosis of 
SUNCT are the cutaneous (or other) triggerability of 
attacks, a lack of refractory period to triggering between 
attacks, and the lack of a response to indomethacin. 
Apart from trigeminal sensory disturbance, the neuro-
logic examination is normal in primary SUNCT.
The diagnosis of SUNCT is often confused with tri-
geminal neuralgia (TN) particularly in ﬁrst-division TN 
(Chap. 34). Minimal or no cranial autonomic symptoms 
and a clear refractory period to triggering indicate a 
diagnosis of TN.
Secondary (Symptomatic) SUNCT
SUNCT can be seen with posterior fossa or pituitary 
lesions. All patients with SUNCT/SUNA should be 
evaluated with pituitary function tests and a brain MRI 
with pituitary views.
TREATMENT 
SUNCT/SUNA
ABORTIVE THERAPY Therapy of acute attacks is 
not a useful concept in SUNCT/SUNA since the attacks are 
of such short duration. However, IV lidocaine, which arrests 
the symptoms, can be used in hospitalized patients.
PREVENTIVE THERAPY Long-term prevention 
to minimize disability and hospitalization is the goal of 
treatment. The most effective treatment for prevention is 
lamotrigine, 200–400 mg/d. Topiramate and gabapentin 
may also be effective. Carbamazepine, 400–500 mg/d, 
has been reported by patients to offer modest benefit.
Surgical approaches such as microvascular decom-
pression or destructive trigeminal procedures are sel-
dom useful and often produce long-term complications. 
Greater occipital nerve injection has produced limited 
benefit in some patients. Occipital nerve stimulation 
is probably helpful in an important subgroup of these 
patients. Complete control with deep-brain stimulation 
of the posterior hypothalamic region was reported in a 
single patient. For intractable cases, short-term preven-
tion with IV lidocaine can be effective, as can occipital 
nerve stimulation.
CHRONIC DAILY HEADACHE
The broad diagnosis of chronic daily headache (CDH) 
can be applied when a patient experiences headache 
on 15 days or more per month. CDH is not a single 
entity; it encompasses a number of different headache 
syndromes, including chronic TTH as well as headache 
secondary to trauma, inﬂammation, infection, medica-
tion overuse, and other causes (Table 8-10). Popula-
tion-based estimates suggest that about 4% of adults 
have daily or near-daily headache. Daily headache may 
be primary or secondary, an important consideration in 
guiding management of this complaint.
APPROACH TO THE
 PATIENT 
Chronic Daily Headache
The first step in the management of patients with CDH 
is to diagnose any underlying condition (Table 8–10). 
For patients with primary headaches, diagnosis of the 
headache type will guide therapy. Preventive treat-
ments such as tricyclics, either amitriptyline or nortrip-
tyline at doses up to 1 mg/kg, are very useful in patients 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
66
with CDH arising from migraine or tension-type head-
ache. Tricyclics are started in low doses (10–25 mg) 
daily and may be given 12 h before the expected time 
of awakening in order to avoid excess morning sleepi-
ness. Anticonvulsants, such as topiramate, valproate, 
and gabapentin, are also useful in migraineurs. Flunari-
zine can also be very effective for some patients, as can 
methysergide or phenelzine.
MANAGEMENT OF MEDICALLY INTRAC-
TABLE DISABLING CHRONIC DAILY HEAD-
ACHE The management of medically intractable 
headache is difficult. At this time, the only promising 
approach is occipital nerve stimulation, which appears 
to modulate thalamic processing in migraine and 
has also shown promise in chronic cluster headache, 
SUNCT/SUNA, and hemicrania continua (see next).
MEDICATION-OVERUSE 
HEADACHE Over-
use of analgesic medication for headache can aggravate 
headache frequency and induce a state of refractory 
daily or near-daily headache called medication-overuse 
headache. A proportion of patients who stop taking 
analgesics will experience substantial improvement in 
the severity and frequency of their headache. However, 
even after cessation of analgesic use, many patients 
continue to have headache, although they may feel clin-
ically improved in some way, especially if they have been 
using codeine or barbiturates regularly. The residual 
symptoms probably represent the underlying headache 
disorder.
TABLE 8-10
CLASSIFICATION OF CHRONIC DAILY HEADACHE
PRIMARY
>4 h DAILY
<4 h DAILY
SECONDARY
Chronic migrainea
Chronic cluster 
headacheb
Posttraumatic
Head injury
Iatrogenic
Postinfectious
Chronic tension-
type headachea
Chronic 
paroxysmal 
hemicrania
Inﬂammatory, such as
Giant cell arteritis
Sarcoidosis
Behçet’s syndrome
Hemicrania 
continuaa
SUNCT/SUNA
Chronic CNS 
infection
New daily persis-
tent headachea
Hypnic 
headache
Medication-overuse 
headachea
aMay be complicated by analgesic overuse.
bSome patients may have headache >4 h/d.
Abbreviations: SUNA, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform head-
ache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms; SUNCT, short-
lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival 
injection and tearing.
Management of Medication Overuse: Out-
patients For patients who overuse medications, it is 
essential that analgesic use be reduced and eliminated. 
One approach is to reduce the medication dose by 10% 
every 1–2 weeks. Immediate cessation of analgesic use 
is possible for some patients, provided there is no con-
traindication. Both approaches are facilitated by the use 
of a medication diary maintained during the month or 
two before cessation; this helps to identify the scope of 
the problem. A small dose of an NSAID such as naproxen, 
500 mg bid, if tolerated, will help relieve residual pain as 
analgesic use is reduced. NSAID overuse is not usually a 
problem for patients with daily headache when the dose 
is taken once or twice daily; however, overuse problems 
may develop with more frequent dosing schedules. Once 
the patient has substantially reduced analgesic use, a 
preventive medication should be introduced. It must be 
emphasized that preventives generally do not work in the 
presence of analgesic overuse. The most common cause 
of unresponsiveness to treatment is the use of a preven-
tive when analgesics continue to be used regularly. For 
some patients, discontinuing analgesics is very difficult; 
often the best approach is to directly inform the patient 
that some degree of pain is inevitable during this initial 
period.
Management of Medication Overuse: Inpa-
tients Some patients will require hospitalization for 
detoxification. Such patients have typically failed efforts 
at outpatient withdrawal or have a significant medical 
condition, such as diabetes mellitus, which would com-
plicate withdrawal as an outpatient. Following admission 
to the hospital, acute medications are withdrawn com-
pletely on the first day, in the absence of a contraindica-
tion. Antiemetics and fluids are administered as required; 
clonidine is used for opiate withdrawal symptoms. For 
acute intolerable pain during the waking hours aspirin, 
1 g IV (not approved in United States), is useful. IM chlor-
promazine can be helpful at night; patients must be ade-
quately hydrated. Three to five days into the admission 
as the effect of the withdrawn substance settles a course 
of IV dihydroergotamine (DHE) can be employed. DHE, 
administered every 8 h for 5 consecutive days, can induce 
a significant remission that allows a preventive treatment 
to be established. 5-HT3 antagonists, such as ondansetron 
or granisetron, are often required with DHE to prevent 
significant nausea, and domperidone (not approved in 
the United States) orally or by suppository can be very 
helpful.
NEW DAILY PERSISTENT HEADACHE New 
daily persistent headache (NDPH) is a clinically distinct 
syndrome; its causes are listed in Table 8-11.
CLINICAL 
PRESENTATION The patient with 
NDPH presents with headache on most if not all days 
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
67
and the patient can clearly, and often vividly, recall 
the moment of onset. The headache usually begins 
abruptly, but onset may be more gradual; evolution 
over 3 days has been proposed as the upper limit for 
this syndrome. Patients typically recall the exact day 
and circumstances of the onset of headache; the new, 
persistent head pain does not remit. The first priority 
is to distinguish between a primary and a secondary 
cause of this syndrome. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is 
the most serious of the secondary causes and must be 
excluded either by history or appropriate investigation 
(Chap. 28).
Secondary NDPH
Low CSF Volume Headache In these syn-
dromes, head pain is positional: it begins when the 
patient sits or stands upright and resolves upon reclin-
ing. The pain, which is occipitofrontal, is usually a dull 
ache but may be throbbing. Patients with chronic low 
CSF volume headache typically present with a history of 
headache from one day to the next that is generally not 
present on waking but worsens during the day. Recum-
bency usually improves the headache within minutes, 
but it takes only minutes to an hour for the pain to 
return when the patient resumes an upright position.
The most common cause of headache due to per-
sistent low CSF volume is CSF leak following lumbar 
puncture (LP). Post-LP headache usually begins within 
48 h but may be delayed for up to 12 days. Its inci-
dence is between 10 and 30%. Beverages with caffeine 
may provide temporary relief. Besides LP, index events 
may include epidural injection or a vigorous Valsalva 
maneuver, such as from lifting, straining, coughing, 
clearing the eustachian tubes in an airplane, or multiple 
orgasms. Spontaneous CSF leaks are well recognized, 
and the diagnosis should be considered whenever the 
headache history is typical, even when there is no obvi-
ous index event. As time passes from the index event, 
the postural nature may become less apparent; cases 
in which the index event occurred several years before 
the eventual diagnosis have been recognized. Symp-
TABLE 8-11
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF NEW DAILY 
PERSISTENT HEADACHE
PRIMARY
SECONDARY
Migrainous-type
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Featureless (tension-type)
Low CSF volume headache
Raised CSF pressure headache
Posttraumatic headachea
Chronic meningitis
aIncludes postinfectious forms.
FIGURE 8-5 
Magnetic resonance image showing diffuse meningeal 
enhancement after gadolinium administration in a patient 
with low CSF volume headache.
toms appear to result from low volume rather than low 
pressure: although low CSF pressures, typically 0–50 
mmH2O, are usually identified, a pressure as high as 140 
mmH2O has been noted with a documented leak.
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS 
[Chap. 33]) can present with orthostatic headache simi-
lar to low CSF volume headache and is a diagnosis that 
needs consideration here.
When imaging is indicated to identify the source of 
a presumed leak, an MRI with gadolinium is the initial 
study of choice (Fig. 8-5). A striking pattern of diffuse 
meningeal enhancement is so typical that in the appro-
priate clinical context the diagnosis is established. Chiari 
malformations may sometimes be noted on MRI; in such 
cases, surgery to decompress the posterior fossa usu-
ally worsens the headache. Spinal MRI with T2 weight-
ing may reveal a leak and spinal MRI may demonstrate 
spinal meningeal cysts whose role in these syndromes 
is yet to be elucidated. The source of CSF leakage may 
be identified by spinal MRI, by CT, or increasingly with 
MR myelography, or with 111In-DTPA CSF studies; in the 
absence of a directly identified site of leakage, early 
emptying of 111In-DTPA tracer into the bladder or slow 
progress of tracer across the brain suggests a CSF leak.
Initial treatment for low CSF volume headache is 
bed rest. For patients with persistent pain, IV caffeine 
(500 mg in 500 mL saline administered over 2 h) can be 
very effective. An ECG to screen for arrhythmia should 
be performed before administration. It is reasonable 
to administer at least two infusions of caffeine before 
embarking on additional tests to identify the source of 
the CSF leak. Since IV caffeine is safe and can be curative, 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
68
it spares many patients the need for further investiga-
tions. If unsuccessful, an abdominal binder may be help-
ful. If a leak can be identified, an autologous blood patch 
is usually curative. A blood patch is also effective for 
post-LP headache; in this setting, the location is empiri-
cally determined to be the site of the LP. In patients with 
intractable pain, oral theophylline is a useful alternative; 
however, its effect is less rapid than caffeine.
Raised CSF Pressure Headache Raised CSF 
pressure is well recognized as a cause of headache. 
Brain imaging can often reveal the cause, such as a 
space-occupying lesion. NDPH due to raised CSF pres-
sure can be the presenting symptom for patients with 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor 
cerebri) without visual problems, particularly when the 
fundi are normal. Persistently raised intracranial pres-
sure can trigger chronic migraine. These patients typi-
cally present with a history of generalized headache 
that is present on waking and improves as the day 
goes on. It is generally worse with recumbency. Visual 
obscurations are frequent. The diagnosis is relatively 
straightforward when papilledema is present, but the 
possibility must be considered even in patients without 
funduscopic changes. Formal visual field testing should 
be performed even in the absence of overt ophthal-
mic involvement. Headache on rising in the morning or 
nocturnal headache is also characteristic of obstructive 
sleep apnea or poorly controlled hypertension.
Evaluation of patients suspected to have raised CSF 
pressure requires brain imaging. It is most efficient to 
obtain an MRI, including an MR venogram, as the initial 
study. If there are no contraindications, the CSF pres-
sure should be measured by LP; this should be done 
when the patient is symptomatic so that both the pres-
sure and the response to removal of 20–30 mL of CSF 
can be determined. An elevated opening pressure and 
improvement in headache following removal of CSF is 
diagnostic.
Initial treatment is with acetazolamide (250–500 mg 
bid); the headache may improve within weeks. If inef-
fective, topiramate is the next treatment of choice; it 
has many actions that may be useful in this setting, 
including carbonic anhydrase inhibition, weight loss, 
and neuronal membrane stabilization, likely mediated 
via effects on phosphorylation pathways. Severely dis-
abled patients who do not respond to medical treat-
ment require intracranial pressure monitoring and may 
require shunting.
Posttraumatic 
Headache A traumatic event 
can trigger a headache process that lasts for many 
months or years after the event. The term trauma is used 
in a very broad sense: headache can develop following 
an injury to the head, but it can also develop after an 
infectious episode, typically viral meningitis, a flulike ill-
ness, or a parasitic infection. Complaints of dizziness, 
vertigo, and impaired memory can accompany the head-
ache. Symptoms may remit after several weeks or persist 
for months and even years after the injury. Typically the 
neurologic examination is normal and CT or MRI stud-
ies are unrevealing. Chronic subdural hematoma may on 
occasion mimic this disorder. In one series, one-third of 
patients with NDPH reported headache beginning after 
a transient flulike illness characterized by fever, neck 
stiffness, photophobia, and marked malaise. Evaluation 
reveals no apparent cause for the headache. There is no 
convincing evidence that persistent Epstein-Barr infec-
tion plays a role in this syndrome. A complicating factor 
is that many patients undergo LP during the acute ill-
ness; iatrogenic low CSF volume headache must be con-
sidered in these cases. Posttraumatic headache may also 
be seen after carotid dissection and subarachnoid hem-
orrhage, and following intracranial surgery. The underly-
ing theme appears to be that a traumatic event involving 
the pain-producing meninges can trigger a headache 
process that lasts for many years.
Treatment is largely empirical. Tricyclic antidepres-
sants, notably amitriptyline, and anticonvulsants such as 
topiramate, valproate, and gabapentin, have been used 
with reported benefit. The MAOI phenelzine may also be 
useful in carefully selected patients. The headache usually 
resolves within 3–5 years, but it can be quite disabling.
Primary NDPH Primary NDPH occurs in both males 
and females. It can be of the migrainous type, with fea-
tures of migraine, or it can be featureless, appearing as 
new-onset TTH (Table 8-11). Migrainous features are 
common and include unilateral headache and throb-
bing pain; each feature is present in about one-third of 
patients. Nausea, photophobia, and/or phonophobia 
occur in about half of patients. Some patients have a 
previous history of migraine; however, the proportion of 
NDPH sufferers with preexisting migraine is no greater 
than the frequency of migraine in the general population. 
At 24 months, ∼86% of patients are headache-free. Treat-
ment of migrainous-type primary NDPH consists of using 
the preventive therapies effective in migraine (Table 8-7). 
Featureless NDPH is one of the primary headache forms 
most refractory to treatment. Standard preventive thera-
pies can be offered but are often ineffective.
OTHER PRIMARY HEADACHES
Hemicrania continua
The essential features of hemicrania continua are moder-
ate and continuous unilateral pain associated with ﬂuc-
tuations of severe pain; complete resolution of pain with 
indomethacin; and exacerbations that may be associated 
 
CHAPTER 8
Headache
69
with autonomic features, including conjunctival injec-
tion, lacrimation, and photophobia on the affected side. 
The age of onset ranges from 11 to 58 years; women are 
affected twice as often as men. The cause is unknown.
TREATMENT 
Hemicrania Continua
Treatment consists of indomethacin; other NSAIDs 
appear to be of little or no benefit. The IM injection of 100 
mg indomethacin has been proposed as a diagnostic tool 
and administration with a placebo injection in a blinded 
fashion can be very useful diagnostically. Alternatively, a 
trial of oral indomethacin, starting with 25 mg tid, then 
50 mg tid, and then 75 mg tid, can be given. Up to two 
weeks at the maximal dose may be necessary to assess 
whether a dose has a useful effect. Topiramate can be 
helpful in some patients. Occipital nerve stimulation may 
have a role in patients with hemicrania continua who are 
unable to tolerate indomethacin.
Primary stabbing headache
The essential features of primary stabbing headache are 
stabbing pain conﬁned to the head or, rarely, the face, 
lasting from 1 to many seconds or minutes and occur-
ring as a single stab or a series of stabs; absence of asso-
ciated cranial autonomic features; absence of cutane-
ous triggering of attacks; and a pattern of recurrence at 
irregular intervals (hours to days). The pains have been 
variously described as “ice-pick pains” or “jabs and 
jolts.” They are more common in patients with other 
primary headaches, such as migraine, the TACs, and 
hemicrania continua.
TREATMENT 
Primary Stabbing Headache
The response of primary stabbing headache to indo-
methacin (25–50 mg two to three times daily) is usu-
ally excellent. As a general rule, the symptoms wax and 
wane, and after a period of control on indomethacin, it 
is appropriate to withdraw treatment and observe the 
outcome.
Primary cough headache
Primary cough headache is a generalized headache that 
begins suddenly, lasts for several minutes, and is precipi-
tated by coughing; it is preventable by avoiding cough-
ing or other precipitating events, which can include 
sneezing, straining, laughing, or stooping. In all patients 
with this syndrome, serious etiologies must be excluded 
before a diagnosis of “benign” primary cough head-
ache can be established. A Chiari malformation or any 
lesion causing obstruction of CSF pathways or displac-
ing cerebral structures can be the cause of the head pain. 
Other conditions that can present with cough or exer-
tional headache as the initial symptom include cerebral 
aneurysm, carotid stenosis, and vertebrobasilar disease. 
Benign cough headache can resemble benign exertional 
headache (discussed next), but patients with the former 
condition are typically older.
TREATMENT 
Primary Cough Headache
Indomethacin 25–50 mg two to three times daily is the 
treatment of choice. Some patients with cough head-
ache obtain pain relief with LP; this is a simple option 
when compared to prolonged use of indomethacin, and 
it is effective in about one-third of patients. The mecha-
nism of this response is unclear.
Primary exertional headache
Primary exertional headache has features resembling 
both cough headache and migraine. It may be pre-
cipitated by any form of exercise; it often has the pul-
satile quality of migraine. The pain, which can last 
from 5 min to 24 h, is bilateral and throbbing at onset; 
migrainous features may develop in patients susceptible 
to migraine. Primary exertional headache can be pre-
vented by avoiding excessive exertion, particularly in 
hot weather or at high altitude.
The mechanism of primary exertional headache is 
unclear. Acute venous distension likely explains one 
syndrome, the acute onset of headache with strain-
ing and breath holding, as in weightlifter’s headache. 
As exertion can result in headache in a number of seri-
ous underlying conditions, these must be considered 
in patients with exertional headache. Pain from angina 
may be referred to the head, probably by central con-
nections of vagal afferents, and may present as exertional 
headache (cardiac cephalgia). The link to exercise is the 
main clinical clue that headache is of cardiac origin. 
Pheochromocytoma may occasionally cause exertional 
headache. Intracranial lesions and stenosis of the carotid 
arteries are other possible etiologies.
TREATMENT 
Primary Exertional Headache
Exercise regimens should begin modestly and progress 
gradually to higher levels of intensity. Indomethacin at 
daily doses from 25 to 150 mg is generally effective in 
benign exertional headache. Indomethacin (50 mg), 
ergotamine (1 mg orally), dihydroergotamine (2 mg 
by nasal spray), or methysergide (1–2 mg orally given 
30–45 min before exercise) are useful prophylactic mea-
sures.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
70
Primary Sex Headache
Sex headache is precipitated by sexual excitement. The 
pain usually begins as a dull bilateral headache that sud-
denly becomes intense at orgasm. The headache can 
be prevented or eased by ceasing sexual activity before 
orgasm. Three types of sex headache are reported: a 
dull ache in the head and neck that intensiﬁes as sex-
ual excitement increases; a sudden, severe, explosive 
headache occurring at orgasm; and a postural head-
ache developing after coitus that resembles the head-
ache of low CSF pressure. The latter arises from vigor-
ous sexual activity and is a form of low CSF pressure 
headache. Headaches developing at the time of orgasm 
are not always benign; 5–12% of cases of subarachnoid 
hemorrhage are precipitated by sexual intercourse. Sex 
headache is reported by men more often than women 
and may occur at any time during the years of sexual 
activity. It may develop on several occasions in succes-
sion and then not trouble the patient again, even with-
out an obvious change in sexual activity. In patients 
who stop sexual activity when headache is ﬁrst noticed, 
the pain may subside within a period of 5 min to 2 h. In 
about half of patients, sex headache will subside within 
6 months. About half of patients with sex headache 
have a history of exertional headaches, but there is no 
excess of cough headache. Migraine is probably more 
common in patients with sex headache.
TREATMENT 
Primary Sex Headache
Benign sex headaches recur irregularly and infrequently. 
Management can often be limited to reassurance and 
advice about ceasing sexual activity if a mild, warning 
headache develops. Propranolol can be used to prevent 
headache that recurs regularly or frequently, but the 
dosage required varies from 40 to 200 mg/d. An alter-
native is the calcium channel–blocking agent diltiazem, 
60 mg tid. Ergotamine (1 mg) or indomethacin (25–50 
mg) taken about 30–45 min prior to sexual activity can 
also be helpful.
Primary thunderclap headache
Sudden onset of severe headache may occur in the 
absence of any known provocation. The differential 
diagnosis includes the sentinel bleed of an intracra-
nial aneurysm, cervicocephalic arterial dissection, and 
cerebral venous thrombosis. Headaches of explosive 
onset may also be caused by the ingestion of sympa-
thomimetic drugs or of tyramine-containing foods in a 
patient who is taking MAOIs, or they may be a symp-
tom of pheochromocytoma. Whether thunderclap head-
ache can be the presentation of an unruptured cerebral 
aneurysm is uncertain. When neuroimaging studies and 
LP exclude subarachnoid hemorrhage, patients with 
thunderclap headache usually do very well over the 
long term. In one study of patients whose CT scans and 
CSF ﬁndings were negative, ∼15% had recurrent epi-
sodes of thunderclap headache, and nearly half subse-
quently developed migraine or tension-type headache.
The ﬁrst presentation of any sudden-onset severe 
headache should be vigorously investigated with neuro-
imaging (CT or, when possible, MRI with MR angi-
ography) and CSF examination. Formal cerebral angi-
ography should be reserved for those cases in which no 
primary diagnosis is forthcoming and for clinical situa-
tions that are particularly suggestive of intracranial aneu-
rysm. Reversible segmental cerebral vasoconstriction 
may be seen in primary thunderclap headache without 
an intracranial aneurysm. In the presence of posterior 
leukoencephalopathy, the differential diagnosis includes 
cerebral angiitis, drug toxicity (cyclosporine, intrathecal 
methotrexate/cytarabine, pseudoephedrine, or cocaine), 
posttransfusion effects, and postpartum angiopathy. 
Treatment with nimodipine may be helpful, although 
by deﬁnition the vasoconstriction of primary thunder-
clap headache resolves spontaneously.
Hypnic headache
This headache syndrome typically begins a few hours 
after sleep onset. The headaches last from 15 to 30 
min and are typically moderately severe and general-
ized, although they may be unilateral and can be throb-
bing. Patients may report falling back to sleep only to 
be awakened by a further attack a few hours later; up 
to three repetitions of this pattern occur through the 
night. Daytime naps can also precipitate head pain. 
Most patients are female, and the onset is usually after 
age 60 years. Headaches are bilateral in most, but may 
be unilateral. Photophobia or phonophobia and nausea 
are usually absent. The major secondary consideration 
in this headache type is poorly controlled hypertension; 
24-h blood pressure monitoring is recommended to 
detect this treatable condition.
TREATMENT 
Hypnic Headache
Patients with hypnic headache generally respond to 
a bedtime dose of lithium carbonate (200–600 mg). 
For those intolerant of lithium, verapamil (160 mg) or 
methysergide (1–4 mg at bedtime) may be alternative 
strategies. One to two cups of coffee or caffeine, 60 mg 
orally, at bedtime may be effective in approximately 
one-third of patients. Case reports suggest that flunari-
zine, 5 mg nightly, can be effective.
 John W. Engstrom  ■   Richard A. Deyo 
71
 The importance of back and neck pain in our society 
is underscored by the following: (1) the cost of back 
pain in the United States exceeds $100 billion annually; 
approximately one-third of these costs are direct health 
care expenses, and two-thirds are indirect costs resulting 
from loss of wages and productivity; (2) back symptoms 
are the most common cause of disability in those <45 
years; (3) low back pain is the second most common 
reason for visiting a physician in the United States; and 
(4) ∼1% of the U.S. population is chronically disabled 
because of back pain. 
 ANATOMY OF THE SPINE 
 The anterior portion of the spine consists of cylindri-
cal vertebral bodies separated by intervertebral disks and 
held together by the anterior and posterior longitudi-
nal ligaments. The intervertebral disks are composed of 
a central gelatinous nucleus pulposus surrounded by a 
tough cartilaginous ring, the annulus ﬁ brosis. Disks are 
responsible for 25% of spinal column length and allow 
the bony vertebrae to move easily upon each other 
( Figs. 9-1 and  9-2) . Desiccation of the nucleus pulp-
osus and degeneration of the annulus ﬁ brosus increase 
with age and results in loss of height. The disks are larg-
est in the cervical and lumbar regions where move-
ments of the spine are greatest. The functions of the 
anterior spine are to absorb the shock of body move-
ments such as walking and running, and to protect the 
contents of the spinal canal. 
 The posterior portion of the spine consists of the ver-
tebral arches and processes. Each arch consists of paired 
cylindrical pedicles anteriorly and paired laminae poste-
riorly. The vertebral arch also gives rise to two trans-
verse processes laterally, one spinous process posteri-
orly, plus two superior and two inferior articular facets. 
The apposition of a superior and inferior facet consti-
tutes a  facet joint . The functions of the posterior spine 
are to protect the spinal cord and nerves within the spi-
nal canal and to provide an anchor for the attachment 
of muscles and ligaments. The contraction of muscles 
attached to the spinous and transverse processes and 
laminae works like a system of pulleys and levers that 
results in ﬂ exion, extension, and lateral bending move-
ments of the spine. 
 Nerve root injury ( radiculopathy ) is a common cause 
of neck, arm, low back, buttock, and leg pain ( Figs. 
15-2 and  15-3 ). The nerve roots exit at a level above 
their respective vertebral bodies in the cervical region 
(e.g., the C7 nerve root exits at the C6-C7 level) and 
below their respective vertebral bodies in the thoracic 
and lumbar regions (e.g., the T1 nerve root exits at the 
T1-T2 level). The cervical nerve roots follow a short 
intraspinal course before exiting. By contrast, because 
the spinal cord ends at the vertebral L1 or L2 level, the 
lumbar nerve roots follow a long intraspinal course and 
can be injured anywhere from the upper lumbar spine 
to their exit at the intervertebral foramen. For example, 
disk herniation at the L4-L5 level can produce not only 
L5 root compression, but also compression of the tra-
versing S1 nerve root  ( Fig. 9-3 ) . 
 Pain-sensitive structures of the spine include the 
periosteum of the vertebrae, dura, facet joints, annulus 
ﬁ brosus of the intervertebral disk, epidural veins and 
arteries, and the posterior longitudinal ligament. Disease 
of these diverse structures may explain many cases of 
back pain without nerve root compression. The nucleus 
pulposus of the intervertebral disk is not pain-sensitive 
under normal circumstances. Pain sensation from within 
the spinal canal is conveyed partially by the sinuverte-
bral nerve that arises from the spinal nerve at each spine 
segment and reenters the spinal canal through the inter-
vertebral foramen at the same level. 
 BACK AND NECK PAIN 
 CHAPTER 9 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
72
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Back Pain
Posterior
Posterior
Anterior
Superior articular
process
Superior vertebral
notch
Intervertebral
foramen
Transverse
process
Spinous
process
Inferior vertebral 
notch
Inferior articular
process (facet)
Intervertebral
disk
Body
Spinous process
Superior
articular
process
Transverse
process
Spinal canal
Body
Lamina
Pedicle
Anterior
A  
B
FIGURE 9-1 
Vertebral anatomy. (From A Gauthier Cornuelle, DH Gronefeld: Radiographic Anatomy Posi-
tioning. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1998; with permission.)
Sacrum
Coccyx
Lumbar (5)
Thoracic (12)
Cervical (7)
Right lateral view
Anterior view
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
Sacral
curvature
Thoracic
curvature
Cervical
curvature
Lumbar
 curvature
FIGURE 9-2 
Spinal column. (From A Gauthier Cornuelle, DH Gronefeld: 
Radiographic Anatomy Positioning. New York, McGraw-Hill, 
1998; with permission.)
Attention is also focused on identification of risk factors 
for serious underlying diseases; the majority of these 
are due to radiculopathy, fracture, tumor, infection, or 
referred pain from visceral structures (Table 9-1).
Local pain is caused by injury to pain-sensitive struc-
tures that compress or irritate sensory nerve endings. 
The site of the pain is near the affected part of the back.
Pain referred to the back may arise from abdominal or 
pelvic viscera. The pain is usually described as primarily 
abdominal or pelvic but is accompanied by back pain 
and usually unaffected by posture. The patient may 
occasionally complain of back pain only.
Pain of spine origin may be located in the back or 
referred to the buttocks or legs. Diseases affecting the 
upper lumbar spine tend to refer pain to the lumbar 
region, groin, or anterior thighs. Diseases affecting the 
lower lumbar spine tend to produce pain referred to the 
buttocks, posterior thighs, or rarely the calves or feet. 
Referred or “sclerotomal” pain may explain instances 
where the pain crosses multiple dermatomes without 
evidence of nerve root compression.
Radicular back pain is typically sharp and radiates 
from the low back to a leg within the territory of a nerve 
root (see “Lumbar Disk Disease,” later in this chapter). 
Coughing, sneezing, or voluntary contraction of abdomi-
nal muscles (lifting heavy objects or straining at stool) 
may elicit the radiating pain. The pain may increase in 
postures that stretch the nerves and nerve roots. Sitting 
with the leg outstretched places traction on the sciatic 
nerve and L5 and S1 roots because the nerve passes pos-
terior to the hip. The femoral nerve (L2, L3, and L4 roots) 
passes anterior to the hip and is not stretched by sitting. 
The description of the pain alone often fails to distin-
guish between sclerotomal pain and radiculopathy.
TYPES OF BACK PAIN Understanding the types 
of pain reported by patients is the essential first step. 
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
73
Pain associated with muscle spasm, although of 
obscure origin, is commonly associated with many spine 
disorders. The spasms are accompanied by abnormal 
posture, tense paraspinal muscles, and dull or achy pain 
in the paraspinal region.
Knowledge of the circumstances associated with the 
onset of back pain is important when weighing possible 
serious underlying causes for the pain. Some patients 
involved in accidents or work-related injuries may exag-
gerate their pain for the purpose of compensation or for 
psychological reasons.
EXAMINATION OF THE BACK A physical exam-
ination that includes the abdomen and rectum is advis-
able. Back pain referred from visceral organs may be 
reproduced during palpation of the abdomen (pancre-
atitis, abdominal aortic aneurysm [AAA]) or percussion 
over the costovertebral angles (pyelonephritis).
The normal spine has a cervical and lumbar lordosis, 
and a thoracic kyphosis. Exaggeration of these normal 
alignments may result in hyperkyphosis of the thoracic 
spine or hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine. Inspection 
may reveal a lateral curvature of the spine (scoliosis) 
or an asymmetry in the prominence of the paraspi-
nal muscles, suggesting muscle spasm. Back pain of 
bony spine origin is often reproduced by palpation or 
4th Lumbar
vertebral body
5th Lumbar
vertebral body
4th Lumbar
pedicle
L4 root
Protruded 
L4-L5 disk
L5 Root
S1 Root
S2 Root
Protruded 
L5-S1 disk
FIGURE 9-3 
Compression of L5 and S1 roots by herniated disks. (From Adams and Victor’s 
Principles of Neurology, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009; with permission.)
TABLE 9-1 
ACUTE LOW BACK PAIN: RISK FACTORS FOR AN 
IMPORTANT STRUCTURAL CAUSE
History
Pain worse at rest or at night
Prior history of cancer
History of chronic infection (esp. lung, urinary tract, skin)
History of trauma
Incontinence
Age >70 years
Intravenous drug use
Glucocorticoid use
History of a rapidly progressive neurologic deﬁcit
Examination
Unexplained fever
Unexplained weight loss
Percussion tenderness over the spine
Abdominal, rectal, or pelvic mass
Patrick’s sign or heel percussion sign
Straight leg or reverse straight leg–raising signs
Progressive focal neurologic deﬁcit
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
74
percussion over the spinous process of the affected 
vertebrae.
Forward bending is often limited by paraspinal mus-
cle spasm; the latter may flatten the usual lumbar lordo-
sis. Flexion at the hips is normal in patients with lumbar 
spine disease, but flexion of the lumbar spine is limited 
and sometimes painful. Lateral bending to the side 
opposite the injured spinal element may stretch the 
damaged tissues, worsen pain, and limit motion. Hyper-
extension of the spine (with the patient prone or stand-
ing) is limited when nerve root compression, facet joint 
pathology, or other bony spine disease is present.
Pain from hip disease may mimic the pain of lumbar 
spine disease. Hip pain can be reproduced by internal and 
external rotation at the hip with the knee and hip in flexion 
(Patrick’s sign) and by tapping the heel with the examiner’s 
palm while the leg is extended (heel percussion sign).
With the patient supine, passive flexion of the 
extended leg at the hip stretches the L5 and S1 nerve 
roots and the sciatic nerve (straight leg–raising maneu-
ver). Passive dorsiflexion of the foot during the maneu-
ver adds to the stretch. While flexion to at least 80° is 
normally possible without causing pain, many patients 
normally report a tight, stretching sensation in the ham-
string muscles unrelated to back pain. The straight leg–
raising (SLR) test is positive if the maneuver reproduces 
the patient’s usual back or limb pain. Eliciting the SLR 
sign in the sitting position can help determine if the 
finding is reproducible. The patient may describe pain 
in the low back, buttocks, posterior thigh, or lower leg, 
TABLE 9-2
LUMBOSACRAL RADICULOPATHY—NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
LUMBOSACRAL 
NERVE ROOTS
EXAMINATION FINDINGS
REFLEX
SENSORY
MOTOR
PAIN DISTRIBUTION
L2a
—
Upper anterior thigh
Psoas (hip ﬂexion)
Anterior thigh
L3a
—
Lower anterior thigh
Anterior knee
Psoas (hip ﬂexion)
Quadriceps (knee extension)
Thigh adduction
Anterior thigh, knee
L4a
Quadriceps (knee)
Medial calf
Quadriceps (knee extension)b
Thigh adduction
Tibialis anterior (foot dorsiﬂexion)
Knee, medial calf
Anterolateral thigh
L5c
—
Dorsal surface—foot
Lateral calf
Peroneii (foot eversion)b
Tibialis anterior (foot dorsiﬂexion)
Gluteus medius (hip abduction)
Toe dorsiﬂexors
Lateral calf, dorsal foot, 
posterolateral thigh, but-
tocks
S1c
Gastrocnemius/
soleus (ankle)
Plantar surface—foot
Lateral aspect—foot
Gastrocnemius/soleus (foot plan-
tar ﬂexion)b
Abductor hallucis (toe ﬂexors)b
Gluteus maximus (hip extension)
Bottom foot, posterior calf, 
posterior thigh, buttocks
aReverse straight leg–raising sign present—see “Examination of the Back.”
bThese muscles receive the majority of innervation from this root.
cStraight leg–raising sign present—see “Examination of the Back.”
but the key feature is reproduction of the patient’s usual 
pain. The crossed SLR sign is positive when flexion of one 
leg reproduces the usual pain in the opposite leg or but-
tocks. The crossed SLR sign is less sensitive but more 
specific for disk herniation than the SLR sign. The nerve 
or nerve root lesion is always on the side of the pain. The 
reverse SLR sign is elicited by standing the patient next 
to the examination table and passively extending each 
leg with the knee fully extended. This maneuver, which 
stretches the L2-L4 nerve roots, lumbosacral plexus, 
and femoral nerve, is considered positive if the patient’s 
usual back or limb pain is reproduced.
The neurologic examination includes a search for 
focal weakness or muscle atrophy, focal reflex changes, 
diminished sensation in the legs, or signs of spinal cord 
injury. The examiner should be alert to the possibility of 
breakaway weakness, defined as fluctuating strength 
during muscle testing. Breakaway weakness may be due 
to pain or a combination of pain and underlying true 
weakness. Breakaway weakness without pain is almost 
always due to a lack of effort. In uncertain cases, elec-
tromyography (EMG) can determine whether or not true 
weakness due to nerve tissue injury is present. Findings 
with specific nerve lumbosacral nerve root lesions are 
shown in Table 9-2 and are discussed next.
LABORATORY, IMAGING, AND EMG STUD-
IES Routine laboratory studies are rarely needed for 
the initial evaluation of nonspecific acute (<3 months 
duration) low back pain (ALBP). If risk factors for a serious 
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
75
underlying cause are present (Table 9-1), then laboratory 
studies (complete blood count [CBC], erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate [ESR], urinalysis) are indicated.
CT scanning is superior to routine x-rays for the 
detection of fractures involving posterior spine struc-
tures, craniocervical and craniothoracic junctions, C1 
and C2 vertebrae, bone fragments within the spinal 
canal, or misalignment; CT scans are increasingly used 
as a primary screening modality for moderate to severe 
trauma. In the absence of risk factors, these imaging 
studies are rarely helpful in nonspecific ALBP. MRI and 
CT-myelography are the radiologic tests of choice for 
evaluation of most serious diseases involving the spine. 
MRI is superior for the definition of soft tissue structures, 
whereas CT-myelography provides optimal imaging of 
the lateral recess of the spinal canal, and is better toler-
ated by claustrophobic patients. While the added diag-
nostic value of modern neuroimaging is significant, 
there is concern that these studies may be overutilized 
in patients with benign ALBP.
Electrodiagnostic studies can be used to assess the 
functional integrity of the peripheral nervous system 
(Chap. 5). Sensory nerve conduction studies are normal 
when focal sensory loss is due to nerve root damage 
because the nerve roots are proximal to the nerve cell 
bodies in the dorsal root ganglia. Injury to nerve tissue 
distal to the dorsal root ganglion (e.g., plexus or periph-
eral nerve) results in reduced sensory nerve signals. 
Needle EMG complements nerve conduction studies 
by detecting denervation or reinnervation changes in 
a myotomal (segmental) distribution. Multiple muscles 
supplied by different nerve roots and nerves are sam-
pled; the pattern of muscle involvement indicates the 
nerve root(s) responsible for the injury. Needle EMG 
provides objective information about motor nerve fiber 
injury when clinical evaluation of weakness is limited by 
pain or poor effort. EMG and nerve conduction studies 
will be normal when sensory nerve root injury or irrita-
tion is the source of the pain.
TABLE 9-3
CAUSES OF BACK OR NECK PAIN
Congenital/Developmental
Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis
Kyphoscoliosis
Spina biﬁda occulta
Tethered spinal cord
Minor Trauma
Strain or sprain
Whiplash injury
Fractures
Trauma—falls, motor vehicle accidents
Atraumatic fractures—osteoporosis, neoplastic inﬁltration, 
exogenous steroids, osteomyelitis
Intervertebral Disk Herniation
Degenerative
 Intervertebral foraminal narrowing
 Disk-osteophyte complex
 Internal disk disruption
 LSS with neurogenic claudication
 Uncovertebral joint disease
 Atlantoaxial joint disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis)
 Arthritis
 Spondylosis
 Facet or sacroiliac arthropathy
  Neoplasms—metastatic, hematologic, primary bone 
tumors
Infection/Inﬂammation
 Vertebral osteomyelitis
 Spinal epidural abscess
 Septic disk (diskitis)
 Meningitis
 Lumbar arachnoiditis
  Autoimmune (e.g., ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthri-
tis [formerly known as Reiter’s syndrome])
Metabolic
 Osteoporosis—hyperparathyroidism, immobility
 Osteosclerosis (e.g., Paget’s disease)
Vascular
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm
 Vertebral artery dissection
Other
 Referred pain from visceral disease
 Postural
 Psychiatric, malingering, chronic pain syndromes
CAUSES OF BACK PAIN
(Table 9-3)
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES OF THE LUMBAR 
SPINE
Spondylolysis is a bony defect in the vertebral pars inter-
articularis (a segment near the junction of the pedicle 
with the lamina); the cause is usually a stress microfrac-
ture in a congenitally abnormal segment. It occurs in 
up to 6% of adolescents. The defect (usually bilateral) 
is best visualized on plain x-rays, CT scan, or bone scan 
and is frequently asymptomatic. Symptoms may occur 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
76
in the setting of a single injury, repeated minor injuries, 
or growth. Spondylolysis is the most common cause of 
persistent low back pain in adolescents and is often asso-
ciated with sports-related activities.
Spondylolisthesis is the anterior slippage of the vertebral 
body, pedicles, and superior articular facets, leaving the 
posterior elements behind. Spondylolisthesis can be associ-
ated with spondylolysis, congenital anomalies, degenerative 
spine disease, or other causes of mechanical weakness of 
the pars (e.g., infection, osteoporosis, tumor, trauma, prior 
surgery). The slippage may be asymptomatic or may cause 
low back pain and hamstring tightness, nerve root injury 
(the L5 root most frequently), symptomatic spinal stenosis, 
or cauda equina syndrome (CES) in severe cases. Tender-
ness may be elicited near the segment that has “slipped” 
forward (most often L4 on L5 or occasionally L5 on S1). 
A “step” may be present on deep palpation of the poste-
rior elements of the segment above the spondylolisthetic 
joint. The trunk may be shortened and the abdomen pro-
tuberant as a result. Anterolisthesis or retrolisthesis can also 
occur at other cervical or lumbar levels in adults and be 
the source of neck or low back pain. Plain x-rays with the 
neck or low back in ﬂexion and extension will reveal the 
movement at the abnormal spinal segment. Surgery is con-
sidered for pain symptoms that do not respond to conser-
vative measures (e.g., rest, physical therapy), and in cases 
with progressive neurologic deﬁcit, postural deformity, 
slippage >50%, or scoliosis.
Spina biﬁda occulta is a failure of closure of one or sev-
eral vertebral arches posteriorly; the meninges and spinal 
cord are normal. A dimple or small lipoma may overlie 
the defect. Most cases are asymptomatic and discovered 
incidentally during an evaluation for back pain.
Tethered cord syndrome usually presents as a progressive 
cauda equina disorder (see later), although myelopa-
thy may also be the initial manifestation. The patient is 
often a young adult who complains of perineal or peri-
anal pain, sometimes following minor trauma. MRI 
studies reveal a low-lying conus (below L1-L2) and a 
short and thickened ﬁlum terminale.
TRAUMA
A patient complaining of back pain and an inability to 
move the legs may have a spinal fracture or dislocation, 
and, with fractures above L1, spinal cord compression. 
Care must be taken to avoid further damage to the spi-
nal cord or nerve roots by immobilizing the back pend-
ing the results of radiologic studies.
Sprains and strains
The terms low back sprain, strain, and mechanically induced 
muscle spasm refer to minor, self-limited injuries asso-
ciated with lifting a heavy object, a fall, or a sudden 
deceleration such as in an automobile accident. These 
terms are used loosely and do not clearly describe a spe-
ciﬁc anatomic lesion. The pain is usually conﬁned to 
the lower back, and there is no radiation to the buttocks 
or legs. Patients with paraspinal muscle spasm often 
assume unusual postures.
Traumatic vertebral fractures
Most traumatic fractures of the lumbar vertebral bod-
ies result from injuries producing anterior wedging or 
compression. With severe trauma, the patient may sus-
tain a fracture-dislocation or a “burst” fracture involv-
ing the vertebral body and posterior elements. Trau-
matic vertebral fractures are caused by falls from a 
height (a pars interarticularis fracture of the L5 vertebra 
is common), sudden deceleration in an automobile acci-
dent, or direct injury. Neurologic impairment is com-
mon, and early surgical treatment is indicated. In vic-
tims of blunt trauma, CT scans of the chest, abdomen, 
or pelvis can be reformatted to detect associated verte-
bral fractures.
LUMBAR DISK DISEASE
This is a common cause of chronic or recurrent low 
back and leg pain (Figs. 9-3 and 9-4). Disk disease is 
most likely to occur at the L4-L5 or L5-S1 levels, but 
upper lumbar levels are involved occasionally. The 
cause is often unknown; the risk is increased in over-
weight individuals. Disk herniation is unusual prior 
to age 20 years and is rare in the ﬁbrotic disks of the 
elderly. Genetic factors may play a role in predisposing 
some patients to disk disease. The pain may be located 
in the low back only or referred to a leg, buttock, or 
hip. A sneeze, cough, or trivial movement may cause 
the nucleus pulposus to prolapse, pushing the frayed and 
weakened annulus posteriorly. With severe disk disease, 
the nucleus may protrude through the annulus (hernia-
tion) or become extruded to lie as a free fragment in the 
spinal canal.
The mechanism by which intervertebral disk injury 
causes back pain is controversial. The inner annulus 
ﬁbrosus and nucleus pulposus are normally devoid of 
innervation. Inﬂammation and production of proin-
ﬂammatory cytokines within the protruding or ruptured 
disk may trigger or perpetuate back pain. Ingrowth of 
nociceptive (pain) nerve ﬁbers into inner portions of 
a diseased disk may be responsible for chronic “disk-
ogenic” pain. Nerve root injury (radiculopathy) from 
disk herniation may be due to compression, inﬂamma-
tion, or both; pathologically, demyelination and axonal 
loss are usually present.
A ruptured disk may be asymptomatic or cause back 
pain, abnormal posture, limitation of spine motion 
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
77
Herniated L4 disc
Herniated L4 disc
A
B
Compressed
Thecal Sac
Compressed
L5 root
Compressed
Thecal Sac
Compressed
L5 root
(particularly ﬂexion), a focal neurologic deﬁcit, or 
radicular pain. A dermatomal pattern of sensory loss or 
a reduced or absent deep tendon reﬂex is more sugges-
tive of a speciﬁc root lesion than is the pattern of pain. 
Motor ﬁndings (focal weakness, muscle atrophy, or fas-
ciculations) occur less frequently than focal sensory or 
reﬂex changes. Symptoms and signs are usually unilat-
eral, but bilateral involvement does occur with large 
central disk herniations that compress multiple roots 
or cause inﬂammation of nerve roots within the spi-
nal canal. Clinical manifestations of speciﬁc nerve root 
lesions are summarized in Table 9-2. There is suggestive 
evidence that lumbar disk herniation with a nonprogres-
sive nerve root deﬁcit can be managed nonsurgically.
The differential diagnosis covers a variety of seri-
ous and treatable conditions, including epidural abscess, 
hematoma, fracture, or tumor. Fever, constant pain 
uninﬂuenced by position, sphincter abnormalities, or 
signs of spinal cord disease suggest an etiology other 
than lumbar disk disease. Absence of ankle reﬂexes can 
be a normal ﬁnding in persons older than age 60 years 
or a sign of bilateral S1 radiculopathy. An absent deep 
tendon reﬂex or focal sensory loss may indicate injury 
to a nerve root, but other sites of injury along the nerve 
must also be considered. For example, an absent knee 
reﬂex may be due to a femoral neuropathy or an L4 
nerve root injury. A loss of sensation over the foot and 
lateral lower calf may result from a peroneal or lateral 
sciatic neuropathy or an L5 nerve root injury. Focal 
muscle atrophy may reﬂect a nerve root, peripheral 
nerve, anterior horn cell disease, or disuse.
A lumbar spine MRI scan or CT-myelogram is neces-
sary to establish the location and type of pathology. Spine 
MRIs yield exquisite views of intraspinal and adjacent 
soft tissue anatomy. Bony lesions of the lateral recess or 
intervertebral foramen are optimally visualized by CT-
myelography. The correlation of neuroradiologic ﬁndings 
to symptoms, particularly pain, is not simple. Contrast-
enhancing tears in the annulus ﬁbrosus or disk protru-
sions are widely accepted as common sources of back 
pain; however, studies have found that many asymp-
tomatic adults have similar ﬁndings. Asymptomatic disk 
protrusions are also common and may enhance with 
contrast. Furthermore, in patients with known disk herniation 
treated either medically or surgically, persistence of the hernia-
tion 10 years later had no relationship to the clinical outcome. 
In summary, MRI ﬁndings of disk protrusion, tears in the 
annulus ﬁbrosus, or contrast enhancement are common 
incidental ﬁndings that, by themselves, should not dictate 
management decisions for patients with back pain.
The diagnosis of nerve root injury is most secure 
when the history, examination, results of imaging 
studies, and the EMG are concordant. The correla-
tion between CT and EMG for localization of nerve 
root injury is between 65 and 73%. Up to one-third 
of asymptomatic adults have a lumbar disk protrusion 
detected by CT or MRI scans.
Management of lumbar disk disease is discussed later 
in the chapter.
Cauda equina syndrome (CES) signiﬁes an injury 
of multiple lumbosacral nerve roots within the spi-
nal canal distal to the termination of the spinal cord 
at L1-2. Low back pain, weakness and areﬂexia in 
the legs, saddle anesthesia, or loss of bladder func-
tion may occur. The problem must be distinguished-
from disorders of the lower spinal cord (conus medul-
laris syndrome), acute transverse myelitis (Chap. 35), 
and Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 46). Combi-
ned involvement of the conus medullaris and cauda 
equina can occur. CES is commonly due to a ruptured 
FIGURE 9-4 
Left L5 radiculopathy. A. Sagittal T2-weighted image on 
the left reveals disk herniation at the L4-L5 level. B. Axial 
T1-weighted image shows paracentral disk herniation with 
displacement of the thecal sac medially and the left L5 nerve 
root posteriorly in the left lateral recess.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
78
lumbosacral intervertebral disk, lumbosacral spine frac-
ture, hematoma within the spinal canal (e.g., follow-
ing lumbar puncture in patients with coagulopathy), 
compressive tumor, or other mass lesion. Treatment 
options include surgical decompression, sometimes 
urgently, in an attempt to restore or preserve motor 
or sphincter function, or radiotherapy for metastatic 
tumors (Chap. 37).
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) describes a narrowed lum-
bar spinal canal and is frequently asymptomatic. Neuro-
genic claudication is the usual symptom, consisting of back 
and buttock or leg pain induced by walking or standing 
and relieved by sitting. Symptoms in the legs are usu-
ally bilateral. Lumbar stenosis, by itself, is frequently 
asymptomatic, and the correlation between the severity 
of symptoms and degree of stenosis of the spinal canal is 
poor. Unlike vascular claudication, symptoms are often 
provoked by standing without walking. Unlike lum-
bar disk disease, symptoms are usually relieved by sit-
ting. Patients with neurogenic claudication can often 
walk much farther when leaning over a shopping cart 
and can pedal a stationary bike while sitting with ease. 
These ﬂexed positions increase the anteroposterior spi-
nal canal diameter and reduce intraspinal venous hyper-
tension, resulting in pain relief. Focal weakness, sensory 
loss, or reﬂex changes may occur when spinal stenosis is 
associated with neural foraminal narrowing and radicu-
lopathy. Severe neurologic deﬁcits, including paralysis 
and urinary incontinence, occur only rarely.
LSS can be acquired (75%), congenital, or due to a 
combination of these factors. Congenital forms (achon-
droplasia, idiopathic) are characterized by short, thick 
pedicles that produce both spinal canal and lateral recess 
stenosis. Acquired factors that contribute to spinal ste-
nosis include degenerative diseases (spondylosis, spondy-
lolisthesis, scoliosis), trauma, spine surgery, metabolic or 
endocrine disorders (epidural lipomatosis, osteoporosis, 
acromegaly, renal osteodystrophy, hypoparathyroidism), 
and Paget’s disease. MRI provides the best deﬁnition of 
the abnormal anatomy (Fig. 9-5).
Conservative treatment of symptomatic LSS includes 
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acet-
aminophen, exercise programs, and symptomatic treat-
ment of acute pain episodes. There is insufﬁcient evi-
dence to support the use of epidural glucocorticoid 
injections. Surgical therapy is considered when medical 
therapy does not relieve symptoms sufﬁciently to allow 
for activities of daily living or when signiﬁcant focal 
neurologic signs are present. Most patients with neu-
rogenic claudication treated surgically experience sig-
niﬁcant relief of back and leg pain within 6 weeks post-
operation, and pain relief persists for at least 2 years. 
Patients treated nonoperatively improve uncommonly. 
Up to one-quarter develop recurrent stenosis at the 
same spinal level or an adjacent level 7–10 years after 
the initial surgery; recurrent symptoms usually respond 
to a second surgical decompression.
Neural foraminal narrowing with radiculopathy is a com-
mon degenerative disorder most often caused by the 
same processes that cause lumbar spinal stenosis (Figs. 
9-1 and 9-6), including osteophytes, lateral disk protru-
sion, calciﬁed disk-osteophytes, facet joint hypertrophy, 
uncovertebral joint hypertrophy (cervical spine), congen-
itally shortened pedicles, or, frequently, a combination 
of these processes. Neoplasms (primary or metastatic), 
fractures, infections (epidural abscess), or hematomas are 
other considerations. These conditions can produce uni-
lateral nerve root symptoms or signs due to bony com-
pression at the intervertebral foramen or lateral recess; 
Normal
Thecal sac
Normal
Nerve roots
Compressed Thecal sac
Facet joints
A
B
FIGURE 9-5 
Axial T2-weighted images of the lumbar spine. A. The image 
shows a normal thecal sac within the lumbar spinal canal. The 
thecal sac is bright. The lumbar roots are dark punctuate dots 
in the posterior thecal sac with the patient supine. B. The thecal 
sac is not well visualized due to severe lumbar spinal canal ste-
nosis, partially the result of hypertrophic facet joints.
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
79
symptoms are indistinguishable from disk-related radicu-
lopathy, but treatment may differ depending upon the 
speciﬁc etiology. The history and neurologic examina-
tion alone cannot distinguish between these possibili-
ties, and a spinal neuroimaging (CT or MRI) procedure 
is required to identify the underlying cause. Neurologic 
ﬁndings from the examination and EMG can help direct 
the attention of the radiologist to speciﬁc nerve or root 
structures that are best visualized on axial images. For facet 
joint hypertrophy, surgical foraminotomy produces long-
term relief of leg and back pain in 80–90% of patients. 
The usefulness of therapeutic facet joint blocks for pain 
has not been rigorously studied.
ARTHRITIS
Spondylosis, or osteoarthritic spine disease, typically 
occurs in later life and primarily involves the cervi-
cal and lumbosacral spine. Patients often complain of 
back pain that increases with movement and is associ-
ated with stiffness. The relationship between clinical 
symptoms and radiologic ﬁndings is usually not straight-
forward. Pain may be prominent when x-ray, CT, or 
MRI ﬁndings are minimal, and prominent degenera-
tive spine disease can be seen in asymptomatic patients. 
Osteophytes or combined disk-osteophytes may cause 
or contribute to central spinal canal stenosis, lateral 
recess stenosis, or neural foraminal narrowing.
Ankylosing spondylitis
This distinctive arthritic spine disease typically pres-
ents with the insidious onset of low back and buttock 
pain. Patients are often males below age 40. Associ-
ated features include morning back stiffness, nocturnal 
pain, pain unrelieved by rest, an elevated ESR, and 
the histocompatibility antigen HLA-B27. Onset at a 
young age and back pain improving with exercise are 
characteristic. Loss of the normal lumbar lordosis and 
exaggeration of thoracic kyphosis develop as the dis-
ease progresses. Inﬂammation and erosion of the outer 
ﬁbers of the annulus ﬁbrosus at the point of contact 
with the vertebral body are followed by ossiﬁcation 
and bony growth that bridges adjacent vertebral bodies 
and reduces spine mobility in all planes. MRI has been 
used to assess the presence of inﬂammation in joints as 
well as response to treatment and is more sensitive than 
plain x-rays. In later stages, plain x-rays reveal bridg-
ing of vertebral bodies to produce the fused “bamboo 
spine.”
Stress fractures after minimal or no trauma can occur 
through the spontaneously ankylosed posterior bony 
elements of the rigid, osteoporotic spine and can pro-
duce focal pain, spinal instability, spinal cord compres-
sion, or CES. Atlantoaxial subluxation with spinal cord 
compression can occur in up to 20% of patients over 
time. Ankylosis of the ribs to the spine and a decrease 
in the height of the thoracic spine may compromise 
respiratory function. Therapy with anti–tumor necrosis 
factor agents is effective in reducing disease activity and 
improving function. Similar to ankylosing spondylitis, 
restricted movements may accompany reactive arthritis 
(formerly known as Reiter’s syndrome), psoriatic arthri-
tis, and chronic inﬂammatory bowel disease.
NEOPLASMS
Back pain is the most common neurologic symptom 
in patients with systemic cancer and is the present-
ing symptom in 20%. The cause is usually vertebral 
body metastasis but can also result from spread of can-
cer through the intervertebral foramen (especially with 
lymphoma) or from carcinomatous meningitis. Cancer-
related back pain tends to be constant, dull, unrelieved 
by rest, and worse at night. By contrast, mechanical low 
back pain usually improves with rest. MRI, CT, and 
CT-myelography are the studies of choice when spi-
nal metastasis is suspected. Once a metastasis is found, 
imaging of the entire spine reveals additional tumor 
deposits in one-third of patients. MRI is preferred for 
soft tissue deﬁnition, but the most rapidly available 
imaging modality is best because the patient’s condi-
tion may worsen quickly without intervention. Fewer 
than 5% of patients who are nonambulatory at the time 
of diagnosis ever regain the ability to walk; thus, early 
Uncinate hypertophy
Compressed C7 root
C6-C7 disc bulge
Sagittal T2 cervical spine
A
B
FIGURE 9-6 
Right C7 radiculopathy. A. Sagittal T2-weighted image 
shows mild disk bulging at C6-C7 and a mildly narrowed 
spinal canal, but no visible nerve root compression. B. Axial 
T2-weighted image. The combination of uncinate hypertro-
phy and facet hypertrophy (ovoid dark space just lateral to 
the C7 root) narrows the right C6-C7 intervertebral foramen 
resulting in right C7 nerve root compression.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
80
diagnosis is crucial. The management of spinal metasta-
sis is discussed in detail in Chap. 37.
INFECTIONS/INFLAMMATION
Vertebral osteomyelitis is often caused by staphylococci, 
but other bacteria or tuberculosis (Pott’s disease) may 
be responsible. The primary source of infection is usu-
ally the urinary tract, skin, or lungs. Intravenous drug 
use is a well-recognized risk factor. Whenever pyogenic 
osteomyelitis is found, the possibility of bacterial endo-
carditis should be considered. Back pain unrelieved by 
rest, spine tenderness over the involved spine segment, 
and an elevated ESR are the most common ﬁndings 
in vertebral osteomyelitis. Fever or an elevated white 
blood cell count is found in a minority of patients. MRI 
and CT are sensitive and speciﬁc for early detection 
of osteomyelitis; CT may be more readily available in 
emergency settings and better tolerated by some patients 
with severe back pain. The intervertebral disk can also 
be affected by infection (diskitis), and very rarely by 
tumor.
Spinal epidural abscess (Chap. 35) presents with back 
pain (aggravated by movement or palpation), fever, 
radiculopathy, or signs of spinal cord compression. The 
subacute development of two or more of these ﬁndings 
should increase the index of suspicion for spinal epidu-
ral abscess. The abscess may track over multiple spinal 
levels and is best delineated by spine MRI.
Lumbar adhesive arachnoiditis with radiculopathy is 
due to ﬁbrosis following inﬂammation within the sub-
arachnoid space. The ﬁbrosis results in nerve root adhe-
sions, and presents as back and leg pain associated with 
motor, sensory, or reﬂex changes. Causes of arach-
noiditis include multiple lumbar operations, chronic 
spinal infections (especially tuberculosis in the develop-
ing world), spinal cord injury, intrathecal hemorrhage, 
myelography (rare), intrathecal injections (glucocorti-
coids, anesthetics, or other agents), and foreign bodies. 
The MRI shows clumped nerve roots or loculations 
of cerebrospinal ﬂuid within the thecal sac. Clumped 
nerve roots may also occur with demyelinating poly-
neuropathy or neoplastic inﬁltration. Treatment is usu-
ally unsatisfactory. Microsurgical lysis of adhesions, dor-
sal rhizotomy, dorsal root ganglionectomy, and epidural 
steroids have been tried, but outcomes have been poor. 
Dorsal column stimulation for pain relief has produced 
varying results.
METABOLIC CAUSES
Osteoporosis and osteosclerosis
Immobilization or underlying conditions such as osteo-
malacia, the postmenopausal state, renal disease, mul-
tiple myeloma, hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, 
metastatic carcinoma, or glucocorticoid use may accel-
erate osteoporosis and weaken the vertebral body, lead-
ing to compression fractures and pain. Up to two-thirds 
of compression fractures seen on radiologic imaging are 
asymptomatic. The most common nontraumatic verte-
bral body fractures are due to postmenopausal or senile 
osteoporosis. The risk of an additional vertebral fracture 
at 1 year following a ﬁrst vertebral fracture is 20%. The 
presence of fever, weight loss, fracture at a level above 
T4, or other conditions described above should increase 
the suspicion for a cause other than senile osteoporosis. 
If tumor is suspected, a bone biopsy or diagnostic search 
for a primary tumor is indicated. The sole manifestation 
of a compression fracture may be localized back pain 
or radicular pain exacerbated by movement and often 
reproduced by palpation over the spinous process of the 
affected vertebra. The clinical context, neurologic signs, 
and radiologic appearance of the spine establish the 
diagnosis.
Relief of acute pain can often be achieved with 
acetaminophen or a combination of opioids and acet-
aminophen. The role of NSAIDs is controversial. 
Both pain and disability are improved with bracing. 
Antiresorptive drugs, especially bisphosphonates (e.g., 
alendronate), have been shown to reduce the risk of 
osteoporotic fractures and are the preferred treatment 
to prevent additional fractures. Less than one-third 
of patients with prior compression fractures are ade-
quately treated for osteoporosis despite the increased 
risk for future fractures; even fewer at-risk patients 
without a history of fracture are adequately treated. 
Interventions (percutaneous vertebroplasty [PVP], 
kyphoplasty) exist for osteoporotic compression frac-
tures associated with debilitating pain. Controlled stud-
ies suggest a beneﬁt for pain reduction acutely, but not 
at 2 months, when compared with conservative care. 
Relief of pain following PVP has also been reported 
in patients with vertebral metastases, myeloma, or 
hemangiomas.
Osteosclerosis, an abnormally increased bone den-
sity often due to Paget’s disease, is readily identiﬁable 
on routine x-ray studies and can sometimes be a source 
of back pain. It may be associated with an isolated 
increase in alkaline phosphatase in an otherwise healthy 
older person. Spinal cord or nerve root compression 
can result from bony encroachment. It should not be 
assumed that Paget’s disease is the cause of a patient’s 
back pain until other etiologies have been carefully 
considered.
REFERRED PAIN FROM VISCERAL DISEASE
Diseases of the thorax, abdomen, or pelvis may refer 
pain to the posterior portion of the spinal segment that 
innervates the diseased organ. Occasionally, back pain 
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
81
may be the ﬁrst and only manifestation. Upper abdom-
inal diseases generally refer pain to the lower thoracic 
or upper lumbar region (eighth thoracic to the ﬁrst 
and second lumbar vertebrae), lower abdominal dis-
eases to the midlumbar region (second to fourth lum-
bar vertebrae), and pelvic diseases to the sacral region. 
Local signs (pain with spine palpation, paraspinal mus-
cle spasm) are absent, and little or no pain accompanies 
routine movements of the spine.
Low thoracic or lumbar pain with abdominal 
disease
Tumors of the posterior wall of the stomach or duo-
denum typically produce epigastric pain, but midline 
back or paraspinal pain may occur if retroperitoneal 
extension is present. Fatty foods occaionally induce 
back pain associated with biliary disease. Diseases 
of the pancreas can produce right paraspinal back 
pain (head of the pancreas involved) or left paraspi-
nal pain (body or tail involved). Pathology in retro-
peritoneal structures (hemorrhage, tumors, pyelone-
phritis) can produce paraspinal pain that radiates to 
the lower abdomen, groin, or anterior thighs. A mass 
in the iliopsoas region can produce unilateral lum-
bar pain with radiation toward the groin, labia, or 
testicle. The sudden appearance of lumbar pain in a 
patient receiving anticoagulants suggests retroperito-
neal hemorrhage.
Isolated low back pain occurs in some patients 
with a contained rupture of an abdominal aortic 
aneurysm (AAA). The classic clinical triad of abdomi-
nal pain, shock, and back pain occurs in <20% of 
patients. The typical patient at risk is an elderly male 
smoker with back pain. Frequently, the diagnosis is 
initially missed because the symptoms and signs can 
be nonspeciﬁc. Misdiagnoses include nonspeciﬁc back 
pain, diverticulitis, renal colic, sepsis, and myocardial 
infarction. A careful abdominal examination reveal-
ing a pulsatile mass (present in 50–75% of patients) is 
an important physical ﬁnding. Patients with suspected 
AAA should be evaluated with abdominal ultrasound, 
CT, or MRI.
Sacral pain with gynecologic and urologic 
disease
Pelvic organs rarely cause low back pain, except for 
gynecologic disorders involving the uterosacral liga-
ments. The pain is referred to the sacral region. Endo-
metriosis or uterine cancers may invade the uterosacral 
ligaments. Pain associated with endometriosis is typi-
cally premenstrual and often continues until it merges 
with menstrual pain. Uterine malposition may cause 
uterosacral ligament traction (retroversion, descensus, 
and prolapse) or produce sacral pain after prolonged 
standing.
Menstrual pain may be felt in the sacral region. 
Poorly localized, cramping pain can radiate down the 
legs. Pain due to neoplastic inﬁltration of nerves is typi-
cally continuous, progressive in severity, and unrelieved 
by rest at night. Less commonly, radiation therapy of 
pelvic tumors may produce sacral pain from late radia-
tion necrosis of tissue. Low back pain that radiates into 
one or both thighs is common in the last weeks of 
pregnancy.
Urologic sources of lumbosacral back pain include 
chronic prostatitis, prostate cancer with spinal metas-
tasis, and diseases of the kidney or ureter. Lesions 
of the bladder and testes do not often produce back 
pain. Infectious, inﬂammatory, or neoplastic renal dis-
eases may produce ipsilateral lumbosacral pain, as can 
renal artery or vein thrombosis. Paraspinal lumbar 
pain may be a symptom of ureteral obstruction due to 
nephrolithiasis.
OTHER CAUSES OF BACK PAIN
Postural back pain
There is a group of patients with nonspeciﬁc chronic 
low back pain (CLBP) in whom no speciﬁc anatomic 
lesion can be found despite exhaustive investigation. 
These individuals complain of vague, diffuse back pain 
with prolonged sitting or standing that is relieved by 
rest. Exercises to strengthen the paraspinal and abdomi-
nal muscles are sometimes helpful.
Psychiatric disease
CLBP may be encountered in patients who seek ﬁnan-
cial compensation; in malingerers; or in those with 
concurrent substance abuse. Many patients with CLBP 
have a history of psychiatric illness (depression, anxiety 
states), or childhood trauma (physical or sexual abuse) 
that antedates the onset of back pain. Preoperative psy-
chological assessment has been used to exclude patients 
with marked psychological impairments that predict a 
poor surgical outcome from spine surgery.
IDIOPATHIC
The cause of low back pain occasionally remains 
unclear. Some patients have had multiple operations for 
disk disease but have persistent pain and disability. The 
original indications for surgery may have been question-
able, with back pain only, no deﬁnite neurologic signs, 
or a minor disk bulge noted on CT or MRI. Scoring 
systems based upon neurologic signs, psychological 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
82
factors, physiologic studies, and imaging studies have 
been devised to minimize the likelihood of unsuccessful 
surgery.
TREATMENT 
Back Pain
ACUTE LOW BACK PAIN (ALBP) WITHOUT 
RADICULOPATHY ALBP is defined as pain of <3 
months’ duration. Full recovery can be expected in 85% 
of adults with ALBP without leg pain. Most have purely 
“mechanical” symptoms (i.e., pain that is aggravated by 
motion and relieved by rest).
The initial assessment excludes serious causes of 
spine pathology that require urgent intervention, 
including infection, cancer, or trauma. Risk factors for a 
serious cause of ALBP are shown in Table 9-1. Labora-
tory and imaging studies are unnecessary if risk factors 
are absent. CT or plain spine films are rarely indicated in 
the first month of symptoms unless a spine fracture is 
suspected.
The prognosis is generally excellent. Many patients 
do not seek medical care and apparently improve on 
their own. Even among those seen in primary care, two-
thirds report being substantially improved after seven 
weeks. This spontaneous improvement can mislead 
clinicians and researchers about the efficacy of treat-
ment interventions. Perhaps as a result, many ineffective 
treatments have become widespread in the past, such 
as bed rest, lumbar traction, sacroiliac fusion, and coc-
cygectomy.
Clinicians should reassure patients that improve-
ment is very likely, and instruct them in self-care. Edu-
cation is an important part of treatment. Satisfaction 
and the likelihood of follow-up increase when patients 
are educated about prognosis, treatment methods, 
activity modifications, and strategies to prevent future 
exacerbations. In one study, patients who felt they did 
not receive an adequate explanation for their symp-
toms wanted further diagnostic tests. In general, bed 
rest should be avoided, or kept to a day or two at most, 
for relief of severe symptoms. Several randomized trials 
suggest that bed rest does not accelerate the pace of 
recovery. In general, the best activity recommendation 
is for walking and early resumption of normal physical 
activity, avoiding only strenuous manual labor. Possible 
advantages of early ambulation for acute back pain 
include maintenance of cardiovascular conditioning, 
improved disk and cartilage nutrition, improved bone 
and muscle strength, and increased endorphin levels. 
Specific back exercises or early vigorous exercise have 
not shown benefits for acute back pain, but may be use-
ful for chronic pain. Application of heat by heating pads 
or heated blankets is sometimes helpful.
Evidence-based guidelines suggest that over-the-
counter medicines such as acetaminophen and NSAIDs 
are first-line options for the treatment of ALBP. Skeletal 
muscle relaxants, such as cyclobenzaprine or methocar-
bamol, may be useful, but sedation is a common side 
effect. Limiting the use of muscle relaxants to nighttime 
only may be an option for some patients. Because of the 
risk of abuse of some drugs in this category, including 
benzodiazepines and carisoprodol, short courses are 
generally recommended.
It is unclear whether opioid analgesics and trama-
dol are more effective than NSAIDs or acetaminophen 
for treating ALBP; most of the available efficacy data 
are for treatment of chronic back pain. Their use is best 
reserved for patients who cannot tolerate acetamino-
phen or NSAIDs, or for those with severe refractory pain. 
As with muscle relaxants, these drugs are often sedat-
ing, so it may be useful to prescribe them at nighttime 
only. Side effects of short-term opioid use include nau-
sea, constipation, and pruritis; risks of long-term opioid 
use include hypersensitivity to pain, hypogonadism, 
and dependency.
There is no evidence to support use of oral or 
injected glucocorticoids for acute low back pain without 
radiculopathy. Antiepileptic drugs, such as gabapentin, 
are not FDA approved for treating low back pain, and 
there is insufficient evidence to support their use in this 
setting.
Nonpharmacologic treatments for acute low back 
pain include spinal manipulation, physical therapy, 
massage, acupuncture, transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation, ultrasound, diathermy, and magnets. Spi-
nal manipulation appears to be roughly equivalent to 
conventional medical treatments and may be a useful 
alternative for patients who wish to avoid or who can-
not tolerate drug therapy. There is little evidence to sup-
port the use of physical therapy, massage, acupuncture, 
laser therapy, therapeutic ultrasound, magnets, corsets, 
or lumbar traction. Though important for chronic pain, 
back exercises for acute back pain are generally not sup-
ported by clinical evidence. There is no useful evidence 
regarding the value of ice or heat applications for ALBP; 
many patients report temporary symptomatic relief 
from ice, and heat may produce a short-term reduction 
in pain after the first week.
CHRONIC 
LOW 
BACK 
PAIN 
WITHOUT 
RADICULOPATHY Chronic low back pain is 
defined as pain lasting >12 weeks; it accounts for 50% of 
total back pain costs. Risk factors include obesity, female 
gender, older age, prior history of back pain, restricted 
spinal mobility, pain radiating into a leg, high levels of 
psychological distress, poor self-rated health, minimal 
physical activity, smoking, job dissatisfaction, and wide-
spread pain. In general, the same treatments that are 
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
83
recommended for acute low back pain can be useful for 
patients with chronic low back pain. In this setting, how-
ever, the benefit of opioid therapy or muscle relaxants is 
less clear.
Evidence supports the use of exercise therapy, 
and this can be one of the mainstays of treatment for 
chronic back pain. Effective regimens have generally 
included a combination of gradually increasing aerobic 
exercise, strengthening exercises, and stretching exer-
cises. Motivating patients is sometimes challenging, and 
supervised exercise is best, for example, with a support-
ive physical therapist. In general, activity tolerance is 
the primary goal, while pain relief is secondary. Exercise 
programs can reverse atrophy in paraspinal muscles and 
strengthen extensors of the trunk. Supervised inten-
sive physical exercise or “work hardening” regimens 
have been effective in returning some patients to work, 
improving walking distance, and reducing pain. In addi-
tion, some forms of yoga have been evaluated in ran-
domized trials and may be helpful for patients who are 
interested.
Medications for chronic low back pain may include 
acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and tricyclic antidepres-
sants. Trials of the latter suggest some benefit even for 
patients without evidence of depression. Trials do not 
support the efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors for back pain. However, depression is com-
mon among patients with chronic pain and should be 
appropriately treated.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy is based on evidence 
that psychological and social factors, as well as somatic 
pathology, are important in the genesis of chronic pain 
and disability. The patient’s attitudes and beliefs, psy-
chological distress, and patterns of illness behavior may 
all influence responses to chronic pain. Thus, in addi-
tion to addressing pathophysiologic mechanisms, psy-
chological treatments are aimed at reducing disability 
by modifying cognitive processes and environmental 
contingencies. Cognitive-behavioral therapy includes 
efforts to identify and modify patients’ thinking about 
their pain and disability by strategies that may involve 
imagery, attention diversion, or modifying maladaptive 
thoughts, feelings, and beliefs. This approach includes 
educating patients about a multidimensional view of 
pain, identifying pain-eliciting or pain-aggravating 
thoughts and feelings, using coping strategies and 
relaxation techniques, and even hypnosis. A systematic 
review concluded that such treatments are more effec-
tive than a waiting list control group for short-term pain 
relief; however, long-term results remain unclear. Behav-
ioral treatments may have effects similar in magnitude 
to exercise therapy.
Back pain is the most common reason for seeking 
complementary and alternative treatments. The most 
common of these for back pain are spinal manipulation, 
acupuncture, and massage. The role of complementary 
and alternative medicine approaches, aside from spi-
nal manipulation, remains unclear. Biofeedback has not 
been studied rigorously. As with acute back pain, spinal 
manipulation may on average offer benefits similar to 
conventional care. Rigorous recent trials of acupunc-
ture suggest that true acupuncture is not superior to 
sham acupuncture, but that both may offer an advan-
tage over routine care. Whether this is due entirely to 
placebo effects or to stimulation provided even by sham 
acupuncture is uncertain. Some trials of massage ther-
apy have been encouraging, but this has been less well 
studied than manipulation or acupuncture.
Studies of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimula-
tion (TENS) have reached conflicting conclusions, but a 
recent evidence-based guideline suggested that there 
was no convincing evidence for its efficacy in treating 
chronic back pain.
Various injections, including epidural glucocorti-
coid injections, facet joint injections, and trigger point 
injections, have been used for treating chronic low back 
pain. However, in the absence of radiculopathy, there 
is no evidence that epidural glucocorticoids are effec-
tive for treating chronic back pain. Several randomized 
trials suggest that facet joint injections are not more 
effective than saline injections, and recent evidence-
based guidelines recommend against their use. Simi-
larly, there is little evidence to support the use of trigger 
point injections. Injection studies are sometimes used 
diagnostically to help determine the anatomic source 
of back pain. Reproduction of the patient’s typical pain 
with discography has been used as evidence that a 
specific disk is the pain generator. Pain relief following 
a foraminal nerve root block or glucocorticoid injection 
into a facet has been similarly used as evidence that the 
facet joint or nerve root is the source. However, the pos-
sibility that the injection response was a placebo effect 
or due to systemic absorption of the glucocorticoids is 
often not excluded.
Another category of intervention for chronic back 
pain includes electrothermal and radiofrequency thera-
pies. Intradiskal therapy has been proposed using both 
types of energy to thermocoagulate and destroy nerves 
in the intervertebral disk, using specially designed cath-
eters or electrodes. A systematic review has suggested 
that current evidence does not support the use of these 
intradiskal therapies.
Radiofrequency denervation is sometimes used to 
destroy nerves that are thought to mediate pain, and 
this technique has been used for facet joint pain (with 
the target nerve being the medial branch of the primary 
dorsal ramus), for back pain thought to arise from the 
intervertebral disk (ramus communicans), and radicular 
back pain (dorsal root ganglia). A few small trials have 
resulted in conflicting results for facet joint pain. The 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
84
evidence for presumed diskogenic pain and for radicu-
lar pain is similarly meager. A trial for patients with 
chronic radicular pain found no difference between 
radiofrequency denervation of the dorsal root ganglia 
and sham treatment. Recent systematic reviews have 
thus concluded that there is insufficient evidence to reli-
ably evaluate these interventional therapies.
Surgical intervention for chronic low back pain in the 
absence of radiculopathy has been evaluated in a small 
number of randomized trials, all conducted in Europe. 
Each of these studies included patients with back pain 
and a degenerative disk, but no sciatica. Three of the 
four trials concluded that lumbar fusion surgery was no 
more effective than highly structured, rigorous rehabili-
tation combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy. The 
fourth trial found an advantage of fusion surgery over 
haphazard “usual care,” which appeared to be less effec-
tive than the structured rehabilitation in other trials. 
Given conflicting evidence, indications for surgery for 
chronic back pain alone have remained controversial. 
Both U.S. and British guidelines suggest considering 
referral for an opinion on spinal fusion for people who 
have completed an optimal nonsurgical treatment pro-
gram (including combined physical and psychological 
treatment) and who have persistent severe back pain for 
which they would consider surgery.
The newest surgical treatment for degenerated disks 
with back pain is disk replacement with prosthetic disks. 
These are generally designed as metal plates with a 
polyethylene cushion sandwiched in between. The tri-
als that led to approval of these devices compared them 
to spine fusion, and concluded that the artificial disks 
were “not inferior.” Serious complications appeared to be 
somewhat more likely with the artificial disk. This treat-
ment remains controversial for low back pain.
Intensive multidisciplinary rehabilitation programs 
may involve daily or frequent care involving physical 
therapy, exercise, cognitive-behavioral therapy, a work-
place evaluation, and other interventions. For patients 
who have not responded to other interventions, such 
programs appear to offer some benefit. Systematic 
reviews suggest that the evidence is limited and effects 
are moderate.
Some observers have raised concern that chronic 
back pain may often be overtreated. The use of opioids, 
epidural glucocorticoid injections, facet joint injections, 
and surgical intervention has increased rapidly in the 
past decade, without corresponding population-level 
improvements in pain or functioning among patients 
with back pain. In each case, randomized trials provide 
only minimal support for these treatments in the set-
ting of chronic back pain without radiculopathy. For low 
back pain without radiculopathy, new British guidelines 
explicitly recommend against use of selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), any type of injection, 
TENS, lumbar supports, traction, radiofrequency facet 
joint denervation, intradiskal electrothermal therapy, or 
intradiskal radiofrequency thermocoagulation. Similarly, 
these treatments are not recommended in guidelines 
from the American College of Physicians and the Ameri-
can Pain Society. On the other hand, exercise therapy 
and treatment of depression appear to be underused.
LOW BACK PAIN WITH RADICULOPATHY A 
common cause of back pain with radiculopathy is a her-
niated disk with nerve root impingement, resulting in 
back pain with radiation down the leg. The prognosis 
for acute low back pain with radiculopathy due to disk 
herniation (sciatica) is generally favorable, with most 
patients demonstrating substantial improvement over a 
matter of months. Serial imaging studies suggest spon-
taneous regression of the herniated portion of the disk 
in two-thirds of patients over 6 months. Nonetheless, 
there are several important treatment options for pro-
viding symptom relief while this natural healing process 
unfolds.
Resumption of normal activity as much as possible 
is usually the best activity recommendation. Random-
ized trial evidence suggests that bed rest is ineffective 
for treating sciatica as well as for back pain alone. Acet-
aminophen and NSAIDs are appropriate for pain relief, 
although severe pain may require short courses of opi-
oid analgesics.
Epidural glucocorticoid injections have a role in pro-
viding temporary symptom relief for sciatica due to a 
herniated disk. Although randomized trial evidence is 
conflicting, there appears to be some overall short-term 
benefit for pain relief of sciatica. However, there does 
not appear to be a benefit in terms of reducing sub-
sequent surgical interventions. Diagnostic nerve root 
blocks have been advocated to determine if pain origi-
nates from a specific nerve root. However, improvement 
may result even when the nerve root is not responsible 
for the pain; this may occur as a placebo effect, from 
a pain-generating lesion located distally along the 
peripheral nerve, or from anesthesia of the sinuverte-
bral nerve. The utility of diagnostic nerve root blocks 
remains a subject of debate.
Surgical intervention is indicated for patients who 
have progressive motor weakness, demonstrated on 
clinical examination or EMG, as a result of nerve root 
injury. Urgent surgery is recommended for patients who 
have evidence of the cauda equina syndrome or spinal 
cord compression, generally suggested by bowel or 
bladder dysfunction, diminished sensation in a saddle 
distribution, a sensory level, bilateral leg weakness, or 
bilateral leg spasticity.
Surgery is also an important option for patients who 
have disabling radicular pain despite optimal conserva-
tive treatment. Sciatica is perhaps the most common rea-
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
85
PAIN IN THE NECK AND SHOULDER
(Table 9-4) Neck pain, which usually arises from 
diseases of the cervical spine and soft tissues of the 
neck, is common. Neck pain arising from the cervical 
spine is typically precipitated by movement and may 
be accompanied by focal tenderness and limitation of 
motion. Pain arising from the brachial plexus, shoul-
der, or peripheral nerves can be confused with cervi-
cal spine disease, but the history and examination usu-
ally identify a more distal origin for the pain. Cervical 
spine trauma, disk disease, or spondylosis with inter-
vertebral foraminal narrowing may be asymptomatic 
or painful and can produce a myelopathy, radiculopa-
thy, or both. The same risk factors for a serious cause 
of low back pain are thought to apply to neck pain 
with the addition that neurologic signs of myelopa-
thy (incontinence, sensory level, spastic legs) may also 
occur. Lhermitte’s sign, an electrical shock down the 
spine with neck ﬂexion, suggests cervical spinal cord 
involvement from any cause.
son for recommending spine surgery. Because patients 
with a herniated disk and sciatica generally experience 
rapid improvement over a matter of weeks, most experts 
do not recommend considering surgery unless the 
patient has failed to respond to 6–8 weeks of appropri-
ate nonsurgical management. For patients who have not 
improved, randomized trials indicate that, compared to 
nonsurgical treatment, surgery results in more rapid pain 
relief. However, after the first year or two of follow-up, 
patients with sciatica appear to have much the same level 
of pain relief and functional improvement with or with-
out surgery. Thus, both treatment approaches are reason-
able, and patient preferences should play a major role 
in decision making. Some patients will want the fastest 
possible relief and find surgical risks acceptable. Others 
will be more risk-averse and more tolerant of symptoms, 
and will choose watchful waiting if they understand that 
improvement is likely in the end.
The usual surgical procedure is a partial hemilami-
nectomy with excision of the prolapsed disk. Fusion of 
the involved lumbar segments should be considered 
only if significant spinal instability is present (i.e., degen-
erative spondylolisthesis). The costs associated with 
lumbar interbody fusion have increased dramatically in 
recent years. There are no large prospective, random-
ized trials comparing fusion to other types of surgical 
intervention. In one study, patients with persistent low 
back pain despite an initial diskectomy fared no better 
with spine fusion than with a conservative regimen of 
cognitive intervention and exercise. Artificial disks have 
been in use in Europe for the past decade; their utility 
remains controversial in the United States.
TRAUMA TO THE CERVICAL SPINE
Trauma to the cervical spine (fractures, subluxation) 
places the spinal cord at risk for compression. Motor 
vehicle accidents, violent crimes, or falls account for 
87% of cervical spinal cord injuries (Chap. 35). Immedi-
ate immobilization of the neck is essential to minimize 
further spinal cord injury from movement of unstable 
cervical spine segments. The decision to obtain imag-
ing should be based upon the nature of the injury. The 
NEXUS low-risk criteria established that normally alert 
patients without palpation tenderness in the midline; 
intoxication; neurologic deﬁcits; and painful distracting 
injuries had a very low likelihood of a clinically signiﬁ-
cant traumatic injury to the cervical spine. The Cana-
dian C-spine rule recommends that imaging should be 
obtained following neck region trauma if the patient 
is >65 years old, has limb paresthesias, or a dangerous 
mechanism for the injury (e.g., bicycle collision with 
tree or parked car, fall from height >3 feet or 5 stairs, 
diving accident). A CT scan is the diagnostic procedure 
of choice for detection of acute fractures. When trau-
matic injury to the vertebral arteries or cervical spinal 
cord is suspected, visualization by MRI with MR angi-
ography is preferred.
Whiplash injury is due to rapid ﬂexion and extension 
of the neck, usually in automobile accidents, and causes 
cervical musculoligamental injury. This diagnosis should 
not be applied to patients with fractures, disk hernia-
tion, head injury, focal neurologic ﬁndings, or altered 
consciousness. Up to 50% of persons reporting whip-
lash injury acutely have persistent neck pain 1 year later. 
Once personal compensation for pain and suffering was 
removed from the Australian health care system, the 
prognosis for recovery at 1 year from whiplash injury 
improved also. Imaging of the cervical spine is not cost-
effective acutely but is useful to detect disk herniations 
when symptoms persist for >6 weeks following the 
injury. Severe initial symptoms have been associated 
with a poor long-term outcome.
CERVICAL DISK DISEASE
Herniation of a lower cervical disk is a common cause 
of neck, shoulder, arm, or hand pain or tingling. Neck 
pain, stiffness, and a range of motion limited by pain 
are the usual manifestations. A herniated cervical disk 
is responsible for ∼25% of cervical radiculopathies. 
Extension and lateral rotation of the neck narrows the 
ipsilateral intervertebral foramen and may reproduce 
radicular symptoms (Spurling’s sign). In young persons, 
acute nerve root compression from a ruptured cervical 
disk is often due to trauma. Cervical disk herniations are 
usually posterolateral near the lateral recess. The cervi-
cal nerve roots most commonly affected are C7 and C6. 
Typical patterns of reﬂex, sensory, and motor changes 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
86
that accompany speciﬁc cervical nerve root lesions are 
summarized in Table 9-4. While the classic patterns 
are clinically helpful, there are numerous exceptions 
because (1) there is overlap in function between adja-
cent nerve roots, (2) symptoms and signs may be evi-
dent in only part of the injured nerve root territory, and 
(3) the location of pain is the most variable of the clini-
cal features.
CERVICAL SPONDYLOSIS
Osteoarthritis of the cervical spine may produce neck 
pain that radiates into the back of the head, shoul-
ders, or arms, or may be the source of headaches in 
the posterior occipital region (supplied by the C2-C4 
nerve roots). Osteophytes, disk protrusions, or hyper-
trophic facet or uncovertebral joints may alone or in 
combination compress one or several nerve roots at 
the intervertebral foramina (Fig. 9-6); this compres-
sion accounts for 75% of cervical radiculopathies. The 
roots most commonly affected are C7 and C6. Nar-
rowing of the spinal canal by osteophytes, ossiﬁca-
tion of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL), or 
a large central disk may compress the cervical spinal 
cord. Combinations of radiculopathy and myelopathy 
may be present. When little or no neck pain accompa-
nies cord compression, the diagnosis may be confused 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 32), multiple 
sclerosis (Chap. 39), spinal cord tumors, or syringomy-
elia (Chap. 35). The possibility of cervical spondylosis 
should be considered even when the patient presents 
with symptoms or signs in the legs only. MRI is the 
study of choice to deﬁne the anatomic abnormalities, 
but plain CT is adequate to assess bony spurs, forami-
nal narrowing, lateral recess stenosis, or OPLL. EMG 
and nerve conduction studies can localize and assess 
the severity of the nerve root injury.
OTHER CAUSES OF NECK PAIN
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) of the cervical apophyseal 
joints produces neck pain, stiffness, and limitation of 
motion. In advanced RA, synovitis of the atlantoaxial 
joint (C1-C2; Fig. 9-2) may damage the transverse liga-
ment of the atlas, producing forward displacement of 
the atlas on the axis (atlantoaxial subluxation). Radio-
logic evidence of atlantoaxial subluxation occurs in 30% 
of patients with RA. Not surprisingly, the degree of 
subluxation correlates with the severity of erosive dis-
ease. When subluxation is present, careful assessment is 
important to identify early signs of myelopathy. Occa-
sional patients develop high spinal cord compression 
leading to quadriparesis, respiratory insufﬁciency, and 
death. Surgery should be considered when myelopa-
thy or spinal instability is present. MRI is the imaging 
modality of choice.
Ankylosing spondylitis can cause neck pain and less 
commonly atlantoaxial subluxation; surgery may be 
required to prevent spinal cord compression. Acute 
herpes zoster presents as acute posterior occipital or 
neck pain prior to the outbreak of vesicles. Neoplasms 
TABLE 9-4
CERVICAL RADICULOPATHY—NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
CERVICAL  
NERVE ROOTS
EXAMINATION FINDINGS
REFLEX
SENSORY
MOTOR
PAIN DISTRIBUTION
C5
Biceps
Over lateral deltoid
Supraspinatusa (initial arm abduction)
Infraspinatusa (arm external rotation)
Deltoida (arm abduction)
Biceps (arm ﬂexion)
Lateral arm, medial 
scapula
C6
Biceps
Thumb, index ﬁngers
Radial hand/forearm
Biceps (arm ﬂexion)
Pronator teres (internal forearm rotation)
Lateral forearm, thumb, 
index ﬁnger
C7
Triceps
Middle ﬁngers
Dorsum forearm
Tricepsa (arm extension)
Wrist extensorsa
Extensor digitoruma (ﬁnger extension)
Posterior arm, dorsal 
forearm, lateral hand
C8
Finger ﬂexors
Little ﬁnger
Medial hand and fore-
arm
Abductor pollicis brevis (abduction D1)
First dorsal interosseous (abduction D2)
Abductor digiti minimi (abduction D5)
4th and 5th ﬁngers, 
medial forearm
T1
Finger ﬂexors
Axilla and medial arm
Abductor pollicis brevis (abduction D1)
First dorsal interosseous (abduction D2)
Abductor digiti minimi (abduction D5)
Medial arm, axilla
aThese muscles receive the majority of innervation from this root.
 
CHAPTER 9
Back and Neck Pain
87
metastatic to the cervical spine, infections (osteomyelitis 
and epidural abscess), and metabolic bone diseases may be 
the cause of neck pain. Neck pain may also be referred 
from the heart with coronary artery ischemia (cervical 
angina syndrome).
THORACIC OUTLET
The thoracic outlet contains the ﬁrst rib, the subclavian 
artery and vein, the brachial plexus, the clavicle, and the 
lung apex. Injury to these structures may result in pos-
tural or movement-induced pain around the shoulder 
and supraclavicular region. True neurogenic thoracic outlet 
syndrome (TOS) is an uncommon disorder resulting from 
compression of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus 
or ventral rami of the C8 or T1 nerve roots most often 
by an anomalous band of tissue connecting an elongate 
transverse process at C7 with the ﬁrst rib. Pain is mild 
or absent. Signs include weakness and wasting of intrin-
sic muscles of the hand and diminished sensation on the 
palmar aspect of the ﬁfth digit. An anteroposterior cer-
vical spine x-ray will show the elongate C7 transverse 
process, and EMG and nerve conduction studies con-
ﬁrm the diagnosis. Treatment consists of surgical resec-
tion of the anomalous band. The weakness and wasting 
of intrinsic hand muscles typically does not improve, 
but surgery halts the insidious progression of weakness. 
Arterial TOS results from compression of the subclavian 
artery by a cervical rib resulting in poststenotic dilatation 
of the artery and thrombus formation. Blood pressure is 
reduced in the affected limb, and signs of emboli may be 
present in the hand. Neurologic signs are absent. Ultra-
sound can conﬁrm the diagnosis noninvasively. Treat-
ment is with thrombolysis or anticoagulation (with or 
without embolectomy) and surgical excision of the cer-
vical rib compressing the subclavian artery. Venous TOS 
is due to subclavian vein thrombosis resulting in swell-
ing of the arm and pain. The vein may be compressed by 
a cervical rib or anomalous scalene muscle. Venography 
is the diagnostic test of choice. Disputed TOS includes a 
large number of patients with chronic arm and shoulder 
pain of unclear cause. The lack of sensitive and speciﬁc 
ﬁndings on physical examination or laboratory markers 
for this condition frequently results in diagnostic uncer-
tainty. The role of surgery in disputed TOS is controver-
sial. Multidisciplinary pain management is a conservative 
approach, although treatment is often unsuccessful.
BRACHIAL PLEXUS AND NERVES
Pain from injury to the brachial plexus or peripheral 
nerves of the arm can occasionally mimic pain of cer-
vical spine origin. Neoplastic inﬁltration of the lower 
trunk of the brachial plexus may produce shoulder or 
supraclavicular pain radiating down the arm, numb-
ness of the fourth and ﬁfth ﬁngers or medial forearm, 
and weakness of intrinsic hand muscles innervated by 
the ulnar and median nerves. Delayed radiation injury 
may produce similar ﬁndings, although pain is less often 
present and almost always less severe. A Pancoast tumor 
of the lung is another cause and should be considered, 
especially when a Horner’s syndrome is present. Supra-
scapular neuropathy may produce severe shoulder pain, 
weakness, and wasting of the supraspinatus and infra-
spinatus muscles. Acute brachial neuritis is often confused 
with radiculopathy; the acute onset of severe shoulder 
or scapular pain is followed typically over days by weak-
ness of the proximal arm and shoulder girdle muscles 
innervated by the upper brachial plexus. The onset is 
often preceded by an infection. The long thoracic nerve 
may be affected; the latter results in a winged scapula. 
Brachial neuritis may also present as an isolated paralysis 
of the diaphragm or with involvement of other nerves 
of the upper limb. Recovery is generally good but may 
take up to 3 years to be complete.
Occasional cases of carpal tunnel syndrome pro-
duce pain and paresthesias extending into the forearm, 
arm, and shoulder resembling a C5 or C6 root lesion. 
Lesions of the radial or ulnar nerve can mimic a radic-
ulopathy at C7 or C8, respectively. EMG and nerve 
conduction studies can accurately localize lesions to the 
nerve roots, brachial plexus, or peripheral nerves.
For further discussion of peripheral nerve disorders, 
see Chap. 45.
SHOULDER
Pain arising from the shoulder can on occasion mimic 
pain from the spine. If symptoms and signs of radiculop-
athy are absent, then the differential diagnosis includes 
mechanical shoulder pain (tendonitis, bursitis, rota-
tor cuff tear, dislocation, adhesive capsulitis, and cuff 
impingement under the acromion) and referred pain 
(subdiaphragmatic irritation, angina, Pancoast tumor). 
Mechanical pain is often worse at night, associated with 
local shoulder tenderness and aggravated by abduction, 
internal rotation, or extension of the arm. Pain from 
shoulder disease may radiate into the arm or hand, but 
sensory, motor, and reﬂex changes are absent.
TREATMENT 
Neck Pain without Radiculopathy
The evidence regarding treatment for neck pain is less 
complete than that for low back pain. As with low back 
pain, spontaneous improvement is the norm for acute 
neck pain, and the usual goal of therapy is to provide 
symptom relief while natural healing processes proceed.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
88
The evidence in support of nonsurgical treatments 
for whiplash-associated disorders is generally of poor 
quality and neither supports nor refutes the effective-
ness of common treatments used for symptom relief. 
Gentle mobilization of the cervical spine combined 
with exercise programs may be more beneficial than 
usual care. Evidence is insufficient to recommend for or 
against the use of cervical traction, neck collars, TENS, 
ultrasound, diathermy, or massage. The role of acupunc-
ture for neck pain also remains ambiguous, with poor-
quality studies and conflicting results.
For patients with neck pain unassociated with 
trauma, supervised exercise, with or without mobiliza-
tion, appears to be effective. Exercises often include 
shoulder rolls and neck stretches. Although there is rela-
tively little evidence about the use of muscle relaxants, 
analgesics, and NSAIDs in neck pain, many clinicians 
use these medications in much the same way as for low 
back pain.
Low-level laser therapy directed at areas of tender-
ness, local acupuncture points, or a grid of predeter-
mined points is a controversial approach to the treat-
ment of neck pain. The putative benefits might be 
mediated by anti-inflammatory effects, reduction of 
skeletal muscle fatigue, or inhibition of transmission at 
neuromuscular junctions. A 2009 meta-analysis sug-
gested that this treatment may provide greater pain 
relief than sham therapy for both acute and chronic 
neck pain. Comparison to other conservative treatment 
measures is needed.
Although some surgical studies have proposed a 
role for anterior diskectomy and fusion in patients with 
neck pain, these studies generally have not been rigor-
ously conducted. A systematic review suggested that 
there was no valid clinical evidence to support either 
cervical fusion or cervical disk arthroplasty in patients 
with neck pain without radiculopathy. Similarly, there is 
no evidence to support radiofrequency neurotomy or 
cervical facet injections for neck pain without radicu-
lopathy.
TREATMENT 
Neck Pain with Radiculopathy
The natural history of neck pain even with radiculopa-
thy is favorable, and many patients will improve with-
out specific therapy. Although there are no randomized 
trials of NSAIDs for neck pain, a course of NSAIDs, with 
or without muscle relaxants, may be appropriate initial 
therapy. Other nonsurgical treatments are commonly 
used, including opioid analgesics, oral glucocorticoids, 
cervical traction, and immobilization with a hard or soft 
cervical collar. However, there are no randomized tri-
als to establish the effectiveness of these treatments in 
comparison to natural history alone. Soft cervical collars 
can be modestly helpful by limiting spontaneous and 
reflex neck movements that exacerbate pain.
As for lumbar radiculopathy, epidural glucocorti-
coids may provide short-term symptom relief in cervical 
radiculopathy. If cervical radiculopathy is due to bony 
compression from cervical spondylosis with foraminal 
narrowing, then surgical decompression is generally 
indicated to forestall progression of neurologic signs.
Surgical treatment can produce rapid and substan-
tial symptom relief, although it is unclear whether long-
term outcomes are improved over nonsurgical therapy. 
Reasonable indications for cervical disk surgery include 
a progressive radicular motor deficit, functionally limit-
ing pain that fails to respond to conservative manage-
ment, or spinal cord compression.
Surgical treatments include anterior cervical diskec-
tomy alone, laminectomy with diskectomy, diskectomy 
with fusion, and disk arthroplasty (implanting an artifi-
cial cervical disk). Fusions can be performed with a vari-
ety of techniques. The risk of subsequent radiculopathy 
or myelopathy at cervical segments adjacent to a fusion 
is ∼3% per year and 26% per decade. Although this risk 
is sometimes portrayed as a late complication of sur-
gery, it may also reflect the natural history of degenera-
tive cervical disk disease. The durability of disk prosthe-
ses is uncertain. Available data do not strongly support 
one surgical technique over another.
 Roy Freeman 
89
 Syncope is a transient, self-limited loss of consciousness 
due to acute global impairment of cerebral blood ﬂ ow. 
The onset is rapid, duration brief, and recovery spon-
taneous and complete. Other causes of transient loss of 
consciousness need to be distinguished from syncope; 
these include seizures, vertebrobasilar ischemia, hypox-
emia, and hypoglycemia. A syncopal prodrome ( presyn-
cope ) is common, although loss of consciousness may 
occur without any warning symptoms. Typical pre-
syncopal symptoms include dizziness, lightheadedness 
or faintness, weakness, fatigue, and visual and auditory 
disturbances. The causes of syncope can be divided into 
three general categories: (1) neurally mediated syncope 
(also called  reﬂ ex syncope ), (2) orthostatic hypotension, 
and (3) cardiac syncope. 
 Neurally mediated syncope comprises a heteroge-
neous group of functional disorders that are character-
ized by a transient change in the reﬂ exes responsible for 
maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis. Episodic vaso-
dilation and bradycardia occur in varying combinations, 
resulting in temporary failure of blood pressure control. 
In contrast, in patients with orthostatic hypotension due 
to autonomic failure, these cardiovascular homeostatic 
reﬂ exes are chronically impaired. Cardiac syncope may 
be due to arrhythmias or structural cardiac diseases that 
cause a decrease in cardiac output. The clinical features, 
underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms, therapeu-
tic interventions, and prognoses differ markedly among 
these three causes. 
 EPIDEMIOLOGY AND NATURAL 
HISTORY 
 Syncope is a common presenting problem, account-
ing for approximately 3% of all emergency room vis-
its and 1% of all hospital admissions. The annual cost 
for syncope-related hospitalization in the United States 
is ∼$2 billion. Syncope has a lifetime cumulative inci-
dence of up to 35% in the general population. The peak 
incidence in the young occurs between ages 10 and 30 
years, with a median peak around 15 years. Neurally 
mediated syncope is the etiology in the vast majority of 
these cases. In elderly adults, there is a sharp rise in the 
incidence of syncope after 70 years. 
 In population-based studies, neurally mediated syn-
cope is the most common cause of syncope. The inci-
dence is slightly higher in females than males. In young 
subjects there is often a family history in ﬁ rst-degree 
relatives. Cardiovascular disease due to structural disease 
or arrhythmias is the next most common cause in most 
series, particularly in emergency room settings and in 
older patients. Orthostatic hypotension also increases in 
prevalence with age because of the reduced baroreﬂ ex 
responsiveness, decreased cardiac compliance, and atten-
uation of the vestibulosympathetic reﬂ ex associated with 
aging. In the elderly, orthostatic hypotension is substan-
tially more common in institutionalized (54–68%) than 
community dwelling (6%) individuals, an observation 
most likely explained by the greater prevalence of pre-
disposing neurologic disorders, physiologic impairment, 
and vasoactive medication use among institutionalized 
patients. 
 The prognosis after a single syncopal event for all 
age groups is generally benign. In particular, syncope 
of noncardiac and unexplained origin in younger indi-
viduals has an excellent prognosis; life expectancy is 
unaffected. By contrast, syncope due to a cardiac cause, 
either structural heart disease or primary arrhythmic dis-
ease, is associated with an increased risk of sudden car-
diac death and mortality from other causes. Similarly, 
mortality rate is increased in individuals with syncope 
due to orthostatic hypotension related to age and the 
associated comorbid conditions ( Table 10-1 ). 
 SYNCOPE 
 CHAPTER 10 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
90
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The upright posture imposes a unique physiologic stress 
upon humans; most, although not all, syncopal episodes 
occur from a standing position. Standing results in pool-
ing of 500–1000 mL of blood in the lower extremi-
ties and splanchnic circulation. There is a decrease 
in venous return to the heart and reduced ventricu-
lar ﬁlling that result in diminished cardiac output and 
blood pressure. These hemodynamic changes provoke 
a compensatory reﬂex response, initiated by the baro-
receptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch, resulting 
in increased sympathetic outﬂow and decreased vagal 
nerve activity (Fig. 10-1). The reﬂex increases periph-
eral resistance, venous return to the heart, and cardiac 
output and thus limits the fall in blood pressure. If this 
response fails, as is the case chronically in orthostatic 
hypotension and transiently in neurally mediated syn-
cope, cerebral hypoperfusion occurs.
Syncope is a consequence of global cerebral hypo-
perfusion and thus represents a failure of cerebral blood 
ﬂow autoregulatory mechanisms. Myogenic factors, 
local metabolites, and to a lesser extent autonomic neu-
rovascular control are responsible for the autoregulation 
of cerebral blood ﬂow (Chap. 28). Typically cerebral 
blood ﬂow ranges from 50 to 60 mL/min per 100 g 
brain tissue and remains relatively constant over perfu-
sion pressures ranging from 50 to 150 mmHg. Cessation 
of blood ﬂow for 6–8 s will result in loss of conscious-
ness, while impairment of consciousness ensues when 
blood ﬂow decreases to 25 mL/min per 100 g brain 
tissue.
TABLE 10-1
HIGH-RISK FEATURES INDICATING 
HOSPITALIZATION OR INTENSIVE EVALUATION 
OF SYNCOPE
Chest pain suggesting coronary ischemia
Features of congestive heart failure
Moderate or severe valvular disease
Moderate or severe structural cardiac disease
Electrocardiographic features of ischemia
History of ventricular arrhythmias
Prolonged QT interval (>500 ms)
Repetitive sinoatrial block or sinus pauses
Persistent sinus bradycardia
Trifascicular block
Atrial ﬁbrillation
Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
Family history of sudden death
Preexcitation syndromes
Brugada pattern on ECG
From the clinical standpoint, a fall in systemic systolic 
blood pressure to ∼50 mmHg or lower will result in 
syncope. A decrease in cardiac output and/or systemic 
vascular resistance—the determinants of blood pres-
sure—thus underlies the pathophysiology of syncope. 
Common causes of impaired cardiac output include 
decreased effective circulating blood volume; increased 
thoracic pressure; massive pulmonary embolus; cardiac 
brady- and tachyarrhythmias; valvular heart disease; and 
myocardial dysfunction. Systemic vascular resistance 
may be decreased by central and peripheral autonomic 
nervous system diseases, sympatholytic medications, and 
transiently during neurally mediated syncope. Increased 
cerebral vascular resistance, most frequently due to 
hypocarbia induced by hyperventilation, may also con-
tribute to the pathophysiology of syncope.
The sequence of changes on the electroencephalo-
gram of syncopal subjects during syncope comprises 
background slowing (often of high amplitude), followed 
by attenuation or cessation of cortical activity prior to 
return of slow waves, and then normal activity. Despite 
the presence of myoclonic movements and other motor 
activity, electroencephalographic seizure discharges are 
not present in syncopal subjects.
CLASSIFICATION
NEURALLY MEDIATED SYNCOPE
Neurally mediated syncope is the ﬁnal pathway of a 
complex central and peripheral nervous system reﬂex arc. 
There is a sudden, transient change in autonomic efferent 
activity characterized by increased parasympathetic out-
ﬂow causing bradycardia and sympathoinhibition causing 
vasodilation. The change in autonomic efferent activity 
leads to a decrease in blood pressure and a subsequent fall 
in cerebral blood ﬂow to below the limits of autoregula-
tion (Fig. 10-2). In order to elicit this reﬂex, a normal 
or functioning autonomic nervous system is necessary; 
this is in contrast to the situation in autonomic failure. 
The triggers of the afferent limb of the reﬂex arc vary and 
may be clearly deﬁned, e.g., the carotid sinus, the gastro-
intestinal tract, or the bladder. In many cases, however, 
the afferent arc is less easily recognized and, under many 
circumstances, the cause is multifactorial. Under these 
circumstances it is likely that multiple afferent pathways 
converge on the central autonomic network within the 
medulla that integrates the neural impulses and mediates 
the vasodepressor-bradycardic response.
Classiﬁcation of neurally mediated syncope
Neurally mediated syncope may be subdivided based on 
the afferent pathway and provocative trigger. Vasova-
gal syncope (the common faint) is provoked by intense 
emotion, pain, and/or orthostatic stress, whereas the 
 
CHAPTER 10
Syncope
91
situational reﬂex syncopes have speciﬁc localized stim-
uli that provoke the reﬂex vasodilation and bradycardia 
that leads to syncope. The underlying mechanisms have 
been identiﬁed and pathophysiology delineated for most 
of these situational reﬂex syncopes. The afferent trigger 
may originate in the pulmonary system, gastrointesti-
nal system, urogenital system, heart, and carotid artery 
(Table 10-2). Hyperventilation leading to hypocarbia 
and cerebral vasoconstriction, and raised intrathoracic 
pressure that impairs venous return to the heart, play a 
central role in many of the situational reﬂex syncopes. 
The afferent pathway of the reﬂex arc differs among 
these disorders, but the efferent response via the vagus 
and sympathetic pathways is similar.
Alternately, neurally mediated syncope may be sub-
divided based on the predominant efferent pathway. 
Vasodepressor syncope describes syncope predominantly 
due to efferent, sympathetic, vasoconstrictor failure; car-
dioinhibitory syncope describes syncope predominantly 
associated with bradycardia or asystole due to increased 
vagal outﬂow; while mixed syncope describes syncope 
in which there are both vagal and sympathetic reﬂex 
changes.
Features of neurally mediated syncope
In addition to symptoms of orthostatic intolerance such 
as dizziness, lightheadedness, and fatigue, premonitory 
FIGURE 10-1 
The Baroreﬂex. A decrease in arterial pressure unloads the 
baroreceptors—the terminals of afferent ﬁbers of the glos-
sopharyngeal and vagus nerves—that are situated in the 
carotid sinus and aortic arch. This leads to a reduction in 
the afferent impulses that are relayed from these mechano-
receptors through the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves 
to the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS) in the dorso-
medial medulla. The reduced baroreceptor afferent activity 
produces a decrease in vagal nerve input to the sinus node 
that is mediated by the neuroanatomical connections of the 
NTS to the nucleus ambiguus (NA). There is an increase in 
sympathetic efferent activity that is mediated by the NTS 
projections to the caudal ventrolateral medulla (CVLM) (an 
excitatory pathway) and from there to the rostral ventrolat-
eral medulla (RVLM) (an inhibitory pathway). The activation of 
RVLM presympathetic neurons in response to hypotension 
is thus predominantly due to disinhibition. In response to a 
sustained fall in blood pressure, vasopressin release is medi-
ated by projections from the A1 noradrenergic cell group in 
the ventrolateral medulla. This projection activates vasopres-
sin-synthesizing neurons in the magnocellular portion of the 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and the supraoptic nucleus 
(SON) of the hypothalamus. Blue denotes sympathetic neu-
rons and green parasympathetic neurons. (From R Freeman: 
N Engl J Med 358:615, 2008.)
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
92
features of autonomic activation may be present in 
patients with neurally mediated syncope. These include 
diaphoresis, pallor, palpitations, nausea, hyperventila-
tion, and yawning. During the syncopal event, proximal 
and distal myoclonus (typically arrhythmic and multifo-
cal) may occur, raising the possibility of epilepsy. The 
eyes typically remain open and usually deviate upward. 
Urinary but not fecal incontinence may occur. Postictal 
confusion is rare, although visual and auditory halluci-
nations are sometimes reported.
While some predisposing factors and provocative stim-
uli are well established (for example, motionless upright 
posture, warm ambient temperature, intravascular vol-
ume depletion, alcohol ingestion, hypoxemia, anemia, 
pain, the sight of blood, venipuncture, and intense emo-
tion), the underlying basis for the widely different thresh-
olds for syncope among individuals exposed to the same 
provocative stimulus is not known. A genetic basis for 
neurally mediated syncope may exist; several studies have 
reported an increased incidence of syncope in ﬁrst-degree 
relatives of fainters, but no gene or genetic marker has 
been identiﬁed, and environmental, social, and cultural 
factors have not been excluded by these studies.
TREATMENT 
Neurally Mediated Syncope
Reassurance, avoidance of provocative stimuli, and 
plasma volume expansion with fluid and salt are the 
cornerstones of the management of neurally mediated 
Time (sec)
60
120
180
240
300
360
BP (mm Hg)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
HR (bpm)
25
50
75
100
125
HR (bpm)
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time (sec)
120
140
160
180
200
BP (mm Hg)
20
40
60
80
100
120
A
B
FIGURE 10-2 
A. The paroxysmal hypotensive-bradycardic response 
that is characteristic of neurally mediated syncope. Non-
invasive beat-to-beat blood pressure and heart rate are 
shown over 5 min (from 60 to 360 s) of an upright tilt on a 
tilt table. B. The same tracing expanded to show 80 s of the 
episode (from 80 to 200 s). BP, blood pressure; bpm, beats 
per minute; HR, heart rate.
syncope. Isometric counterpressure maneuvers of the 
limbs (leg crossing or handgrip and arm tensing) may 
raise blood pressure and, by maintaining pressure in the 
autoregulatory zone, avoid or delay the onset of syn-
cope. Randomized controlled trials support this inter-
vention.
Fludrocortisone, vasoconstricting agents, and beta-
adrenoreceptor antagonists are widely used by experts 
to treat refractory patients, although there is no consis-
tent evidence from randomized, controlled trials for any 
pharmacotherapy to treat neurally mediated syncope. 
Because vasodilation is the dominant pathophysiologic 
syncopal mechanism in most patients, use of a cardiac 
pacemaker is rarely beneficial. Possible exceptions are 
older patients in whom syncope is associated with asys-
tole or severe bradycardia, and patients with prominent 
cardioinhibition due to carotid sinus syndrome. In these 
patients, dual-chamber pacing may be helpful.
ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION
Orthostatic hypotension, deﬁned as a reduction in 
systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg or dia-
stolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg within 
3 min of standing or head-up tilt on a tilt table, is a 
manifestation of sympathetic vasoconstrictor (auto-
nomic) failure (Fig. 10-3). In many (but not all) 
cases, there is no compensatory increase in heart rate 
despite hypotension; with partial autonomic failure, 
 
CHAPTER 10
Syncope
93
TABLE 10-2
CAUSES OF SYNCOPE
A. Neurally Mediated Syncope
  Vasovagal syncope
   Provoked fear, pain, anxiety, intense emotion, sight of blood, unpleasant sights and odors, orthostatic 
stress
  Situational reﬂex syncope
  Pulmonary
    Cough syncope, wind instrument player’s syncope, weightlifter’s syncope, “mess trick”a and “faint-
ing lark,”b sneeze syncope, airway instrumentation
  Urogenital
    Postmicturition syncope, urogenital tract instrumentation, prostatic massage
  Gastrointestinal
    Swallow syncope, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, esophageal stimulation, gastrointestinal tract instru-
mentation, rectal examination, defecation syncope
  Cardiac
    Swallow syncope, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, esophageal stimulation, gastrointestinal tract instru-
mentation, rectal examination, defecation syncope
  Carotid sinus
    Carotid sinus sensitivity, carotid sinus massage
  Ocular
    Ocular pressure, ocular examination, ocular surgery
B. Orthostatic Hypotension
   Primary autonomic failure due to idiopathic central and peripheral neurodegenerative diseases—the 
“synucleinopathies”
  Lewy body diseases
    Parkinson’s disease
    Lewy body dementia
    Pure autonomic failure
  Multiple system atrophy (the Shy-Drager syndrome)
  Secondary autonomic failure due to autonomic peripheral neuropathies
  Diabetes
  Hereditary amyloidosis (familial amyloid polyneuropathy)
  Primary amyloidosis (AL amyloidosis; immunoglobulin light chain associated)
   Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN) (especially type III—familial dysautonomia)
  Idiopathic immune-mediated autonomic neuropathy
  Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy
  Sjögren’s syndrome
  Paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathy
  HIV neuropathy
  Postprandial hypotension
  Iatrogenic (drug-induced)
  Volume depletion
C. Cardiac Syncope
  Arrhythmias
  Sinus node dysfunction
  Atrioventricular dysfunction
  Supraventricular tachycardias
  Ventricular tachycardias
  Inherited channelopathies
  Cardiac structural disease
  Valvular disease
  Myocardial ischemia
  Obstructive and other cardiomyopathies
  Atrial myxoma
  Pericardial effusions and tamponade
aHyperventilation for 1 min, followed by sudden chest compression.
bHyperventilation (20 breaths) in a squatting position, rapid rise to standing, then Valsalva.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
94
heart rate may increase to some degree but is insuf-
ﬁcient to maintain cardiac output. A variant of ortho-
static hypotension is “delayed” orthostatic hypoten-
sion which occurs beyond 3 min of standing; this may 
reﬂect a mild or early form of sympathetic adrener-
gic dysfunction. In some cases, orthostatic hypoten-
sion occurs within 15 s of standing (so-called “initial” 
orthostatic hypotension), a ﬁnding that may repre-
sent a transient mismatch between cardiac output and 
peripheral vascular resistance and does not represent 
autonomic failure.
Characteristic symptoms of orthostatic hypotension 
include light-headedness, dizziness, and presyncope 
(near-faintness) occurring in response to sudden pos-
tural change. However, symptoms may be absent or 
nonspeciﬁc, such as generalized weakness, fatigue, cog-
nitive slowing, leg buckling, or headache. Visual blur-
ring may occur, likely due to retinal or occipital lobe 
ischemia. Neck pain—typically in the suboccipital, pos-
terior cervical, and shoulder region (the “coat-hanger 
headache”)—most likely due to neck muscle ischemia, 
may be the only symptom. Patients may report ortho-
static dyspnea (thought to reﬂect ventilation-perfusion 
mismatch due to inadequate perfusion of ventilated 
lung apices) or angina (attributed to impaired myo-
cardial perfusion even with normal coronary arteries). 
Symptoms may be exacerbated by exertion, prolonged 
standing, increased ambient temperature, or meals. Syn-
cope is usually preceded by warning symptoms, but may 
occur suddenly, suggesting the possibility of a seizure or 
cardiac cause.
Supine hypertension is common in patients with 
orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic failure, 
affecting over 50% of patients in some series. Ortho-
static hypotension may present after initiation of ther-
apy for hypertension, and supine hypertension may fol-
low treatment of orthostatic hypotension. However, 
in other cases, the association of the two conditions 
is unrelated to therapy; it may in part be explained by 
baroreﬂex dysfunction in the presence of residual sym-
pathetic outﬂow, particularly in patients with central 
autonomic degeneration.
Causes of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension
Causes of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension include 
central and peripheral autonomic nervous system dys-
function (Chap. 33). Autonomic dysfunction of other 
organ systems (including the bladder, bowels, sexual 
organs, and sudomotor system) of varying severity fre-
quently accompanies orthostatic hypotension in these 
disorders (Table 10-2).
The primary autonomic degenerative disorders are 
multiple system atrophy (the Shy-Drager syndrome; 
Chap. 33), Parkinson’s disease (Chap. 30), demen-
tia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 29), and pure auto-
nomic failure (Chap. 33). These are often grouped 
together as “synucleinopathies” due to the presence of 
Time (sec)
60
120
180
240
300
360
BP (mm Hg)
0
50
100
150
200
HR (bpm)
65
70
75
HR (bpm)
68
70
72
74
Time (sec)
180
190
200
210
220
BP (mm Hg)
60
90
120
150
180
A
B
FIGURE 10-3 
A. The gradual fall in blood pressure without a compen-
satory heart rate increase that is characteristic of ortho-
static hypotension due to autonomic failure. Blood pressure 
and heart rate are shown over 5 min (from 60 to 360 s) of an 
upright tilt on a tilt table. B. The same tracing expanded to 
show 40 s of the episode (from 180 to 220 s). BP, blood pres-
sure; bpm, beats per minute; HR, heart rate.
 
CHAPTER 10
Syncope
95
alpha-synuclein, a small protein that precipitates pre-
dominantly in the cytoplasm of neurons in the Lewy 
body disorders (Parkinson’s disease, dementia with 
Lewy bodies, and pure autonomic failure) and in the 
glia in multiple system atrophy.
Peripheral autonomic dysfunction may also accom-
pany small ﬁber peripheral neuropathies such as those 
seen in diabetes, amyloid, immune-mediated neuropa-
thies, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies 
(HSAN; particularly HSAN type III; familial dysauto-
nomia), and inﬂammatory neuropathies (Chaps. 46 and 
47). Less frequently, orthostatic hypotension is associ-
ated with the peripheral neuropathies that accompany 
vitamin B12 deﬁciency, neurotoxic exposure, HIV and 
other infections, and porphyria.
Patients with autonomic failure and the elderly are 
susceptible to falls in blood pressure associated with 
meals. The magnitude of the blood pressure fall is exac-
erbated by large meals, meals high in carbohydrate, and 
alcohol intake. The mechanism of postprandial syncope 
is not fully elucidated.
Orthostatic hypotension is often iatrogenic. Drugs 
from several classes may lower peripheral resistance 
(e.g., alpha-adrenoreceptor antagonists used to treat 
hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy; antihyperten-
sive agents of several classes; nitrates and other vasodi-
lators; tricyclic agents and phenothiazines). Iatrogenic 
volume depletion due to diuresis and volume depletion 
due to medical causes (hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, 
or decreased ﬂuid intake) may also result in decreased 
effective circulatory volume, orthostatic hypotension, 
and syncope.
CARDIAC SYNCOPE
Cardiac (or cardiovascular) syncope is caused by 
arrhythmias and structural heart disease. These may 
occur in combination because structural disease ren-
ders the heart more vulnerable to abnormal electrical 
activity.
Arrhythmias
Bradyarrhythmias that cause syncope include those due to 
severe sinus node dysfunction (e.g., sinus arrest or sino-
atrial block) and atrioventricular block (e.g., Mobitz type 
II, high-grade, and complete AV block). The bradyar-
rhythmias due to sinus node dysfunction are often asso-
ciated with an atrial tachyarrhythmia, a disorder known 
as the tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome. A prolonged 
pause following the termination of a tachycardic epi-
sode is a frequent cause of syncope in patients with the 
tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome. Medications of sev-
eral classes may also cause bradyarrhythmias of sufﬁcient 
severity to cause syncope. Syncope due to bradycardia or 
asystole is referred to as a Stokes-Adams attack.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias frequently cause syn-
cope. The likelihood of syncope with ventricular tachy-
cardia is in part dependent on the ventricular rate; rates 
below 200 beats per min are less likely to cause syn-
cope. The compromised hemodynamic function during 
ventricular tachycardia is caused by ineffective ventricu-
lar contraction, reduced diastolic ﬁlling due to abbrevi-
ated ﬁlling periods, loss of atrioventricular synchrony, 
and concurrent myocardial ischemia.
Several disorders associated with cardiac electro-
physiologic instability and arrhythmogenesis are due to 
mutations in ion channel subunit genes. These include 
the long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, and cat-
echolaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. 
The long QT syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous 
disorder associated with prolonged cardiac repolariza-
tion and a predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias. 
Syncope and sudden death in patients with long QT 
syndrome result from a unique polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia called torsades des pointes that degenerates 
into ventricular ﬁbrillation. The long QT syndrome has 
been linked to genes encoding K+ channel α-subunits, 
K+ channel β-subunits, voltage-gated Na+ channel, and 
a scaffolding protein, ankyrin B (ANK2). Brugada syn-
drome is characterized by idiopathic ventricular ﬁbril-
lation in association with right ventricular electrocar-
diogram (ECG) abnormalities without structural heart 
disease. This disorder is also genetically heterogeneous, 
although it is most frequently linked to mutations in 
the Na+ channel α-subunit, SCN5A. Catecholamin-
ergic polymorphic tachycardia is an inherited, geneti-
cally heterogeneous disorder associated with exercise- 
or stress-induced ventricular arrhythmias, syncope, or 
TREATMENT 
Orthostatic Hypotension
The first step is to remove reversible causes—usually 
vasoactive medications (Table 33-6). Next, nonphar-
macologic interventions should be introduced. These 
interventions include patient education regarding 
staged moves from supine to upright; warnings about 
the hypotensive effects of meal ingestion; instructions 
about the isometric counterpressure maneuvers that 
increase intravascular pressure (see earlier in this chap-
ter); and raising the head of the bed to reduce supine 
hypertension. Intravascular volume should be expanded 
by increasing dietary fluid and salt. If these nonpharma-
cologic measures fail, pharmacologic intervention with 
fludrocortisone acetate and vasoconstricting agents 
such as midodrine and pseudoephedrine should be 
introduced. Some patients with intractable symptoms 
require additional therapy with supplementary agents 
that include pyridostigmine, yohimbine, desmopressin 
acetate (DDAVP), and erythropoietin (Chap. 33).
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
96
sudden death. Acquired QT interval prolongation, most 
commonly due to drugs, may also result in ventricular 
arrhythmias and syncope. 
Structural disease
Structural heart disease, (e.g., valvular disease, myocar-
dial ischemia, hypertrophic and other cardiomyopathies, 
cardiac masses such as atrial myxoma, and pericardial 
effusions) may lead to syncope by compromising cardiac 
output. Structural disease may also contribute to other 
pathophysiologic mechanisms of syncope. For example, 
cardiac structural disease may predispose to arrhyth-
mogenesis; aggressive treatment of cardiac failure with 
diuretics and/or vasodilators may lead to orthostatic 
hypotension; and inappropriate reﬂex vasodilation may 
occur with structural disorders such as aortic stenosis 
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, possibly provoked 
by increased ventricular contractility.
TREATMENT 
Cardiac Syncope
Treatment of cardiac disease depends upon the under-
lying disorder. Therapies for arrhythmias include cardiac 
pacing for sinus node disease and AV block, and abla-
tion, anti-arrhythmic drugs, and cardioverter-defibril-
lators for atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. These 
disorders are best managed by physicians with special-
ized skills in this area.
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Syncope
DIFFERENTIAL 
DIAGNOSIS Syncope is easily 
diagnosed when the characteristic features are present; 
however, several disorders with transient real or apparent 
loss of consciousness may create diagnostic confusion.
Generalized and partial seizures may be confused 
with syncope; however, there are a number of differenti-
ating features. Whereas tonic-clonic movements are the 
hallmark of a generalized seizure, myoclonic and other 
movements also may occur in up to 90% of syncopal 
episodes. Myoclonic jerks associated with syncope may 
be multifocal or generalized. They are typically arrhyth-
mic and of short duration (<30 s). Mild flexor and exten-
sor posturing also may occur. Partial- or partial-complex 
seizures with secondary generalization are usually pre-
ceded by an aura, commonly an unpleasant smell; fear 
anxiety; abdominal discomfort or other visceral sensa-
tions. These phenomena should be differentiated from 
the premonitory features of syncope.
Autonomic manifestations of seizures (autonomic 
epilepsy) may provide a more difficult diagnostic chal-
lenge. Autonomic seizures have cardiovascular, gastro-
intestinal, pulmonary, urogenital, pupillary, and cutane-
ous manifestations that are similar to the premonitory 
features of syncope. Furthermore, the cardiovascular 
manifestations of autonomic epilepsy include clinically 
significant tachycardias and bradycardias that may be of 
sufficient magnitude to cause loss of consciousness. The 
presence of accompanying nonautonomic auras may 
help differentiate these episodes from syncope.
Loss of consciousness associated with a seizure usu-
ally lasts longer than 5 min and is associated with pro-
longed postictal drowsiness and disorientation, whereas 
reorientation occurs almost immediately after a synco-
pal event. Muscle aches may occur after both syncope 
and seizures, although they tend to last longer follow-
ing a seizure. Seizures, unlike syncope, are rarely pro-
voked by emotions or pain. Incontinence of urine may 
occur with both seizures and syncope; however, fecal 
incontinence does not occur with syncope.
Hypoglycemia may cause transient loss of conscious-
ness, typically in individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabe-
tes treated with insulin. The clinical features associated 
with impending or actual hypoglycemia include tremor, 
palpitations, anxiety, diaphoresis, hunger, and paresthe-
sias. These symptoms are due to autonomic activation 
to counter the falling blood glucose. Hunger, in par-
ticular, is not a typical premonitory feature of syncope. 
Hypoglycemia also impairs neuronal function, lead-
ing to fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and cognitive and 
behavioral symptoms. Diagnostic difficulties may occur 
in individuals in strict glycemic control; repeated hypo-
glycemia impairs the counterregulatory response and 
leads to a loss of the characteristic warning symptoms 
that are the hallmark of hypoglycemia.
Patients with cataplexy experience an abrupt partial 
or complete loss of muscular tone triggered by strong 
emotions, typically anger or laughter. Unlike syncope, 
consciousness is maintained throughout the attacks, 
which typically last between 30 s and 2 min. There are 
no premonitory symptoms. Cataplexy occurs in 60–75% 
of patients with narcolepsy.
The clinical interview and interrogation of eyewit-
nesses usually allow differentiation of syncope from 
falls due to vestibular dysfunction, cerebellar disease, 
extrapyramidal system dysfunction, and other gait dis-
orders. If the fall is accompanied by head trauma, a 
postconcussive syndrome, amnesia for the precipitat-
ing events, and/or the presence of loss of consciousness 
may contribute to diagnostic difficulty.
Apparent loss of consciousness can be a manifesta-
tion of psychiatric disorders such as generalized anxiety, 
panic disorders, major depression, and somatization dis-
order. These possibilities should be considered in indi-
viduals who faint frequently without prodromal symp-
toms. Such patients are rarely injured despite numerous 
falls. There are no clinically significant hemodynamic 
 
CHAPTER 10
Syncope
97
changes concurrent with these episodes. In contrast, 
transient loss of consciousness due to vasovagal syn-
cope precipitated by fear, stress, anxiety, and emotional 
distress is accompanied by hypotension, bradycardia, or 
both.
INITIAL 
EVALUATION The goals of the initial 
evaluation are to determine whether the transient loss 
of consciousness was due to syncope; to identify the 
cause; and to assess risk for future episodes and serious 
harm (Table 10-1). The initial evaluation should include a 
detailed history, thorough questioning of eyewitnesses, 
and a complete physical and neurologic examination. 
Blood pressure and heart rate should be measured in 
the supine position and after 3 min of standing to deter-
mine whether orthostatic hypotension is present. An ECG 
should be performed if there is suspicion of syncope due 
to an arrhythmia or underlying cardiac disease. Relevant 
electrocardiographic abnormalities include bradyarrhyth-
mias or tachyarrhythmias, atrioventricular block, isch-
emia, old myocardial infarction, long QT syndrome, and 
bundle branch block. This initial assessment will lead to 
the identification of a cause of syncope in approximately 
50% of patients and also allows stratification of patients 
at risk for cardiac mortality.
Laboratory Tests Baseline laboratory blood tests 
are rarely helpful in identifying the cause of syncope. 
Blood tests should be performed when specific disor-
ders, e.g., myocardial infarction, anemia, and secondary 
autonomic failure, are suspected (Table 10-2).
Autonomic Nervous System Testing (Chap. 
33) Autonomic testing including tilt table testing can be 
performed in specialized centers. Autonomic testing is 
helpful to uncover objective evidence of autonomic fail-
ure and also to demonstrate a predisposition to neurally 
mediated syncope. Autonomic testing includes assess-
ments of parasympathetic autonomic nervous system 
function (e.g., heart rate variability to deep respiration 
and a Valsalva maneuver), sympathetic cholinergic func-
tion (e.g., thermoregulatory sweat response and quan-
titative sudomotor axon reflex test), and sympathetic 
adrenergic function (e.g., blood pressure response to 
a Valsalva maneuver and a tilt table test with beat-to-
beat blood pressure measurement). The hemodynamic 
abnormalities demonstrated on tilt table test (Figs. 
10-2 and 10-3) may be useful in distinguishing ortho-
static hypotension due to autonomic failure from the 
hypotensive bradycardic response of neurally mediated 
syncope. Similarly, the tilt table test may help identify 
patients with syncope due to delayed or initial ortho-
static hypotension.
Carotid sinus massage should be considered in 
patients with symptoms suggestive of carotid sinus 
syncope and in patients over age 50 years with recur-
rent syncope of unknown etiology. This test should only 
be carried out under continuous ECG and blood pres-
sure monitoring and should be avoided in patients with 
carotid bruits, plaques, or stenosis.
Cardiac Evaluation ECG monitoring is indicated 
for patients with a high pretest probability of arrhyth-
mia causing syncope. Patients should be monitored in 
hospital if the likelihood of a life-threatening arrhythmia 
is high, e.g., patients with severe structural or coronary 
artery disease, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, tri-
fascicular heart block, prolonged QT interval, Brugada’s 
syndrome ECG pattern, and family history of sudden 
cardiac death. Outpatient Holter monitoring is recom-
mended for patients who experience frequent syncopal 
episodes (one or more per week), whereas loop record-
ers, which continually record and erase cardiac rhythm, 
are indicated for patients with suspected arrhythmias 
with low risk of sudden cardiac death. Loop record-
ers may be external (recommended for evaluation of 
episodes that occur at a frequency of greater than one 
per month) or implantable (if syncope occurs less fre-
quently).
Echocardiography should be performed in patients 
with a history of cardiac disease or if abnormalities 
are found on physical examination or the electrocar-
diogram. Echocardiographic diagnoses that may be 
responsible for syncope include aortic stenosis, hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, cardiac tumors, aortic dissec-
tion, and pericardial tamponade. Echocardiography also 
has a role in risk stratification based on the left ventricu-
lar ejection fraction.
Treadmill exercise testing with ECG and blood pres-
sure monitoring should be performed in patients who 
have experienced syncope during or shortly after 
exercise. Treadmill testing may help identify exercise-
induced arrhythmias (e.g., tachycardia-related AV block) 
and exercise-induced exaggerated vasodilation.
Electrophysiologic studies are indicated in patients 
with structural heart disease and ECG abnormali-
ties in whom noninvasive investigations have failed 
to yield a diagnosis. Electrophysiologic studies have 
low sensitivity and specificity and should only be 
performed when a high pretest probability exists. 
Currently, this test is rarely performed to evaluate 
patients with syncope.
Psychiatric Evaluation Screening for psychiat-
ric disorders may be appropriate in patients with recur-
rent unexplained syncope episodes. Tilt table testing, 
with demonstration of symptoms in the absence of 
hemodynamic change, may be useful in reproduc-
ing syncope in patients with suspected psychogenic 
syncope.
 Mark F. Walker  ■   Robert B. Daroff 
98
 Dizziness is a common, vexing symptom, and epidemi-
ologic data indicate that more than 20% of adults expe-
rience dizziness within a given year. The diagnosis is 
frequently challenging, in part because patients use the 
term to refer to a variety of different sensations, includ-
ing feelings of faintness, spinning, and other illusions 
of motion, imbalance, and anxiety. Other descriptive 
words, such as  light-headedness , are equally ambiguous, 
referring in some cases to a presyncopal sensation due 
to hypoperfusion of the brain and in others to disequi-
librium and imbalance. Patients often have difﬁ culty 
distinguishing among these various symptoms, and the 
words they choose do not describe the underlying etiol-
ogy reliably. 
 Vascular disorders cause presyncopal dizziness as a 
result of cardiac dysrhythmia, orthostatic hypotension, 
medication effects, or another cause. Such presynco-
pal sensations vary in duration; they may increase in 
severity until loss of consciousness occurs, or they may 
resolve before loss of consciousness if the cerebral isch-
emia is corrected. Faintness and syncope, which are 
discussed in detail in  Chap. 10 , should always be con-
sidered when one is evaluating patients with brief epi-
sodes of dizziness or dizziness that occurs with upright 
posture. 
 Vestibular causes of dizziness may be due to periph-
eral lesions that affect the labyrinths or vestibular nerves 
or to involvement of the central vestibular pathways. 
They may be paroxysmal or due to a ﬁ xed unilateral or 
bilateral vestibular deﬁ cit. Acute unilateral lesions cause 
vertigo due to a sudden imbalance in vestibular inputs 
from the two labyrinths. Bilateral lesions cause imbal-
ance and instability of vision when the head moves 
( oscillopsia ). Other causes of dizziness include nonvestib-
ular imbalance and gait disorders (e.g., loss of proprio-
ception from sensory neuropathy, parkinsonism) and 
anxiety. 
 In evaluating patients with dizziness, questions to 
consider include the following: (1) is it dangerous 
 DIZZINESS AND VERTIGO 
 CHAPTER 11 
(e.g., arrhythmia, transient ischemic attack/stroke)? (2) 
is it vestibular? and (3) if vestibular, is it peripheral or 
central? A careful history and examination often pro-
vide enough information to answer these questions and 
determine whether additional studies or referral to a 
specialist is necessary. 
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
 Dizziness 
HISTORY  When a patient presents with dizziness, 
the fi rst step is to delineate more precisely the nature 
of the symptom. In the case of vestibular disorders, the 
physical symptoms depend on whether the lesion is 
unilateral or bilateral and whether it is acute or chronic 
and progressive. Vertigo, an illusion of self or environ-
mental motion, implies asymmetry of vestibular inputs 
from the two labyrinths or in their central pathways and 
is usually acute. Symmetric bilateral vestibular hypo-
function causes imbalance but no vertigo. Because of 
the ambiguity in patients’ descriptions of their symp-
toms, diagnosis based simply on symptom character is 
typically unreliable. The history should focus closely on 
other features, including whether dizziness is parox-
ysmal or has occurred only once, the duration of each 
episode, any provoking factors, and the symptoms that 
accompany the dizziness. 
 Causes of dizziness can be divided into episodes 
that last for seconds, minutes, hours, or days. Com-
mon causes of brief dizziness (seconds) include benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) and orthostatic 
hypotension, both of which typically are provoked by 
changes in position. Attacks of migrainous vertigo and 
Ménière’s disease often last hours. When episodes are 
of intermediate duration (minutes), transient ischemic 
attacks of the posterior circulation should be consid-
ered, although these episodes also could be due to 
migraine or a number of other causes. 
 
CHAPTER 11
Dizziness and Vertigo
99
Symptoms that accompany vertigo may be help-
ful in distinguishing peripheral vestibular lesions from 
central causes. Unilateral hearing loss and other aural 
symptoms (ear pain, pressure, fullness) typically point 
to a peripheral cause. Because the auditory pathways 
quickly become bilateral upon entering the brainstem, 
central lesions are unlikely to cause unilateral hearing 
loss (unless the lesion lies near the root entry zone of 
the auditory nerve). Symptoms such as double vision, 
numbness, and limb ataxia suggest a brainstem or cer-
ebellar lesion.
EXAMINATION Because dizziness and imbalance 
can be a manifestation of a variety of neurologic disor-
ders, the neurologic examination is important in the eval-
uation of these patients. Particular focus should be given 
to assessment of eye movements, vestibular function, 
and hearing. The range of eye movements and whether 
they are equal in each eye should be observed. Peripheral 
eye movement disorders (e.g., cranial neuropathies, eye 
muscle weakness) are usually disconjugate (different in 
the two eyes). One should check pursuit (the ability to fol-
low a smoothly moving target) and saccades (the ability 
to look back and forth accurately between two targets). 
Poor pursuit or inaccurate (dysmetric) saccades usually 
indicates central pathology, often involving the cerebel-
lum. Finally, one should look for spontaneous nystagmus, 
an involuntary back-and-forth movement of the eyes. 
Most often nystagmus is of the jerk type, in which a slow 
drift (slow phase) in one direction alternates with a rapid 
saccadic movement (quick phase or fast phase) in the 
opposite direction that resets the position of the eyes in 
the orbits. Table 11-1 lists features that help distinguish 
peripheral vestibular nystagmus from central nystagmus. 
Except in the case of acute vestibulopathy (e.g., vestibular 
neuritis), if primary position nystagmus is easily seen in 
the light, it is probably due to a central cause. Two forms 
of nystagmus that are characteristic of lesions of the cer-
ebellar pathways are vertical nystagmus with downward 
fast phases (downbeat nystagmus) and horizontal nys-
tagmus that changes direction with gaze (gaze-evoked 
nystagmus).
Specialists find that the most useful bedside test of 
peripheral vestibular function is the head impulse test, in 
which the vestibuloocular reflex (VOR) is assessed with 
small-amplitude (approximately 20 degrees) rapid head 
rotations; beginning in the primary position, the head is 
rotated to the left or right while the patient is instructed 
to fixate on the examiner’s face. If the VOR is deficient, a 
catch-up saccade is seen at the end of the rotation. This 
test can identify both unilateral (deficient VOR when the 
head is rotated toward the weak side) and bilateral ves-
tibular hypofunction.
All patients with episodic dizziness, especially if it is 
provoked by positional change, should be tested with 
the Dix-Hallpike maneuver. The patient begins in a sit-
ting position with the head turned 45 degrees; holding 
the back of the head, the examiner then gently low-
ers the patient into a supine position with the head 
extended backward by about 20 degrees, and observes 
for nystagmus; after 30 s the patient is raised to the sit-
ting position and after a 1-min rest the procedure is 
TABLE 11-1
FEATURES OF PERIPHERAL AND CENTRAL VERTIGO
SIGN OR SYMPTOM
PERIPHERAL (LABYRINTH OR 
VESTIBULAR NERVE)
CENTRAL (BRAINSTEM OR CEREBELLUM)
Direction of associated nystagmus
Unidirectional; fast phase opposite 
lesiona
Bidirectional (direction-changing) or uni-
directional
Purely horizontal nystagmus without  
torsional component
Uncommon
May be present
Purely vertical or purely torsional  
nystagmus
Never presentb
May be present
Visual ﬁxation
Inhibits nystagmus
No inhibition
Tinnitus and/or deafness
Often present
Usually absent
Associated central nervous system 
abnormalities
None
Extremely common (e.g., diplopia, hic-
cups, cranial neuropathies, dysarthria)
Common causes
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, 
infection (labyrinthitis), vestibular neu-
ritis, Ménière’s disease, labyrinthine 
ischemia, trauma, toxin
Vascular, demyelinating, neoplasm
aIn Ménière’s disease, the direction of the fast phase is variable.
bCombined vertical-torsional nystagmus suggests BPPV.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
100
repeated with the head turned to the other side. Use 
of Frenzel eyeglasses (self-illuminated goggles with 
convex lenses that blur the patient’s vision but allow 
the examiner to see the eyes greatly magnified) can 
improve the sensitivity of the test. If transient upbeating 
and torsional nystagmus are elicited in the supine posi-
tion, posterior canal BPPV can be diagnosed confidently 
and treated with a repositioning maneuver, and addi-
tional testing can be avoided.
Dynamic visual acuity is a functional test that can 
be useful in assessing vestibular function. Visual acuity 
is measured with the head still and when the head is 
rotated back and forth by the examiner (about 1–2 Hz). 
A drop in visual acuity during head motion of more than 
one line on a near card or Snellen chart is abnormal.
The choice of ancillary tests should be guided by the 
history and examination findings. Audiometry should 
be performed whenever a vestibular disorder is sus-
pected. Unilateral sensorineural hearing loss supports a 
peripheral disorder (e.g., vestibular schwannoma). Pre-
dominantly low-frequency hearing loss is characteristic 
of Ménière’s disease. Electro- or videonystagmography 
includes recordings of spontaneous nystagmus (if pres-
ent), pursuit, and saccades; caloric testing to assess the 
responses of the two horizontal semicircular canals; and 
measurement of positional nystagmus. Patients with 
unexplained unilateral hearing loss or vestibular hypo-
function should undergo magnetic resonance imaging 
of the internal auditory canals, including administration 
of gadolinium, to rule out a schwannoma.
TREATMENT 
Dizziness
Treatment of vestibular symptoms should be driven by 
the underlying diagnosis. Simply treating dizziness with 
vestibular suppressant medications is often not helpful 
and may make the symptoms worse. The diagnostic and 
specific treatment approaches for the most commonly 
encountered vestibular disorders are discussed next.
hemorrhage), which may be life-threatening, or periph-
eral, affecting the vestibular nerve or labyrinth. Attention 
should be given to any symptoms or signs that point to 
central dysfunction (diplopia, weakness or numbness, dys-
arthria). The pattern of spontaneous nystagmus, if pres-
ent, may be helpful (Table  11-1). If the head impulse test 
is normal, an acute peripheral vestibular lesion is unlikely. 
However, a central lesion cannot always be excluded with 
certainly on the basis of symptoms and examination alone; 
thus, older patients with vascular risk factors who pres-
ent with an acute vestibular syndrome generally should be 
evaluated for the possibility of stroke even when there are 
no speciﬁc ﬁndings that indicate a central lesion.
Most patients with vestibular neuritis recover spon-
taneously, but glucocorticoids can improve outcome if 
administered within 3 days of symptom onset. Antivi-
ral medications are of no proven beneﬁt unless there is 
evidence to suggest herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt 
syndrome). Vestibular suppressant medications may 
reduce acute symptoms but should be avoided after the 
ﬁrst several days as they may impede central compen-
sation and recovery. Patients should be encouraged to 
resume a normal level of activity as soon as possible, and 
directed vestibular rehabilitation therapy may accelerate 
improvement.
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
BPPV is a common cause of recurrent vertigo. Episodes 
are brief (<1 min and typically 15–20 s) and are always 
provoked by changes in head position relative to grav-
ity, such as lying down, rolling over in bed, rising from a 
supine position, and extending the head to look upward. 
The attacks are caused by free-ﬂoating otoconia (calcium 
carbonate crystals) that have been dislodged from the 
utricular macula and have moved into one of the semi-
circular canals, usually the posterior canal. When head 
position changes, gravity causes the otoconia to move 
within the canal, producing vertigo and nystagmus. With 
posterior canal BPPV, the nystagmus beats upward and 
torsionally (the upper poles of the eyes beat toward the 
affected ear). Less commonly, the otoconia enter the 
horizontal canal, resulting in a horizontal nystagmus 
when the patient is lying with either ear down. Superior 
(also called anterior) canal involvement is rare. BPPV is 
treated with repositioning maneuvers that utilize gravity 
to remove the otoconia from the semicircular canal. For 
posterior canal BPPV, the Epley maneuver is the most 
commonly used procedure. For more refractory cases of 
BPPV, patients can be taught a variant of this maneuver 
that they can perform alone at home.
Vestibular migraine
Vestibular symptoms occur frequently in migraine, 
sometimes as a headache aura but often independent of 
Acute prolonged vertigo
An acute unilateral vestibular lesion causes constant ver-
tigo, nausea, vomiting, oscillopsia (motion of the visual 
scene), and imbalance. These symptoms are due to a 
sudden asymmetry of inputs from the two labyrinths 
or in their central connections, simulating a continuous 
rotation of the head. Unlike BPPV, the vertigo persists 
even when the head is not moving.
When a patient presents with an acute vestibular syn-
drome, the most important question is whether the 
lesion is central (e.g., a cerebellar or brainstem infarct or 
 
CHAPTER 11
Dizziness and Vertigo
101
headache. The duration of vertigo may be from min-
utes to hours, and some patients also experience more 
prolonged periods of disequilibrium (lasting days to 
weeks). Motion sensitivity and sensitivity to visual 
motion (e.g., movies) are common in patients with ves-
tibular migraine. Although data from controlled stud-
ies are generally lacking, vestibular migraine typically is 
treated with medications that are used for prophylaxis 
of migraine headaches. Antiemetics may be helpful to 
relieve symptoms at the time of an attack.
Ménière’s disease
Attacks of Ménière’s disease consist of vertigo, hearing 
loss, and pain, pressure, or fullness in the affected ear. 
The hearing loss and aural symptoms are key features 
that distinguish Ménière’s disease from other peripheral 
vestibulopathies. Audiometry at the time of an attack 
shows a characteristic asymmetric low-frequency hear-
ing loss; hearing commonly improves between attacks, 
although permanent hearing loss may occur eventually. 
Ménière’s disease is thought to be due to excess ﬂuid 
(endolymph) in the inner ear, hence the term endolym-
phatic hydrops. Patients suspected of having Ménière’s 
disease should be referred to an otolaryngologist for fur-
ther evaluation. Diuretics and sodium restriction are the 
initial treatments. If attacks persist, injections of genta-
micin into the middle ear are typically the next line of 
therapy. Full ablative procedures (vestibular nerve sec-
tion, labyrinthectomy) seldom are required.
Vestibular schwannoma
Vestibular schwannomas (sometimes less correctly termed 
acoustic neuromas) and other tumors at the cerebellopon-
tine angle cause slowly progressive unilateral sensori-
neural hearing loss and vestibular hypofunction. These 
patients typically do not have vertigo, because the 
gradual vestibular deﬁcit is compensated centrally as it 
develops. The diagnosis often is not made until there is 
sufﬁcient hearing loss to be noticed. The examination 
will show a deﬁcient Halmagyi-Curthoys head impulse 
response when the head is rotated toward the affected 
side. Any patient with unexplained asymmetric vestibu-
lar function (e.g., no prior history of vestibular neuritis) 
or asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss (documented 
on audiometry) should undergo MRI of the internal 
auditory canals, including gadolinium administration, to 
rule out a schwannoma.
Bilateral vestibular hypofunction
Patients with bilateral loss of vestibular function also 
typically do not have vertigo, since vestibular func-
tion is lost on both sides simultaneously, thus there is 
no asymmetry of vestibular input. Symptoms include 
loss of balance, particularly in the dark, where vestibular 
input is most critical, and oscillopsia during head move-
ment, such as while walking or riding in a car. Bilateral 
vestibular hypofunction may be (1) idiopathic and pro-
gressive, (2) part of a neurodegenerative disorder, or (3) 
iatrogenic, due to medication ototoxicity (most com-
monly gentamicin or other aminoglycoside antibiotics). 
Other causes include bilateral vestibular schwannomas 
(neuroﬁbromatosis type 2), autoimmune disease, men-
ingeal-based infection or tumor, and other toxins. It 
also may occur in patients with peripheral polyneuropa-
thy; in these patients, both vestibular loss and impaired 
proprioception may contribute to poor balance. Finally, 
unilateral processes such as vestibular neuritis and 
Ménière’s disease may involve both ears sequentially, 
resulting in bilateral vestibulopathy.
Examination ﬁndings include diminished dynamic 
visual acuity (see earlier in this chapter) due to loss of 
stable vision when the head is moving, abnormal head 
impulse responses in both directions, and a Romberg 
sign. In the laboratory, responses to caloric testing are 
reduced. Patients with bilateral vestibular hypofunction 
should be referred for vestibular rehabilitation therapy. 
Vestibular suppressant medications should not be used, 
as they will increase the imbalance. Evaluation by a 
neurologist is important not only to conﬁrm the diag-
nosis but also to consider any other associated neuro-
logic abnormalities that may clarify the etiology.
Psychosomatic dizziness
Psychological factors play an important role in chronic 
dizziness. First, dizziness may be a somatic manifesta-
tion of a psychiatric condition such as major depres-
sion, anxiety, or panic disorder. Second, patients may 
develop anxiety and autonomic symptoms as a conse-
quence or comorbidity of an independent vestibular 
disorder. One particular form of this has been termed 
variously phobic postural vertigo, psychophysiologic vertigo, or 
chronic subjective dizziness. These patients have a chronic 
feeling (months or longer) of dizziness and disequilib-
rium, an increased sensitivity to self-motion and visual 
motion (e.g., movies), and a particular intensiﬁcation of 
symptoms when moving through complex visual envi-
ronments such as supermarkets (visual vertigo). Although 
there may be a past history of an acute vestibular disor-
der (e.g., vestibular neuritis), the neurootologic exami-
nation and vestibular testing are normal or indicative 
of a compensated vestibular deﬁcit, indicating that the 
ongoing subjective dizziness cannot be explained by a 
primary vestibular disorder. Anxiety disorders are com-
mon in patients with chronic dizziness and contribute 
substantially to the morbidity. Thus, treatment with 
antianxiety medications (selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors [SSRIs]) and cognitive/behavioral therapy 
may be helpful. Vestibular rehabilitation therapy is also 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
102
sometimes beneﬁcial. Vestibular suppressant medications 
generally should be avoided. This condition should be 
suspected when the patient states, “My dizziness is so 
bad, I’m afraid to leave my house” (agoraphobia). Gen-
eral treatment of vertigo consists of vestibular suppres-
sant medications and vestibular rehabilitation therapy.
TREATMENT 
Vertigo
Table 11-2 provides a list of commonly used medica-
tions for suppression of vertigo. As noted, these medi-
cations should be reserved for short-term control of 
active vertigo, such as during the first few days of acute 
vestibular neuritis, or for acute attacks of Ménière’s dis-
ease. They are less helpful for chronic dizziness and, as 
previously stated, may hinder central compensation. 
An exception is that benzodiazepines may attenuate 
psychosomatic dizziness and the associated anxiety, 
although SSRIs are generally preferable in such patients.
Vestibular rehabilitation therapy promotes central 
adaptation processes that compensate for vestibular 
loss and also may help habituate motion sensitivity and 
other symptoms of psychosomatic dizziness. The gen-
eral approach is to use a graded series of exercises that 
progressively challenge gaze stabilization and balance.
TABLE 11-2
TREATMENT OF VERTIGO
AGENTa
DOSEb
Antihistamines
 Meclizine
 Dimenhydrinate
 Promethazine
25–50 mg 3 times daily
50 mg 1–2 times daily
25 mg 2–3 times daily 
(also can be given rectally 
and IM)
Benzodiazepines
 Diazepam
 Clonazepam
2.5 mg 1–3 times daily
0.25 mg 1–3 times daily
Anticholinergic
 Scopolamine transdermalc
Patch
Physical therapy
 Repositioning maneuversd
 Vestibular rehabilitation
Other
 Diuretics and/or low-
sodium (1 g/d) diete
 Antimigrainous drugsf
 Methylprednisoloneg
100 mg daily days 1–3; 
80 mg daily days 4–6; 
60 mg daily days 7–9; 
40 mg daily days 10–12; 
20 mg daily days 13–15; 
10 mg daily days 16–18, 
20, 22
 Selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitorsh
aAll listed drugs are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration, but most are not approved for the treatment of vertigo.
bUsual oral (unless otherwise stated) starting dose in adults; a 
higher maintenance dose can be reached by a gradual increase.
cFor motion sickness only.
dFor benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.
eFor Ménière’s disease.
fFor vestibular migraine.
gFor acute vestibular neuritis (started within three days of onset).
hFor psychosomatic vertigo.
 Michael J. Aminoff 
103
 Normal motor function involves integrated muscle 
activity that is modulated by the activity of the cere-
bral cortex, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and spinal cord. 
Motor system dysfunction leads to weakness or paral-
ysis, which is discussed in this chapter, or to ataxia 
( Chap. 31 ) or abnormal movements ( Chap. 30 ). The 
mode of onset, distribution, and accompaniments of 
weakness help suggest its cause. 
 Weakness is a reduction in the power that can be 
exerted by one or more muscles. Increased fatigabil-
ity or limitation in function due to pain or articular 
stiffness often is confused with weakness by patients. 
 Increased fatigability is the inability to sustain the perfor-
mance of an activity that should be normal for a person 
of the same age, sex, and size. Increased time is required 
sometimes for full power to be exerted, and this  brady-
kinesia may be misinterpreted as weakness. Severe pro-
prioceptive sensory loss also may lead to complaints 
of weakness because adequate feedback information 
about the direction and power of movements is lacking. 
Finally,  apraxia, a disorder of planning and initiating a 
skilled or learned movement unrelated to a signiﬁ cant 
motor or sensory deﬁ cit ( Chap. 18 ), sometimes is mis-
taken for weakness. 
 Paralysis indicates weakness that is so severe that 
a muscle cannot be contracted at all, whereas  paresis
refers to weakness that is mild or moderate. The pre-
ﬁ x “hemi-” refers to one-half of the body, “para-” to 
both legs, and “quadri-” to all four limbs. The sufﬁ x 
“-plegia” signiﬁ es severe weakness or paralysis. 
 The distribution of weakness helps to indicate the 
site of the underlying lesion. Weakness from involve-
ment of upper motor neurons occurs particularly in the 
extensors and abductors of the upper limb and the ﬂ ex-
ors of the lower limb. Lower motor neuron weakness 
does not have this selectivity but depends on whether 
involvement is at the level of the anterior horn cells, 
nerve root, limb plexus, or peripheral nerve—only 
muscles supplied by the affected structure are weak. 
Myopathic weakness is generally most marked in proxi-
mal muscles, whereas weakness from impaired neu-
romuscular transmission has no speciﬁ c pattern of 
involvement. Weakness often is accompanied by other 
neurologic abnormalities that help indicate the site of 
the responsible lesion. These abnormalities include 
changes in tone, muscle bulk, muscle stretch reﬂ exes, 
and cutaneous reﬂ exes  ( Table 12-1 ) . 
Tone is the resistance of a muscle to passive stretch. 
Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities that cause 
weakness generally produce  spasticity , an increase in 
tone associated with disease of upper motor neurons. 
Spasticity is velocity-dependent, has a sudden release 
after reaching a maximum (the “clasp-knife” phenom-
enon), and predominantly affects the antigravity mus-
cles (i.e., upper-limb ﬂ exors and lower-limb exten-
sors). Spasticity is distinct from rigidity and paratonia, 
two other types of hypertonia.  Rigidity is increased 
tone that is present throughout the range of motion 
(a “lead pipe” or “plastic” stiffness) and affects ﬂ ex-
ors and extensors equally; it sometimes has a cogwheel 
quality that is enhanced by voluntary movement of the 
contralateral limb (reinforcement). Rigidity occurs with 
certain extrapyramidal disorders, such as Parkinson’s 
disease.  Paratonia (or  gegenhalten ) is increased tone that 
varies irregularly in a manner that may seem related to 
the degree of relaxation, is present throughout the range 
of motion, and affects ﬂ exors and extensors equally; it 
usually results from disease of the frontal lobes. Weak-
ness with  decreased tone ( ﬂ accidity ) or normal tone occurs 
with disorders of  motor units. A motor unit consists of a 
single lower motor neuron and all the muscle ﬁ bers that 
it innervates. 
 Muscle bulk generally is not affected in patients with 
upper motor neuron lesions, although mild disuse 
atrophy eventually may occur. By contrast, atrophy is 
often conspicuous when a lower motor neuron lesion 
is responsible for weakness and also may occur with 
advanced muscle disease. 
 WEAKNESS AND PARALYSIS 
 CHAPTER 12 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
104
Muscle stretch (tendon) reﬂexes are usually increased 
with upper motor neuron lesions, although they may 
be decreased or absent for a variable period immediately 
after onset of an acute lesion. This is usually—but not 
invariably—accompanied by abnormalities of cutaneous 
reﬂexes (such as superﬁcial abdominals; Chap. 1) and, in 
particular, by an extensor plantar (Babinski) response. 
The muscle stretch reﬂexes are depressed in patients 
with lower motor neuron lesions when there is direct 
involvement of speciﬁc reﬂex arcs. The stretch reﬂexes 
generally are preserved in patients with myopathic 
weakness except in advanced stages, when they some-
times are attenuated. In disorders of the neuromuscu-
lar junction, the intensity of the reﬂex responses may 
be affected by preceding voluntary activity of affected 
muscles; that activity may lead to enhancement of ini-
tially depressed reﬂexes in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome and, conversely, to depression of initially nor-
mal reﬂexes in myasthenia gravis (Chap. 47).
The distinction of neuropathic (lower motor neuron) 
from myopathic weakness is sometimes difﬁcult clinically, 
although distal weakness is likely to be neuropathic, and 
symmetric proximal weakness myopathic. Fasciculations 
(visible or palpable twitch within a muscle due to the 
spontaneous discharge of a motor unit) and early atro-
phy indicate that weakness is neuropathic.
PATHOGENESIS
Upper motor neuron weakness
This pattern of weakness results from disorders that 
affect the upper motor neurons or their axons in the 
cerebral cortex, subcortical white matter, internal cap-
sule, brainstem, or spinal cord (Fig. 12-1). These 
lesions produce weakness through decreased activation 
of the lower motor neurons. In general, distal muscle 
groups are affected more severely than are proximal 
ones, and axial movements are spared unless the lesion 
is severe and bilateral. With corticobulbar involve-
ment, weakness usually is observed only in the lower 
face and tongue; extraocular, upper facial, pharyngeal, 
and jaw muscles almost always are spared. With bilateral 
corticobulbar lesions, pseudobulbar palsy often develops: 
dysarthria, dysphagia, dysphonia, and emotional labil-
ity accompany bilateral facial weakness and a brisk jaw 
jerk. Spasticity accompanies upper motor neuron weak-
ness but may not be present in the acute phase. Upper 
motor neuron lesions also affect the ability to perform 
rapid repetitive movements. Such movements are slow 
and coarse, but normal rhythmicity is maintained. 
Finger-nose-ﬁnger and heel-knee-shin maneuvers are 
performed slowly but adequately.
Lower motor neuron weakness
This pattern results from disorders of cell bodies of 
lower motor neurons in the brainstem motor nuclei and 
the anterior horn of the spinal cord or from dysfunc-
tion of the axons of these neurons as they pass to skel-
etal muscle (Fig. 12-2). Weakness is due to a decrease 
in the number of muscle ﬁbers that can be activated 
through a loss of α motor neurons or disruption of their 
connections to muscle. Loss of γ motor neurons does 
not cause weakness but decreases tension on the muscle 
spindles, which decreases muscle tone and attenuates 
the stretch reﬂexes elicited on examination. An absent 
stretch reﬂex suggests involvement of spindle afferent 
ﬁbers.
When a motor unit becomes diseased, especially in 
anterior horn cell diseases, it may discharge spontane-
ously, producing fasciculations that may be seen or felt 
clinically or recorded by electromyography (EMG). 
When α motor neurons or their axons degenerate, the 
denervated muscle ﬁbers also may discharge spontane-
ously. These single muscle ﬁber discharges, or ﬁbrilla-
tion potentials, cannot be seen or felt but can be recorded 
with EMG. If lower motor neuron weakness is pres-
ent, recruitment of motor units is delayed or reduced, 
with fewer than normal activated at a particular dis-
charge frequency. This contrasts with weakness of the 
upper motor neuron type, in which a normal number 
of motor units is activated at a given frequency but with 
a diminished maximal discharge frequency.
TABLE 12-1
SIGNS THAT DISTINGUISH THE ORIGIN OF WEAKNESS
SIGN
UPPER MOTOR NEURON
LOWER MOTOR NEURON
MYOPATHIC
Atrophy
None
Severe
Mild
Fasciculations
None
Common
None
Tone
Spastic
Decreased
Normal/decreased
Distribution of weakness
Pyramidal/regional
Distal/segmental
Proximal
Tendon reﬂexes
Hyperactive
Hypoactive/absent
Normal/hypoactive
Babinski sign
Present
Absent
Absent
 
CHAPTER 12
Weakness and Paralysis
105
Myopathic weakness
Myopathic weakness is produced by disorders of the 
muscle ﬁbers. Disorders of the neuromuscular junctions 
also produce weakness, but this is variable in degree and 
Ventromedial
bulbospinal 
tracts
Lateral
corticospinal tract
Rubrospinal
(ventrolateral)
tract
Corticospinal
tract
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Elbow
Wrist
Fingers
Thumb
Neck
Brow
Larynx
Eyelid
Nares
Lips
Tongue
Knee
Ankle
Toes
Red nucleus
Rubrospinal tract
Lateral corticospinal
tract
Reticular nuclei
Vestibular nuclei
Vestibulospinal tract
Reticulospinal tract
FIGURE 12-1 
The corticospinal and bulbospinal upper motor neuron 
pathways. Upper motor neurons have their cell bodies in 
layer V of the primary motor cortex (the precentral gyrus, or 
Brodmann’s area 4) and in the premotor and supplemental 
motor cortex (area 6). The upper motor neurons in the pri-
mary motor cortex are somatotopically organized, as illus-
trated on the right side of the ﬁgure.
 Axons of the upper motor neurons descend through the 
subcortical white matter and the posterior limb of the inter-
nal capsule. Axons of the pyramidal or corticospinal system 
descend through the brainstem in the cerebral peduncle of 
the midbrain, the basis pontis, and the medullary pyramids. 
At the cervicomedullary junction, most pyramidal axons 
decussate into the contralateral corticospinal tract of the lat-
eral spinal cord, but 10–30% remain ipsilateral in the anterior 
spinal cord. Pyramidal neurons make direct monosynaptic 
connections with lower motor neurons. They innervate most 
densely the lower motor neurons of hand muscles and are 
involved in the execution of learned, ﬁne movements. Cor-
ticobulbar neurons are similar to corticospinal neurons but 
innervate brainstem motor nuclei.
 Bulbospinal upper motor neurons inﬂuence strength and 
tone but are not part of the pyramidal system. The descend-
ing ventromedial bulbospinal pathways originate in the tec-
tum of the midbrain (tectospinal pathway), the vestibular 
nuclei (vestibulospinal pathway), and the reticular formation 
(reticulospinal pathway). These pathways inﬂuence axial and 
proximal muscles and are involved in the maintenance of 
posture and integrated movements of the limbs and trunk. 
The descending ventrolateral bulbospinal pathways, which 
originate predominantly in the red nucleus (rubrospinal path-
way), facilitate distal limb muscles. The bulbospinal system 
sometimes is referred to as the extrapyramidal upper motor 
neuron system. In all ﬁgures, nerve cell bodies and axon ter-
minals are shown, respectively, as closed circles and forks.
distribution and is inﬂuenced by preceding activity of the 
affected muscle. At a muscle ﬁber, if the nerve termi-
nal releases a normal number of acetylcholine molecules 
presynaptically and a sufﬁcient number of postsynaptic 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
106
acetylcholine receptors are opened, the end plate reaches 
threshold and thereby generates an action potential that 
spreads across the muscle ﬁber membrane and into the 
transverse tubular system. This electrical excitation activates 
intracellular events that produce an energy-dependent 
contraction of the muscle ﬁber (excitation-contraction 
coupling).
Myopathic weakness is produced by a decrease in the 
number or contractile force of muscle ﬁbers activated 
within motor units. With muscular dystrophies, inﬂam-
matory myopathies, or myopathies with muscle ﬁber 
necrosis, the number of muscle ﬁbers is reduced within 
many motor units. On EMG, the size of each motor 
unit action potential is decreased, and motor units must 
be recruited more rapidly than normal to produce the 
desired power. Some myopathies produce weakness 
through loss of contractile force of muscle ﬁbers or 
through relatively selective involvement of type II (fast) 
ﬁbers. These myopathies may not affect the size of indi-
vidual motor unit action potentials and are detected by 
a discrepancy between the electrical activity and force 
of a muscle.
Diseases of the neuromuscular junction, such as 
myasthenia gravis, produce weakness in a similar man-
ner, but the loss of muscle ﬁbers is functional (due to 
inability to activate them) rather than related to muscle 
ﬁber loss. The number of muscle ﬁbers that are acti-
vated varies over time, depending on the state of rest of 
the neuromuscular junctions. Thus, fatigable weakness 
is suggestive of myasthenia gravis or other disorders of 
the neuromuscular junction.
Hemiparesis
Hemiparesis results from an upper motor neuron lesion 
above the midcervical spinal cord; most such lesions 
are above the foramen magnum. The presence of other 
neurologic deﬁcits helps localize the lesion. Thus, lan-
guage disorders, cortical sensory disturbances, cogni-
tive abnormalities, disorders of visual-spatial integration, 
apraxia, or seizures point to a cortical lesion. Homon-
ymous visual ﬁeld defects reﬂect either a cortical or a 
subcortical hemispheric lesion. A “pure motor” hemi-
paresis of the face, arm, and leg often is due to a small, 
discrete lesion in the posterior limb of the internal cap-
sule, cerebral peduncle, or upper pons. Some brainstem 
lesions produce “crossed paralyses,” consisting of ipsi-
lateral cranial nerve signs and contralateral hemiparesis 
(Chap. 27). The absence of cranial nerve signs or facial 
weakness suggests that a hemiparesis is due to a lesion in 
the high cervical spinal cord, especially if it is associated 
with ipsilateral loss of proprioception and contralateral 
loss of pain and temperature sense (the Brown-Séquard 
syndrome).
Acute or episodic hemiparesis usually results from isch-
emic or hemorrhagic stroke but also may relate to 
hemorrhage occurring into brain tumors or may be a 
result of trauma; other causes include a focal structural 
lesion or an inﬂammatory process as in multiple scle-
rosis, abscess, or sarcoidosis. Evaluation (Fig. 12-3) 
begins immediately with a CT scan of the brain and 
laboratory studies. If the CT is normal and an ischemic 
stroke is unlikely, MRI of the brain or cervical spine is 
performed.
Subacute hemiparesis that evolves over days or weeks 
has an extensive differential diagnosis. A common cause 
is subdural hematoma, especially in elderly or anticoag-
ulated patients, even when there is no history of trauma. 
Infectious possibilities include cerebral abscess, fungal 
granuloma or meningitis, and parasitic infection. Weak-
ness from primary and metastatic neoplasms may evolve 
Muscle spindle
(intrafusal fibers)
Afferent 
neuron
Alpha and gamma
motor neurons
Motor end plates on
voluntary muscle
(extrafusal fibers)
α
γ
FIGURE 12-2 
Lower motor neurons are divided into a and g types. 
The larger α motor neurons are more numerous and inner-
vate the extrafusal muscle ﬁbers of the motor unit. Loss of α 
motor neurons or disruption of their axons produces lower 
motor neuron weakness. The smaller, less numerous γ motor 
neurons innervate the intrafusal muscle ﬁbers of the muscle 
spindle and contribute to normal tone and stretch reﬂexes. 
The α motor neuron receives direct excitatory input from cor-
ticomotoneurons and primary muscle spindle afferents. The α 
and γ motor neurons also receive excitatory input from other 
descending upper motor neuron pathways, segmental sen-
sory inputs, and interneurons. The α motor neurons receive 
direct inhibition from Renshaw cell interneurons, and other 
interneurons indirectly inhibit the α and γ motor neurons.
 A tendon reﬂex requires the function of all the illustrated 
structures. A tap on a tendon stretches muscle spindles 
(which are tonically activated by γ motor neurons) and acti-
vates the primary spindle afferent neurons. These neurons 
stimulate the α motor neurons in the spinal cord, producing a 
brief muscle contraction, which is the familiar tendon reﬂex.
 
CHAPTER 12
Weakness and Paralysis
107
over days to weeks. AIDS may present with subacute 
hemiparesis due to toxoplasmosis or primary CNS lym-
phoma. Noninfectious inﬂammatory processes such as 
multiple sclerosis or, less commonly, sarcoidosis merit 
consideration. If the brain MRI is normal and there are 
no cortical and hemispheric signs, MRI of the cervical 
spine should be undertaken.
Chronic hemiparesis that evolves over months usually is 
due to a neoplasm or vascular malformation, a chronic 
subdural hematoma, or a degenerative disease. If an 
MRI of the brain is normal, the possibility of a foramen 
magnum or high cervical spinal cord lesion should be 
considered.
Paraparesis
An intraspinal lesion at or below the upper thoracic 
spinal cord level is most commonly responsible, but a 
paraparesis also may result from lesions at other loca-
tions that disturb upper motor neurons (especially 
parasagittal intracranial lesions) and lower motor neu-
rons (anterior horn cell disorders, cauda equina syn-
dromes due to involvement of nerve roots derived 
from the lower spinal cord [Chap. 35], and peripheral 
neuropathies).
Acute paraparesis may not be recognized as due to spi-
nal cord disease at an early stage if the legs are ﬂaccid 
and areﬂexic. Usually, however, there is sensory loss 
in the legs with an upper level on the trunk, a dissoci-
ated sensory loss suggestive of a central cord syndrome, 
or exaggerated stretch reﬂexes in the legs with normal 
reﬂexes in the arms. It is important to image the spinal 
cord (Fig. 12-3). Compressive lesions (particularly epi-
dural tumor, abscess, and hematoma but also a prolapsed 
intervertebral disk and vertebral involvement by malig-
nancy or infection), spinal cord infarction (propriocep-
tion usually is spared), an arteriovenous ﬁstula or other 
vascular anomaly, and transverse myelitis are among the 
possible causes (Chap. 35).
Diseases of the cerebral hemispheres that produce 
acute paraparesis include anterior cerebral artery isch-
emia (shoulder shrug also is affected), superior sagittal 
sinus or cortical venous thrombosis, and acute hydro-
cephalus. If upper motor neuron signs are associated 
with drowsiness, confusion, seizures, or other hemi-
spheric signs, MRI of the brain should be undertaken.
Paraparesis may result from a cauda equina syndrome, 
for example, after trauma to the low back, a mid-
line disk herniation, or an intraspinal tumor; although 
sphincters are affected, hip ﬂexion often is spared, as is 
Hemiparesis
UMN signs
Cerebral signs
Brain CT
or MRI
†
Proximal
Restricted
Paraparesis
Quadriparesis
Monoparesis
Distal
LMN signs*
Alert
UMN signs
LMN signs*
UMN signs
LMN signs*
EMG and NCS
UMN pattern
LMN pattern
Myopathic pattern
Anterior horn,
  root, or peripheral
  nerve disease
Muscle or
  neuromuscular
  junction disease
* or signs of myopathy
† If no abnormality detected, consider spinal MRI.
‡ If no abnormality detected, consider myelogram or brain MRI.
No
Yes
No
Yes
Spinal MRI
‡ 
DISTRIBUTION OF WEAKNESS
FIGURE 12-3 
An algorithm for the initial workup of a patient with weak-
ness. CT, computed tomography; EMG, electromyography; 
LMN, lower motor neuron; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 
NCS, nerve conduction studies; UMN, upper motor neuron.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
108
sensation over the anterolateral thighs. Rarely, parapa-
resis is caused by a rapidly evolving anterior horn cell 
disease (such as poliovirus or West Nile virus infec-
tion), peripheral neuropathy (such as Guillain-Barré 
syndrome; Chap. 46), or myopathy (Chap. 48). In such 
cases, electrophysiologic studies are diagnostically help-
ful and refocus the subsequent evaluation.
Subacute or chronic paraparesis with spasticity is caused 
by upper motor neuron disease. When there is associ-
ated lower-limb sensory loss and sphincter involvement, 
a chronic spinal cord disorder is likely (Chap. 35). If an 
MRI of the spinal cord is normal, MRI of the brain 
may be indicated. If hemispheric signs are present, a 
parasagittal meningioma or chronic hydrocephalus is 
likely and MRI of the brain is the initial test. In the 
rare situation in which a long-standing paraparesis has a 
lower motor neuron or myopathic etiology, the local-
ization usually is suspected on clinical grounds by the 
absence of spasticity and conﬁrmed by EMG and nerve 
conduction tests.
Quadriparesis or generalized weakness
Generalized weakness may be due to disorders of the 
CNS or the motor unit. Although the terms quadri-
paresis and generalized weakness often are used inter-
changeably, quadriparesis is commonly used when 
an upper motor neuron cause is suspected, and gen-
eralized weakness when a disease of the motor unit is 
likely. Weakness from CNS disorders usually is associ-
ated with changes in consciousness or cognition, with 
spasticity and brisk stretch reﬂexes, and with alterations 
of sensation. Most neuromuscular causes of general-
ized weakness are associated with normal mental func-
tion, hypotonia, and hypoactive muscle stretch reﬂexes. 
The major causes of intermittent weakness are listed 
in Table 12-2. A patient with generalized fatigabil-
ity without objective weakness may have the chronic 
fatigue syndrome (Chap. 52).
Acute quadriparesis
Acute quadriparesis with onset over minutes may result 
from disorders of upper motor neurons (e.g., anoxia, 
hypotension, brainstem or cervical cord ischemia, trauma, 
and systemic metabolic abnormalities) or muscle (electro-
lyte disturbances, certain inborn errors of muscle energy 
metabolism, toxins, and periodic paralyses). Onset over 
hours to weeks may, in addition to these disorders, be 
due to lower motor neuron disorders. Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (Chap. 46) is the most common lower motor 
neuron weakness that progresses over days to 4 weeks; 
the ﬁnding of an elevated protein level in the cerebrospi-
nal ﬂuid is helpful but may be absent early in the course.
In obtunded patients, evaluation begins with a CT 
scan of the brain. If upper motor neuron signs are pres-
ent but the patient is alert, the initial test is usually an 
MRI of the cervical cord. If weakness is lower motor 
neuron, myopathic, or uncertain in origin, the clinical 
approach begins with blood studies to determine the 
level of muscle enzymes and electrolytes and an EMG 
and nerve conduction study.
Subacute or chronic quadriparesis
When quadriparesis due to upper motor neuron disease 
develops over weeks, months, or years, the distinction 
between disorders of the cerebral hemispheres, brain-
stem, and cervical spinal cord is usually possible clini-
cally. An MRI is obtained of the clinically suspected site 
of pathology. EMG and nerve conduction studies help 
distinguish lower motor neuron disease (which usually 
presents with weakness that is most profound distally) 
from myopathic weakness, which is typically proximal.
Monoparesis
Monoparesis usually is due to lower motor neuron dis-
ease, with or without associated sensory involvement. 
Upper motor neuron weakness occasionally presents 
as a monoparesis of distal and nonantigravity muscles. 
Myopathic weakness rarely is limited to one limb.
Acute monoparesis
If the weakness is predominantly in distal and nonan-
tigravity muscles and is not associated with sensory 
impairment or pain, focal cortical ischemia is likely 
(Chap. 27); diagnostic possibilities are similar to those 
for acute hemiparesis. Sensory loss and pain usually 
accompany acute lower motor neuron weakness; the 
weakness commonly is localized to a single nerve root 
or peripheral nerve within the limb but occasionally 
TABLE 12-2
CAUSES OF EPISODIC GENERALIZED WEAKNESS
1. Electrolyte disturbances, e.g., hypokalemia, hyperka-
lemia, hypercalcemia, hypernatremia, hyponatremia, 
hypophosphatemia, hypermagnesemia
2. Muscle disorders
 a. Channelopathies (periodic paralyses)
 b.  Metabolic defects of muscle (impaired carbohydrate 
or fatty acid utilization; abnormal mitochondrial 
function)
3. Neuromuscular junction disorders
 a. Myasthenia gravis
 b. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
4. Central nervous system disorders
 a. Transient ischemic attacks of the brainstem
 b. Transient global cerebral ischemia
  c. Multiple sclerosis
 
CHAPTER 12
Weakness and Paralysis
109
reﬂects plexus involvement. If lower motor neuron 
weakness is suspected or the pattern of weakness is 
uncertain, the clinical approach begins with an EMG 
and a nerve conduction study.
Subacute or chronic monoparesis
Weakness and atrophy that develop over weeks or 
months are usually of lower motor neuron origin. If 
they are associated with sensory symptoms, a peripheral 
cause (nerve, root, or plexus) is likely; in the absence 
of such symptoms, anterior horn cell disease should be 
considered. In either case, an electrodiagnostic study 
is indicated. If weakness is of the upper motor neuron 
type, a discrete cortical (precentral gyrus) or cord lesion 
may be responsible, and an imaging study of the appro-
priate site is performed.
Distal weakness
Involvement of two or more limbs distally suggests 
lower motor neuron or peripheral nerve disease. Acute 
distal lower limb weakness results occasionally from an 
acute toxic polyneuropathy or cauda equina syndrome. 
Distal symmetric weakness usually develops over weeks, 
months, or years and, when associated with numb-
ness, is due to diseases of peripheral nerves (Chap. 45). 
Anterior horn cell disease may begin distally but is typi-
cally asymmetric and without accompanying numb-
ness (Chap. 32). Rarely, myopathies present with dis-
tal weakness (Chap. 48). Electrodiagnostic studies help 
localize the disorder (Fig.  12-3).
Proximal weakness
Myopathy often produces symmetric weakness of the 
pelvic or shoulder girdle muscles (Chap. 48). Diseases 
of the neuromuscular junction (such as myasthenia 
gravis [Chap. 47]), may present with symmetric proxi-
mal weakness often associated with ptosis, diplopia, or 
bulbar weakness and ﬂuctuating in severity during the 
day. The extreme fatigability present in some cases of 
myasthenia gravis may even suggest episodic weak-
ness, but strength rarely returns fully to normal. In 
anterior horn cell disease, proximal weakness is usu-
ally asymmetric, but it may be symmetric if familial. 
Numbness does not occur with any of these diseases. 
The evaluation usually begins with determination of 
the serum creatine kinase level and electrophysiologic 
studies.
Weakness in a restricted distribution
Weakness may not ﬁt any of these patterns, being lim-
ited, for example, to the extraocular, hemifacial, bul-
bar, or respiratory muscles. If it is unilateral, restricted 
weakness usually is due to lower motor neuron or 
peripheral nerve disease, such as in a facial palsy or 
an isolated superior oblique muscle paresis. Weakness 
of part of a limb usually is due to a peripheral nerve 
lesion such as carpal tunnel syndrome or another 
entrapment neuropathy. Relatively symmetric weak-
ness of extraocular or bulbar muscles usually is due to 
a myopathy (Chap. 48) or neuromuscular junction dis-
order (Chap. 47). Bilateral facial palsy with areﬂexia 
suggests Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 46). Wors-
ening of relatively symmetric weakness with fatigue 
is characteristic of neuromuscular junction disorders. 
Asymmetric bulbar weakness usually is due to motor 
neuron disease. Weakness limited to respiratory mus-
cles is uncommon and usually is due to motor neuron 
disease, myasthenia gravis, or polymyositis/dermato-
myositis (Chap. 49).
 Lewis Sudarsky 
110
 PREVALENCE, MORBIDITY, AND 
MORTALITY 
 Gait and balance problems are common in the elderly 
and contribute to the risk of falls and injury. Gait dis-
orders have been described in 15% of individuals older 
than age 65 years. By age 80 years, one person in four 
will use a mechanical aid to assist ambulation. Among 
those 85 and older, the prevalence of gait abnormality 
approaches 40%. In epidemiologic studies, gait disorders 
are consistently identiﬁ ed as a major risk factor for falls 
and injury. 
 A substantial number of older persons report insecure 
balance and experience falls and fear of falling. Prospec-
tive studies indicate that 30% of those age >65 years fall 
each year; the proportion is even higher in frail elderly 
and nursing home patients. Each year, 8% of individ-
uals age >75 years suffer a serious fall-related injury. 
Hip fractures often result in hospitalization and nursing 
home admission. For each person who is physically dis-
abled, there are others whose functional independence 
is constrained by anxiety and fear of falling. Nearly 
one in ﬁ ve elderly individuals voluntarily limits activity 
because of fear of falling. With loss of ambulation, there 
is a diminished quality of life and increased morbidity 
and mortality rates. 
 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 
 Upright bipedal gait depends on the successful integra-
tion of postural control and locomotion. These func-
tions are widely distributed in the central nervous sys-
tem. The biomechanics of bipedal walking are complex, 
and the performance is easily compromised by neuro-
logic deﬁ cit at any level. Command and control centers 
in the brainstem, cerebellum, and forebrain modify the 
action of spinal pattern generators to promote stepping. 
While a form of “ﬁ ctive locomotion” can be elicited 
from quadrupedal animals after spinal transection, this 
capacity is limited in primates. Step generation in pri-
mates is dependent on locomotor centers in the pontine 
tegmentum, midbrain, and subthalamic region. Loco-
motor synergies are executed through the reticular for-
mation and descending pathways in the ventromedial 
spinal cord. Cerebral control provides a goal and pur-
pose for walking and is involved in avoidance of obsta-
cles and adaptation of locomotor programs to context 
and terrain. 
 Postural control requires the maintenance of the 
center of mass over the base of support through the 
gait cycle. Unconscious postural adjustments main-
tain standing balance: long latency responses are mea-
surable in the leg muscles, beginning 110 ms after a 
perturbation. Forward motion of the center of mass 
provides propulsive force for stepping, but failure 
to maintain the center of mass within stability limits 
results in falls. The anatomic substrate for dynamic 
balance has not been well deﬁ ned, but the vestibular 
nucleus and midline cerebellum contribute to balance 
control in animals. Human patients with damage to 
these structures have impaired balance with standing 
and walking. 
 Standing balance depends on good-quality sensory 
information about the position of the body center with 
respect to the environment, support surface, and gravi-
tational forces. Sensory information for postural control 
is primarily generated by the visual system, the vestibu-
lar system, and by proprioceptive receptors in the mus-
cle spindles and joints. A healthy redundancy of sensory 
afferent information is generally available, but loss of 
two of the three pathways is sufﬁ cient to compromise 
standing balance. Balance disorders in older individuals 
sometimes result from multiple insults in the periph-
eral sensory systems (e.g., visual loss, vestibular deﬁ cit, 
peripheral neuropathy), critically degrading the quality 
of afferent information needed for balance stability. 
 Older patients with cognitive impairment from 
neurodegenerative diseases appear to be particularly 
 GAIT AND BALANCE DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 13 
 
CHAPTER 13
Gait and Balance Disorders
111
TABLE 13-1
ETIOLOGY OF GAIT DISORDERS
CASES
PERCENT
Sensory deﬁcits
22
18.3
Myelopathy
20
16.7
Multiple infarcts
18
15.0
Parkinsonism
14
11.7
Cerebellar degeneration
 8
  6.7
Hydrocephalus
 8
  6.7
Toxic/metabolic
 3
  2.5
Psychogenic
 4
  3.3
Other
 6
  5.0
Unknown cause
17
14.2
Total
120
100%
Source: Reproduced with permission from J Masdeu et al: Gait 
Disorders of Aging: With Special Reference to Falls. Boston, Little 
Brown, 1995.
prone to falls and injury. Frailty, muscle weakness, 
and deconditioning also contribute to the risk. It has 
been shown that older people who continue walking 
while talking are at increased risk for falls. There is a 
growing literature on the use of attentional resources 
to manage gait and balance. Walking is generally con-
sidered to be unconscious and automatic, but the abil-
ity to walk while attending a cognitive task (dual-task 
walking) may be compromised in frail elderly with a 
history of falls. Older patients with deﬁcits in execu-
tive function may have particular difﬁculty in managing 
the attentional resources needed for dynamic balance 
when distracted.
DISORDERS OF GAIT
The heterogeneity of gait disorders observed in clini-
cal practice reﬂects the large network of neural systems 
involved in the task. Walking is vulnerable to neurologic 
disease at every level. Gait disorders have been classi-
ﬁed descriptively, based on the abnormal physiology and 
biomechanics. One problem with this approach is that 
many failing gaits look fundamentally similar. This over-
lap reﬂects common patterns of adaptation to threatened 
balance stability and declining performance. The gait dis-
order observed clinically must be viewed as the product of a neu-
rologic deﬁcit and a functional adaptation. Unique features of 
the failing gait are often overwhelmed by the adaptive 
response. Some of the common patterns of abnormal gait 
are summarized next. Gait disorders can also be classiﬁed 
by etiology, as listed in Table 13-1.
Cautious gait
The term cautious gait is used to describe the patient who 
walks with an abbreviated stride and lowered center of 
mass, as if walking on a slippery surface. This disorder is 
both common and nonspeciﬁc. It is, in essence, an adap-
tation to a perceived postural threat. There may be an 
associated fear of falling. In one study, this disorder was 
observed in more than one-third of older patients with 
a higher level gait disturbance. Physical therapy often 
improves walking to the degree that follow-up observa-
tion may reveal a more speciﬁc underlying disorder.
Stiff-legged gait
Spastic gait is characterized by stiffness in the legs, an 
imbalance of muscle tone, and a tendency to circum-
duct and scuff the feet. The disorder reﬂects compro-
mise of corticospinal command and overactivity of spi-
nal reﬂexes. The patient may walk on his or her toes. In 
extreme instances, the legs cross due to increased tone 
in the adductors. Upper motor neuron signs are present 
on physical examination. Shoes often reﬂect an uneven 
pattern of wear across the outside. The disorder may be 
cerebral or spinal in origin.
Myelopathy from cervical spondylosis is a common 
cause of spastic or spastic-ataxic gait. Demyelinating dis-
ease and trauma are the leading causes of myelopathy in 
younger patients. In a chronic progressive myelopathy 
of unknown cause, workup with laboratory and imag-
ing tests may establish a diagnosis. A family history 
should suggest hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP; Chap. 
32). Genetic testing is now available for some of the 
common HSP mutations. Tropical spastic paraparesis 
related to the retrovirus HTLV-I is endemic in parts of 
the Caribbean and South America. A structural lesion, 
such as tumor or spinal vascular malformation, should 
be excluded with appropriate testing. Spinal cord disor-
ders are discussed in detail in Chap. 35.
With cerebral spasticity, asymmetry is common, 
involvement of the upper extremities is usually observed, 
and dysarthria is often an associated feature. Common 
causes include vascular disease (stroke), multiple sclero-
sis, and perinatal injury to the nervous system (cerebral 
palsy).
Other stiff-legged gaits include dystonia (Chap. 48) 
and stiff-person syndrome. Dystonia is a disorder char-
acterized by sustained muscle contractions, resulting in 
repetitive twisting movements and abnormal posture. It 
often has a genetic basis. Dystonic spasms produce plan-
tar ﬂexion and inversion of the feet, sometimes with 
torsion of the trunk. In autoimmune stiff-person syn-
drome (Chap. 44), there is exaggerated lordosis of the 
lumbar spine and overactivation of antagonist muscles, 
which restricts trunk and lower limb movement and 
results in a wooden or ﬁxed posture.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
112
Parkinsonism and freezing gait
Parkinson’s disease (Chap. 30) is common, affecting 
1% of the population age >55 years. The stooped pos-
ture and shufﬂing gait are characteristic and distinctive 
features. Patients sometimes accelerate (festinate) with 
walking or display retropulsion. There may be difﬁculty 
with gait initiation (freezing) and a tendency to turn 
en bloc. Imbalance and falls may develop as the disease 
progresses over years. Gait freezing is described in 7% of 
Parkinson’s patients within 2 years of onset and 26% by 
the end of 5 years. Freezing of gait is even more com-
mon in some of the Parkinson’s-related neurodegen-
erative disorders, such as progressive supranuclear palsy, 
multiple-system atrophy, and corticobasal degeneration. 
These patients frequently present with axial stiffness, 
postural instability, and a shufﬂing gait while lacking the 
characteristic pill-rolling tremor of Parkinson’s disease. 
Falls within the ﬁrst year suggest the possibility of pro-
gressive supranuclear palsy.
Hyperkinetic movement disorders also produce char-
acteristic and recognizable disturbances in gait. In Hun-
tington’s disease (Chap. 29), the unpredictable occur-
rence of choreic movements gives the gait a dancing 
quality. Tardive dyskinesia is the cause of many odd, 
stereotypic gait disorders seen in patients chronically 
exposed to antipsychotics and other drugs that block the 
D2 dopamine receptor.
Frontal gait disorder
Frontal gait disorder, sometimes known as “gait apraxia,” 
is common in the elderly and has a variety of causes. 
The term is used to describe a shufﬂing, freezing gait 
with imbalance and other signs of higher cerebral dys-
function. Typical features include a wide base of sup-
port, short stride, shufﬂing along the ﬂoor, and dif-
ﬁculty with starts and turns. Many patients exhibit 
difﬁculty with gait initiation, descriptively character-
ized as the “slipping clutch” syndrome. The term lower 
body parkinsonism is also used to describe such patients. 
Strength is generally preserved, and patients are able 
to make stepping movements when not standing and 
maintaining balance at the same time. This disorder is 
best considered a higher level motor control disorder, as 
opposed to an apraxia (Chap. 18).
The most common cause of frontal gait disorder is 
vascular disease, particularly subcortical small-vessel 
disease. Lesions are frequently found in the deep fron-
tal white matter and centrum ovale. Gait disorder may 
be the salient feature in hypertensive patients with 
ischemic lesions of the deep hemisphere white matter 
(Binswanger’s disease). The clinical syndrome includes 
mental change (variable in degree), dysarthria, pseudo-
bulbar affect (emotional disinhibition), increased tone, 
and hyperreﬂexia in the lower limbs.
Communicating hydrocephalus in adults also pres-
ents with a gait disorder of this type. Other features of 
the diagnostic triad (mental change, incontinence) may 
be absent in the initial stages. MRI demonstrates ven-
tricular enlargement, an enlarged ﬂow void about the 
aqueduct, and a variable degree of periventricular white 
matter change. A lumbar puncture or dynamic test is 
necessary to conﬁrm the presence of hydrocephalus.
Cerebellar gait ataxia
Disorders of the cerebellum have a dramatic impact on 
gait and balance. Cerebellar gait ataxia is characterized 
by a wide base of support, lateral instability of the trunk, 
erratic foot placement, and decompensation of balance 
when attempting to walk tandem. Difﬁculty main-
taining balance when turning is often an early feature. 
Patients are unable to walk tandem heel to toe, and dis-
play truncal sway in narrow-based or tandem stance. 
They show considerable variation in their tendency to 
fall in daily life.
Causes of cerebellar ataxia in older patients include 
stroke, trauma, tumor, and neurodegenerative disease, 
including multiple-system atrophy (Chaps. 30 and 33) 
and various forms of hereditary cerebellar degenera-
tion (Chap. 31). A short expansion at the site of the 
fragile X mutation (fragile X pre-mutation) has been 
associated with gait ataxia in older men. Alcoholic cer-
ebellar degeneration can be screened by history and 
often conﬁrmed by MRI. In patients with ataxia, MRI 
demonstrates the extent and topography of cerebellar 
atrophy.
Sensory ataxia
As reviewed earlier, balance depends on high-quality 
afferent information from the visual and the vestibular 
systems and proprioception. When this information is 
lost or degraded, balance during locomotion is impaired 
and instability results. The sensory ataxia of tabetic 
neurosyphilis is a classic example. The contemporary 
equivalent is the patient with neuropathy affecting 
large ﬁbers. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency is a treatable cause 
of large-ﬁber sensory loss in the spinal cord and periph-
eral nervous system. Joint position and vibration sense 
are diminished in the lower limbs. The stance in such 
patients is destabilized by eye closure; they often look 
down at their feet when walking and do poorly in the 
dark. Patients have been described with imbalance from 
bilateral vestibular loss, caused by disease or by expo-
sure to ototoxic drugs. Table 13-2 compares sensory 
ataxia with cerebellar ataxia and frontal gait disorder. 
Some frail older patients exhibit a syndrome of imbal-
ance from the combined effect of multiple sensory deﬁ-
cits. Such patients have disturbances in proprioception, 
vision, and vestibular sense that impair postural support.
 
CHAPTER 13
Gait and Balance Disorders
113
Neuromuscular disease
Patients with neuromuscular disease often have an 
abnormal gait, occasionally as a presenting feature. With 
distal weakness (peripheral neuropathy) the step height 
is increased to compensate for footdrop, and the sole 
of the foot may slap on the ﬂoor during weight accep-
tance. Neuropathy may be associated with a degree 
of sensory imbalance, as described earlier. Patients 
with myopathy or muscular dystrophy more typically 
exhibit proximal weakness. Weakness of the hip gir-
dle may result in a degree of excess pelvic sway during 
locomotion.
Toxic and metabolic disorders
Alcohol intoxication is the most common cause of 
acute walking difﬁculty. Chronic toxicity from medi-
cations and metabolic disturbances can impair motor 
function and gait. Mental status changes may be pres-
ent, and examination may reveal asterixis or myoclonus. 
Static equilibrium is disturbed, and such patients are 
easily thrown off balance. Disequilibrium is particularly 
evident in patients with chronic renal disease and those 
with hepatic failure, in whom asterixis may impair pos-
tural support. Sedative drugs, especially neuroleptics and 
long-acting benzodiazepines, affect postural control and 
increase the risk for falls. These disorders are important 
to recognize because they are often treatable.
Psychogenic gait disorder
Psychogenic disorders are common in neurologic prac-
tice, and the presentation often involves gait. Some 
patients with extreme anxiety or phobia walk with 
exaggerated caution with abduction of the arms, as 
if walking on ice. This inappropriately overcautious 
gait differs in degree from the gait of the patient who 
is insecure and making adjustments for imbalance. 
Depressed patients exhibit primarily slowness, a mani-
festation of psychomotor retardation, and lack of pur-
pose in their stride. Hysterical gait disorders are among 
the most spectacular encountered. Odd gyrations of 
posture with wastage of muscular energy (astasia-abasia), 
extreme slow motion, and dramatic ﬂuctuations over 
time may be observed in patients with somatoform dis-
orders and conversion reaction.
TABLE 13-2
FEATURES OF CEREBELLAR ATAXIA, SENSORY 
ATAXIA, AND FRONTAL GAIT DISORDERS
CEREBELLAR 
ATAXIA
SENSORY 
ATAXIA
FRONTAL GAIT
Base of 
support
Wide-based
Narrow 
base, looks 
down
Wide-based
Velocity
Variable
Slow
Very slow
Stride
Irregular, 
lurching
Regular 
with path 
deviation
Short, shufﬂing
Romberg
+/−
Unsteady, 
falls
+/−
Heel → shin
Abnormal
+/−
Normal
Initiation
Normal
Normal
Hesitant
Turns
Unsteady
+/−
Hesitant,  
multistep
Postural 
instability
+
+++
++++
Poor postural 
synergies  
getting up from 
a chair
Falls
Late event
Frequent
Frequent
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Slowly Progressive Disorder of Gait
When reviewing the history, it is helpful to inquire about 
the onset and progression of disability. Initial awareness 
of an unsteady gait often follows a fall. Stepwise evolu-
tion or sudden progression suggests vascular disease. 
Gait disorder may be associated with urinary urgency 
and incontinence, particularly in patients with cervical 
spine disease or hydrocephalus. It is always important 
to review the use of alcohol and medications that affect 
gait and balance. Information on localization derived 
from the neurologic examination can be helpful to nar-
row the list of possible diagnoses.
Gait observation provides an immediate sense of the 
patient’s degree of disability. Characteristic patterns of 
abnormality are sometimes observed, though failing 
gaits often look fundamentally similar. Cadence (steps/
min), velocity, and stride length can be recorded by tim-
ing a patient over a fixed distance. Watching the patient 
get out of a chair provides a good functional assess-
ment of balance.
Brain imaging studies may be informative in patients 
with an undiagnosed disorder of gait. MRI is sensitive 
for cerebral lesions of vascular or demyelinating disease 
and is a good screening test for occult hydrocepha-
lus. Patients with recurrent falls are at risk for subdural 
hematoma. Many elderly patients with gait and balance 
difficulty have white matter abnormalities in the peri-
ventricular region and centrum semiovale. While these 
lesions may be an incidental finding, a substantial bur-
den of white matter disease will ultimately impact cere-
bral control of locomotion.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
114
DISORDERS OF BALANCE
Balance is the ability to maintain equilibrium: a state in 
which opposing physical forces cancel. In physiology, 
this is taken to mean the ability to control the center of 
mass with respect to gravity and the support surface. In 
reality, we are not consciously aware of what or where 
our center of mass is, but everyone, including gymnasts, 
ﬁgure skaters, and platform divers, moves so as to man-
age it. Imbalance implies a disturbance of equilibrium. 
Disorders of balance present with difﬁculty maintain-
ing posture standing and walking and with a subjective 
sense of disequilibrium, a form of dizziness.
The cerebellum and vestibular system organize anti-
gravity responses needed to maintain the upright pos-
ture. As reviewed earlier in this chapter, these responses 
are physiologically complex, and the anatomic represen-
tation is not well understood. Failure, resulting in dis-
equilibrium, can occur at several levels: cerebellar, ves-
tibular, somatosensory, and higher level disequilibrium. 
Patients with hereditary ataxia or alcoholic cerebellar 
degeneration do not generally complain of dizziness, 
but balance is visibly impaired. Neurologic examination 
will reveal a variety of cerebellar signs. Postural com-
pensation may prevent falls early on, but falls inevita-
bly occur with disease progression. The progression of 
a neurodegenerative ataxia is often measured by the 
number of years to loss of stable ambulation. Vestibular 
disorders (Chap. 11) have symptoms and signs in three 
categories: (1) vertigo, the subjective appreciation or 
illusion of movement; (2) nystagmus, a vestibulo-ocu-
lomotor sign; and (3) poor standing balance, an impair-
ment of vestibulospinal function. Not every patient 
has all manifestations. Patients with vestibular deﬁcits 
related to ototoxic drugs may lack vertigo or obvious 
nystagmus, but balance is impaired on standing and 
walking, and the patient cannot navigate in the dark. 
Laboratory testing is available to explore vestibulo-ocu-
lomotor and vestibulospinal deﬁcits.
Somatosensory deﬁcits also produce imbalance and 
falls. There is often a subjective sense of insecure bal-
ance and fear of falling. Postural control is compro-
mised by eye closure (Romberg’s sign); these patients 
also have difﬁculty navigating in the dark. A dramatic 
example is the patient with autoimmune subacute sen-
sory neuropathy, sometimes a paraneoplastic disor-
der (Chap. 44). Compensatory strategies enable such 
patients to walk in the virtual absence of propriocep-
tion, but the task requires active visual monitoring. 
Patients with higher level disorders of equilibrium have 
difﬁculty maintaining balance in daily life and may pres-
ent with falls. There may be reduced awareness of bal-
ance impairment. Classic examples include patients 
with progressive supranuclear palsy and normal pressure 
hydrocephalus. Patients on sedating medications are 
also in this category. In prospective studies, cognitive 
impairment and the use of sedative medications substan-
tially increase the risk for falls.
FALLS
Falls are common in the elderly; 30% of people older 
than age 65 years living in the community fall each 
year. Modest changes in balance function have been 
described in ﬁt older subjects as a result of normal aging. 
Subtle deﬁcits in sensory systems, attention, and motor 
reaction time contribute to the risk, and environmen-
tal hazards abound. Epidemiologic studies have iden-
tiﬁed a number of risk factors for falls, summarized in 
Table 13-3. A fall is not a neurologic problem, nor 
reason for referral to a specialist, but there are circum-
stances in which neurologic evaluation is appropriate. 
In a classic study, 90% of fall events occurred among 
10% of individuals, a group known as recurrent fallers. 
Some of these are frail older persons with chronic dis-
eases. Recurrent falls sometimes indicate the presence 
of serious balance impairment. Syncope, seizure, or falls 
related to loss of consciousness require appropriate eval-
uation and treatment (Chaps. 10 and 26).
The descriptive classiﬁcation of falls is as difﬁcult as 
the classiﬁcation of gait disorders, for many of the same 
reasons. Postural control systems are widely distributed, 
and a number of disease-related abnormalities occur. 
Unlike gait problems that are apparent on observation, 
falls are rarely observed in the ofﬁce. The patient and 
family may have limited information about what trig-
gered the fall. Injuries can complicate the physical 
examination. While there is no standard nosology of 
falls, common patterns can be identiﬁed.
TABLE 13-3
RISK FACTORS FOR FALLS, A META-ANALYSIS: 
SUMMARY OF SIXTEEN CONTROLLED STUDIES
RISK FACTOR
MEAN RR (OR)
RANGE
Weakness
4.9
1.9–10.3
Balance deﬁcit
3.2
1.6–5.4
Gait disorder
3.0
1.7–4.8
Visual deﬁcit
2.8
1.1–7.4
Mobility limitation
2.5
1.0–5.3
Cognitive impairment
2.4
2.0–4.7
Impaired functional status
2.0
1.0–3.1
Postural hypotension
1.9
1.0–3.4
Abbreviations: OR, odds ratios from retrospective studies; RR, rela-
tive risks from prospective studies.
Source: Reproduced with permission from J Masdeu et al: Gait 
Disorders of Aging: With Special Reference to Falls. Boston, Little 
Brown, 1995.
 
CHAPTER 13
Gait and Balance Disorders
115
Slipping, tripping, and “mechanical falls”
Slipping on icy pavement, tripping on obstacles, and falls 
related to obvious environmental factors are often termed 
mechanical falls. They occasionally occur in healthy indi-
viduals with good balance compensation. Frequent trip-
ping falls raise suspicion about an underlying neurologic 
deﬁcit. Patients with spasticity, leg weakness, or footdrop 
experience tripping falls.
Weakness and frailty
Patients who lack strength in antigravity muscles have 
difﬁculty rising from a chair, fatigue easily when walk-
ing, and have difﬁculty maintaining their balance after a 
perturbation. These patients are often unable to get up 
after a fall and may be on the ﬂoor for an hour or more 
before help arrives. Deconditioning of this sort is often 
treatable. Resistance strength training can increase mus-
cle mass and leg strength in people in their eighties and 
nineties.
Drop attacks and collapsing falls
Drop attacks are sudden collapsing falls without loss of 
consciousness. Patients who collapse from lack of pos-
tural tone present a diagnostic challenge. The patient 
may report that his or her legs just gave out underneath; 
the family may describe the patient as “collapsing in a 
heap.” Orthostatic hypotension may be a factor in some 
such falls. Asterixis or epilepsy may impair postural sup-
port. A colloid cyst of the third ventricle can present 
with intermittent obstruction of the foramen of Mon-
roe, resulting in a drop attack. While collapsing falls are 
more common in older patients with vascular risk fac-
tors, they should not be confused with vertebrobasilar 
ischemic attacks.
Toppling falls
Some patients maintain tone in antigravity muscles but 
fall over like a tree trunk, as if postural defenses had dis-
engaged. There may be a consistent direction to such 
falls. The patient with cerebellar pathology may lean 
and topple over toward the side of the lesion. Patients 
with lesions of the vestibular system or its central path-
ways may experience lateral pulsion and toppling falls. 
Patients with progressive supranuclear palsy often fall 
over backward. Falls of this nature occur in patients 
with advanced Parkinson’s disease once postural insta-
bility has developed.
Gait freezing
Another fall pattern in Parkinson’s disease and related 
disorders is the fall due to freezing of gait. The feet 
stick to the ﬂoor and the center of mass keeps moving, 
resulting in a disequilibrium from which the patient has 
difﬁculty recovering. This sequence of events can result 
in a forward fall. Gait freezing can also occur as the 
patient attempts to turn and change direction. Similarly, 
the patient with Parkinson’s disease and festinating gait 
may ﬁnd his feet unable to keep up, resulting in a for-
ward fall.
Falls related to sensory deﬁcit
Patients with somatosensory, visual, or vestibular deﬁ-
cits are prone to falls. These patients have particular dif-
ﬁculty dealing with poor illumination or walking on 
uneven ground. These patients often express subjective 
imbalance, apprehension, and fear of falling. Deﬁcits in 
joint position and vibration sense are apparent on physi-
cal examination.
TREATMENT 
 Interventions to Reduce the Risk of Falls 
and Injury
Efforts should be made to define the etiology of the gait 
disorder and mechanism of the falls. Standing blood 
pressure should be recorded. Specific treatment may 
be possible, once a diagnosis is established. Therapeutic 
intervention is often recommended for older patients at 
substantial risk for falls, even if no neurologic disease is 
identified. A home visit to look for environmental haz-
ards can be helpful. A variety of modifications may be 
recommended to improve safety, including improved 
lighting and the installation of grab bars and nonslip 
surfaces.
Rehabilitation interventions attempt to improve 
muscle strength and balance stability and to make the 
patient more resistant to injury. High-intensity resis-
tance strength training with weights and machines 
is useful to improve muscle mass, even in frail older 
patients. Improvements are realized in posture and 
gait, which should translate to reduced risk of falls and 
injury. Sensory balance training is another approach 
to improve balance stability. Measurable gains can be 
achieved in a few weeks of training, and benefits can 
be maintained over 6 months by a 10- to 20-min home 
exercise program. This strategy is particularly success-
ful in patients with vestibular and somatosensory bal-
ance disorders. The Yale Health and Aging study used a 
strategy of targeted, multiple risk factor abatement to 
reduce falls in the elderly. Prescription medications were 
adjusted, and home-based exercise programs were tai-
lored to the patients’ needs, based on an initial geriat-
ric assessment. The program realized a 44% reduction 
in falls, compared with a control group of patients who 
had periodic social visits.
 Gail Kang  ■  Nicholas B. Galiﬁ anakis  ■  Michael Geschwind 
116
 Problems with gait and balance are major causes of falls, 
accidents, and resulting disability, especially in later life, 
and are often harbingers of neurologic disease. Early 
diagnosis is essential, especially for treatable conditions, 
as it may permit the institution of prophylactic mea-
sures to prevent dangerous falls, and also to reverse or 
ameliorate the underlying cause. In this video, examples 
of gait disorders due to Parkinson’s disease, other extra-
pyramidal disorders, and ataxias, as well as other common 
gait disorders, are presented. Videos for this chap-
ter can be accessed at the following link: http://www
.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/.
 VIDEO LIBRARY OF GAIT DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 14 
 Michael J. Aminoff  ■   Arthur K. Asbury 
117
 Normal somatic sensation reﬂ ects a continuous monitor-
ing process, little of which reaches consciousness under 
ordinary conditions. By contrast, disordered sensation, 
particularly when experienced as painful, is alarming and 
dominates the patient’s attention. Physicians should be 
able to recognize abnormal sensations by how they are 
described, know their type and likely site of origin, and 
understand their implications.  Pain is considered sepa-
rately in  Chap. 7 . 
 POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS 
 Abnormal sensory symptoms can be divided into two 
categories: positive and negative. The prototypical posi-
tive symptom is tingling (pins and needles); other posi-
tive sensory phenomena include altered sensations that 
are described as pricking, bandlike, lightning-like shoot-
ing feelings (lancinations), aching, knifelike, twisting, 
drawing, pulling, tightening, burning, searing, electrical, 
or raw feelings. Such symptoms are often painful. 
 Positive phenomena usually result from trains of im-
pulses generated at sites of lowered threshold or height-
ened excitability along a peripheral or central sensory 
pathway. The nature and severity of the abnormal sen-
sation depend on the number, rate, timing, and distri-
bution of ectopic impulses and the type and function 
of nervous tissue in which they arise. Because positive 
phenomena represent excessive activity in sensory path-
ways, they are not necessarily associated with a sensory 
deﬁ cit (loss) on examination. 
 Negative phenomena represent loss of sensory func-
tion and are characterized by diminished or absent 
feeling that often is experienced as numbness and by 
abnormal ﬁ ndings on sensory examination. In disor-
ders affecting peripheral sensation, it is estimated that at 
least one-half the afferent axons innervating a particular 
site are lost or functionless before a sensory deﬁ cit can 
be demonstrated by clinical examination. This thresh-
old varies in accordance with how rapidly function is 
lost in sensory nerve ﬁ bers. If the rate of loss is slow, 
lack of cutaneous feeling may be unnoticed by the 
patient and difﬁ cult to demonstrate on examination, 
even though few sensory ﬁ bers are functioning; if it is 
rapid, both positive and negative phenomena are usually 
conspicuous. Subclinical degrees of sensory dysfunction 
may be revealed by sensory nerve conduction studies or 
somatosensory evoked potentials ( Chap. 5 ). 
 Whereas sensory symptoms may be either positive 
or negative, sensory signs on examination are always a 
measure of negative phenomena. 
 TERMINOLOGY 
 Words used to characterize sensory disturbance are 
descriptive and based on convention. Paresthesias and 
dysesthesias are general terms used to denote posi-
tive sensory symptoms. The term  paresthesias typically 
refers to tingling or pins-and-needles sensations but may 
include a wide variety of other abnormal sensations, 
except pain; it sometimes implies that the abnormal 
sensations are perceived spontaneously. The more gen-
eral term  dysesthesia s denotes all types of abnormal sen-
sations, including painful ones, regardless of whether a 
stimulus is evident. 
 Another set of terms refers to sensory abnormalities 
found on examination.  Hypesthesia or  hypoesthesia refers 
to a reduction of cutaneous sensation to a speciﬁ c type 
of testing such as pressure, light touch, and warm or 
cold stimuli;  anesthesia, to a complete absence of skin 
sensation to the same stimuli plus pinprick; and  hypal-
gesia or  analgesia, to reduced or absent pain perception 
(nociception), such as perception of the pricking quality 
elicited by a pin.  Hyperesthesia means pain or increased 
sensitivity in response to touch. Similarly,  allodynia
describes the situation in which a nonpainful stimulus, 
once perceived, is experienced as painful, even excru-
ciating. An example is elicitation of a painful sensation 
by application of a vibrating tuning fork.  Hyperalgesia
 NUMBNESS, TINGLING, AND SENSORY LOSS 
 CHAPTER 15 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
118
denotes severe pain in response to a mildly noxious 
stimulus, and hyperpathia, a broad term, encompasses all 
the phenomena described by hyperesthesia, allodynia, 
and hyperalgesia. With hyperpathia, the threshold for a 
sensory stimulus is increased and perception is delayed, 
but once felt, it is unduly painful.
Disorders of deep sensation arising from muscle spin-
dles, tendons, and joints affect proprioception (position 
sense). Manifestations include imbalance (particularly 
with eyes closed or in the dark), clumsiness of precision 
movements, and unsteadiness of gait, which are referred 
to collectively as sensory ataxia. Other ﬁndings on exam-
ination usually, but not invariably, include reduced or 
absent joint position and vibratory sensibility and absent 
deep tendon reﬂexes in the affected limbs. The Rom-
berg sign is positive, which means that the patient sways 
markedly or topples when asked to stand with feet close 
together and eyes closed. In severe states of deafferenta-
tion involving deep sensation, the patient cannot walk 
or stand unaided or even sit unsupported. Continuous 
involuntary movements (pseudoathetosis) of the out-
stretched hands and ﬁngers occur, particularly with eyes 
closed.
ANATOMY OF SENSATION
Cutaneous afferent innervation is conveyed by a rich 
variety of receptors, both naked nerve endings (noci-
ceptors and thermoreceptors) and encapsulated terminals 
(mechanoreceptors). Each type of receptor has its own 
set of sensitivities to speciﬁc stimuli, size and distinctness 
of receptive ﬁelds, and adaptational qualities. Much of 
the knowledge about these receptors has come from the 
development of techniques to study single intact nerve 
ﬁbers intraneurally in awake, unanesthetized human 
subjects. It is possible not only to record from but also 
to stimulate single ﬁbers in isolation. A single impulse, 
whether elicited by a natural stimulus or evoked by 
electrical microstimulation in a large myelinated afferent 
ﬁber, may be both perceived and localized.
Afferent ﬁbers of all sizes in peripheral nerve trunks 
traverse the dorsal roots and enter the dorsal horn of 
the spinal cord (Fig. 15-1). From there the smaller 
ﬁbers take a route to the parietal cortex different from 
that of the larger ﬁbers. The polysynaptic projections of 
the smaller ﬁbers (unmyelinated and small myelinated), 
which subserve mainly nociception, temperature sensibil-
ity, and touch, cross and ascend in the opposite anterior 
and lateral columns of the spinal cord, through the brain-
stem, to the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the 
thalamus and ultimately project to the postcentral gyrus 
of the parietal cortex (Chap. 7). This is the spinothalamic 
pathway or anterolateral system. The larger ﬁbers, which 
subserve tactile and position sense and kinesthesia, project 
rostrally in the posterior column on the same side of the 
spinal cord and make their ﬁrst synapse in the gracile or 
cuneate nucleus of the lower medulla. Axons of second-
order neurons decussate and ascend in the medial lemnis-
cus located medially in the medulla and in the tegmen-
tum of the pons and midbrain and synapse in the VPL 
nucleus; third-order neurons project to parietal cortex. 
This large-ﬁber system is referred to as the posterior col-
umn–medial lemniscal pathway (lemniscal, for short). Note 
that although the lemniscal and the anterolateral pathways 
both project up the spinal cord to the thalamus, it is the 
(crossed) anterolateral pathway that is referred to as the 
spinothalamic tract by convention.
Although the ﬁber types and functions that make up 
the spinothalamic and lemniscal systems are relatively 
well known, many other ﬁbers, particularly those asso-
ciated with touch, pressure, and position sense, ascend 
in a diffusely distributed pattern both ipsilaterally and 
contralaterally in the anterolateral quadrants of the spi-
nal cord. This explains why a complete lesion of the 
posterior columns of the spinal cord may be associated 
with little sensory deﬁcit on examination.
EXAMINATION OF SENSATION
The main components of the sensory examination are 
tests of primary sensation (pain, touch, vibration, joint 
position, and thermal sensation [Table 15-1]).
Some general principles pertain. The examiner must 
depend on patient responses, particularly when testing 
cutaneous sensation (pin, touch, warm, or cold), and 
this complicates interpretation. Further, examination 
may be limited in some patients. In a stuporous patient, 
for example, sensory examination is reduced to observ-
ing the briskness of withdrawal in response to a pinch 
or another noxious stimulus. Comparison of response 
on one side of the body to that on the other is essential. 
In an alert but uncooperative patient, it may not be 
possible to examine cutaneous sensation, but some idea 
of proprioceptive function may be gained by noting the 
patient’s best performance of movements requiring bal-
ance and precision. Frequently, patients present with 
sensory symptoms that do not ﬁt an anatomic localiza-
tion and that are accompanied by either no abnormali-
ties or gross inconsistencies on examination. The exam-
iner should consider whether the sensory symptoms 
are a disguised request for help with psychological or 
situational problems. Discretion must be used in pur-
suing this possibility. Finally, sensory examination of a 
patient who has no neurologic complaints can be brief 
and consist of pinprick, touch, and vibration testing in 
the hands and feet plus evaluation of stance and gait, 
including the Romberg maneuver. Evaluation of stance 
and gait also tests the integrity of motor and cerebellar 
systems.
 
CHAPTER 15
Numbness, Tingling, and Sensory Loss
119
Primary sensation
(See Table 15-1) The sense of pain usually is tested 
with a clean pin, with the patient asked to focus on the 
pricking or unpleasant quality of the stimulus, not just 
the pressure or touch sensation elicited. Areas of hypal-
gesia should be mapped by proceeding radially from the 
most hypalgesic site (Figs. 15-2, 15-3 and 15-4).
Arm
Trunk
Face
Postcentral
cortex
MIDBRAIN
PONS
MEDULLA
SPINAL CORD
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus of
thalamus
Internal
capsule
Reticulothalamic pathway
Principal sensory
nucleus of V
Nucleus 
gracilis
Nucleus 
of spinal 
tract V
Nucleus 
cuneatus
Medial lemniscus
Spinothalamic tract
Spinothalamic tract
Leg
Thalamus
FIGURE 15-1 
The main somatosensory pathways. The spinothalamic 
tract (pain, thermal sense) and the posterior column–lemniscal 
system (touch, pressure, joint position) are shown. Offshoots 
from the ascending anterolateral fasciculus (spinothalamic 
tract) to nuclei in the medulla, pons, and mesencephalon 
and nuclear terminations of the tract are indicated. (From AH 
Ropper, RH Brown, in Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neu-
rology, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
Temperature sensation to both hot and cold is best 
tested with small containers ﬁlled with water of the 
desired temperature. This is impractical in most settings. 
An alternative way to test cold sensation is to touch a 
metal object, such as a tuning fork at room temperature, 
to the skin. For testing warm temperatures, the tuning 
fork or another metal object may be held under warm 
water of the desired temperature and then used. The 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
120
TABLE 15-1
TESTING PRIMARY SENSATION
SENSE
TEST DEVICE
ENDINGS ACTIVATED
FIBER SIZE MEDIATING
CENTRAL PATHWAY
Pain
Pinprick
Cutaneous nociceptors
Small
SpTh, also D
Temperature, heat
Warm metal object
Cutaneous thermoreceptors 
for hot
Small
SpTh
Temperature, cold
Cold metal object
Cutaneous thermoreceptors 
for cold
Small
SpTh
Touch
Cotton wisp, ﬁne brush
Cutaneous mechanorecep-
tors, also naked endings
Large and small
Lem, also D and SpTh
Vibration
Tuning fork, 128 Hz
Mechanoreceptors, espe-
cially pacinian corpuscles
Large
Lem, also D
Joint position
Passive movement of 
speciﬁc joints
Joint capsule and tendon 
endings, muscle spindles
Large
Lem, also D
Abbreviations: D, diffuse ascending projections in ipsilateral and contralateral anterolateral columns; SpTh, spinothalamic projection, contralat-
eral; Lem, posterior column and lemniscal projection, ipsilateral.
Great auricular n.
Ant. cut. n. of neck
Ant.
cut.
rami
of
  thor.
  n’s.
T2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Lat.
   cut.
  rami
Supraclavicular n’s.
Med. cut. n. of arm
 & intercostobrachial n.
Med. cut. n. 
  of forearm
Iliohypo-
gastric n.
Genital
branch of
genitofem.
n.
Dorsal n. of penis
Scrotal branch of perineal n.
Obturator n.
Lat.cut. n. of calf
(from common peroneal n.)
Superﬁcial peroneal n.
   (from common peroneal n.)
Deep peroneal n.
(from common peroneal n.)
Intermed. & med. cut. n’s.
of thigh (from femoral n.)
Lat. cut. n. of thigh
Lat. cut. of forearm
(from musculocut. n.)
Lower lat.cut. n. of arm
(from radial n.)
Axillary n.
(circumflex)
I
II
III
Ilio-
inguinal n.
Femoral
branch
of genito- 
femoral n.
(lumbo-inguinal n.)     
Saphenous n.
(from femoral n.)
Med. & lat. plantar n’s.
(from posttibial n.)
Sural n.
(from tibial n.)
Radial n.
Median n.
Ulnar n.
 
Great auricular n.
Greater
Lesser n.}  occipital nerves
Ant. cut. n. of neck
T2
3
4
  5
   6
   7
    8
    9
     10
          11
          12
T1
L1
S1
Post. rami of
lumbar sacral
& coccygeal n’s.
Lat.
cut.   
rami         
Post.
cut.
rami
of
thor.
n’s.
C5
C6
Supraclavicular n’s.
Med. cut. n. of arm
 & intercostobrachial n.
Post. cut. n. of forearm
 (from radial n.)
Lat. cut. n. of forearm
 (from musculocut n.)
Med. 
 cut. n. 
  of 
   forearm
Obturator n.
Superficial peroneal n.
(from common peroneal n.)
Lat. cut. n.of calf
(from common femoral n.)
Inf. med.
cluneal n.
Inf. lat.
      cluneal n’s.
Lat. plantar n.
Saphenous n.
Sural n.
Calcanean branches
of tibial & sural n’s.
Med.
plantar n.
Lat. 
  plantar n.
Superficial
peroneal
n.
Inf. med. n. of thigh
Post cut. n. of thigh
Lower
Lat. cut. of arm
(from radial n.)
Post cut. n. of arm
(from radial n.)
Axillary n.
(circumflex)
Iliohypo-
gastric n.
Saphenous n.
(from femoral n.)
Med. cut. n. of thigh
(from femoral n.)
Calcanean branches of
sural & tibial n’s.
Sural n. (from tibial n.)
Radial n.
Median n.
Ulnar n.
FIGURE 15-2 
The cutaneous ﬁelds of peripheral nerves. (Reproduced by permission from W Haymaker, B Woodhall: Peripheral Nerve Inju-
ries, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1953.)
 
CHAPTER 15
Numbness, Tingling, and Sensory Loss
121
appreciation of both cold and warmth should be tested 
because different receptors respond to each.
Touch usually is tested with a wisp of cotton or a 
ﬁne camel hair brush. In general, it is better to avoid 
testing touch on hairy skin because of the profusion of 
the sensory endings that surround each hair follicle.
Joint position testing is a measure of proprioception, 
one of the most important functions of the sensory sys-
tem. With the patient’s eyes closed, joint position is 
tested in the distal interphalangeal joint of the great toe 
and ﬁngers. If errors are made in recognizing the direc-
tion of passive movements, more proximal joints are 
tested. A test of proximal joint position sense, primar-
ily at the shoulder, is performed by asking the patient 
to bring the two index ﬁngers together with arms 
extended and eyes closed. Normal individuals can do 
this accurately, with errors of 1 cm or less.
The sense of vibration is tested with a tuning fork 
that vibrates at 128 Hz. Vibration usually is tested over 
bony points, beginning distally; in the feet it is tested 
over the dorsal surface of the distal phalanx of the big 
toes and at the malleoli of the ankles, and in the hands 
dorsally at the distal phalanx of the ﬁngers. If abnormal-
ities are found, more proximal sites can be examined. 
Vibratory thresholds at the same site in the patient and 
the examiner may be compared for control purposes.
C3
C7
C8
C6
L2
L3
L4
L1
L2
L3
L4 L5
L5
L1
L4
L4
L5
L3
L3
L2
L5
L5
L5
L1
L5
L4
L3
L2
L5
L4
S1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S2
S2
S2
S1
S1
S1
S
2
L
4
S2
S2
S1
S1
S
2
L4
L5
L5
 L
4
C7
C8
S
2
C3
C5
T1
C5
C4
C5
C6
C6
C4
C7
C8
T1
C6
FIGURE 15-4 
Dermatomes of the upper and lower extremities, outlined 
by the pattern of sensory loss following lesions of single 
nerve roots. (From JJ Keegan, FD Garrett: Anat Rec 102:409, 
1948.)
T2
T2
T2
T1
T1
C3
C3
C4
C4
C5
C5
C5
C6
C6
C8
C6
C7
C8
T3
T3
T4
T4
T5
T5
T6
T6
T7
T7
T8
T8
T9
T9
T10
T10
T11
T11
T12
T12
L1
L2
L3
L3
L4
L4
L5
L5
L5
L1
L3
S1
S2
S2
S1
S1
S3
S4
S5
L2
FIGURE 15-3 
Distribution of the sensory spinal roots on the surface of 
the body (dermatomes). (From D Sinclair: Mechanisms of 
Cutaneous Sensation. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 
1981; with permission from Dr. David Sinclair.)
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
122
Quantitative sensory testing
Effective sensory testing devices are now available com-
mercially. Quantitative sensory testing is particularly 
useful for serial evaluation of cutaneous sensation in 
clinical trials. Threshold testing for touch and vibra-
tory and thermal sensation is the most widely used 
application.
Cortical sensation
The most commonly used tests of cortical function 
are two-point discrimination, touch localization, and 
bilateral simultaneous stimulation and tests for graphes-
thesia and stereognosis. Abnormalities of these sensory 
tests, in the presence of normal primary sensation in an 
alert cooperative patient, signify a lesion of the pari-
etal cortex or thalamocortical projections to the pari-
etal lobe. If primary sensation is altered, these cortical 
discriminative functions usually will be abnormal also. 
Comparisons should always be made between analo-
gous sites on the two sides of the body because the 
deﬁcit with a speciﬁc parietal lesion is likely to be uni-
lateral. Interside comparisons are important for all cor-
tical sensory testing.
Two-point discrimination is tested with special calipers, 
the points of which may be set from 2 mm to several 
centimeters apart and then applied simultaneously to the 
site to be tested. The pulp of the ﬁngertips is a common 
site to test; a normal individual can distinguish about 
3-mm separation of points there.
Touch localization is performed by light pressure for an 
instant with the examiner’s ﬁngertip or a wisp of cot-
ton wool; the patient, whose eyes are closed, is required 
to identify the site of touch with the ﬁngertip. Bilateral 
simultaneous stimulation at analogous sites (e.g., the dor-
sum of both hands) can be carried out to determine 
whether the perception of touch is extinguished con-
sistently on one side or the other. The phenomenon 
is referred to as extinction or neglect. Graphesthesia refers 
to the capacity to recognize with eyes closed letters 
or numbers drawn by the examiner’s ﬁngertip on the 
palm of the hand. Once again, interside comparison is 
of prime importance. Inability to recognize numbers or 
letters is termed agraphesthesia.
Stereognosis refers to the ability to identify common 
objects by palpation, recognizing their shape, texture, 
and size. Common standard objects such as keys, paper 
clips, and coins are best used. Patients with normal ste-
reognosis should be able to distinguish a dime from a 
penny and a nickel from a quarter without looking. 
Patients should be allowed to feel the object with only 
one hand at a time. If they are unable to identify it in 
one hand, it should be placed in the other for compari-
son. Individuals who are unable to identify common 
objects and coins in one hand but can do so in the other 
are said to have astereognosis of the abnormal hand.
LOCALIZATION OF SENSORY 
ABNORMALITIES
Sensory symptoms and signs can result from lesions at 
almost any level of the nervous system from the parietal 
cortex to the peripheral sensory receptor. Noting the 
distribution and nature of sensory symptoms and signs 
is the most important way to localize their source. Their 
extent, conﬁguration, symmetry, quality, and severity 
are the key observations.
Dysesthesias without sensory ﬁndings by examination 
may be difﬁcult to interpret. To illustrate, tingling dys-
esthesias in an acral distribution (hands and feet) can be 
systemic in origin, e.g., secondary to hyperventilation, 
or induced by a medication such as acetazolamide. Dis-
tal dysesthesias also can be an early event in an evolv-
ing polyneuropathy or may herald a myelopathy, such 
as from vitamin B12 deﬁciency. Sometimes distal dyses-
thesias have no deﬁnable basis. In contrast, dysesthesias 
that correspond in distribution to a particular periph-
eral nerve territory denote a lesion of that nerve trunk. 
For instance, dysesthesias restricted to the ﬁfth digit and 
the adjacent one-half of the fourth ﬁnger on one hand 
reliably point to disorder of the ulnar nerve, most com-
monly at the elbow.
Nerve and root
In focal nerve trunk lesions severe enough to cause a 
deﬁcit, sensory abnormalities are readily mapped and 
generally have discrete boundaries (Figs. 15-2, 15-3 and 
15-4). Root (“radicular”) lesions frequently are accom-
panied by deep, aching pain along the course of the 
related nerve trunk. With compression of a ﬁfth lumbar 
(L5) or ﬁrst sacral (S1) root, as from a ruptured inter-
vertebral disk, sciatica (radicular pain relating to the sci-
atic nerve trunk) is a common manifestation (Chap. 9). 
With a lesion affecting a single root, sensory deﬁcits 
may be minimal or absent because adjacent root territo-
ries overlap extensively.
Isolated mononeuropathies may cause symptoms 
beyond the territory supplied by the affected nerve, but 
abnormalities on examination typically are conﬁned to 
appropriate anatomic boundaries. In multiple mono-
neuropathies, symptoms and signs occur in discrete ter-
ritories supplied by different individual nerves and—as 
more nerves are affected—may simulate a polyneu-
ropathy if deﬁcits become conﬂuent. With polyneu-
ropathies, sensory deﬁcits are generally graded, distal, 
and symmetric in distribution (Chap. 45). Dysesthesias, 
 
CHAPTER 15
Numbness, Tingling, and Sensory Loss
123
followed by numbness, begin in the toes and ascend 
symmetrically. When dysesthesias reach the knees, they 
usually also have appeared in the ﬁngertips. The process 
appears to be nerve length–dependent, and the deﬁcit 
is often described as “stocking-glove” in type. Involve-
ment of both hands and feet also occurs with lesions of 
the upper cervical cord or the brainstem, but an upper 
level of the sensory disturbance may then be found on 
the trunk and other evidence of a central lesion may be 
present, such as sphincter involvement or signs of an 
upper motor neuron lesion (Chap. 12). Although most 
polyneuropathies are pansensory and affect all modali-
ties of sensation, selective sensory dysfunction according 
to nerve ﬁber size may occur. Small-ﬁber polyneuropa-
thies are characterized by burning, painful dysesthesias 
with reduced pinprick and thermal sensation but with 
sparing of proprioception, motor function, and deep 
tendon reﬂexes. Touch is involved variably; when it is 
spared, the sensory pattern is referred to as exhibiting 
sensory dissociation. Sensory dissociation may occur with 
spinal cord lesions as well as small-ﬁber neuropathies. 
Large-ﬁber polyneuropathies are characterized by vibra-
tion and position sense deﬁcits, imbalance, absent ten-
don reﬂexes, and variable motor dysfunction but pres-
ervation of most cutaneous sensation. Dysesthesias, if 
present at all, tend to be tingling or bandlike in quality.
Sensory neuronopathy is characterized by widespread 
but asymmetric sensory loss occurring in a non-length-
dependent manner so that it may occur proximally or 
distally and in the arms, legs, or both. Pain and numbness 
progress to sensory ataxia and impairment of all sensory 
modalities with time. This condition is usually paraneo-
plastic or idiopathic in origin (Chaps. 44 and 45).
Spinal cord
(See also Chap. 35) If the spinal cord is transected, all 
sensation is lost below the level of transection. Bladder 
and bowel function also are lost, as is motor function. 
Hemisection of the spinal cord produces the Brown-
Séquard syndrome, with absent pain and temperature 
sensation contralaterally and loss of proprioceptive sen-
sation and power ipsilaterally below the lesion (see Figs. 
15-1 and 35-1).
Numbness or paresthesias in both feet may arise 
from a spinal cord lesion; this is especially likely when 
the upper level of the sensory loss extends to the trunk. 
When all extremities are affected, the lesion is probably 
in the cervical region or brainstem unless a peripheral 
neuropathy is responsible. The presence of upper motor 
neuron signs (Chap. 12) supports a central lesion; a 
hyperesthetic band on the trunk may suggest the level 
of involvement.
A dissociated sensory loss can reﬂect spinothalamic 
tract involvement in the spinal cord, especially if the 
deﬁcit is unilateral and has an upper level on the torso. 
Bilateral spinothalamic tract involvement occurs with 
lesions affecting the center of the spinal cord, such as in 
syringomyelia. There is a dissociated sensory loss with 
impairment of pinprick and temperature appreciation 
but relative preservation of light touch, position sense, 
and vibration appreciation.
Dysfunction of the posterior columns in the spinal 
cord or of the posterior root entry zone may lead to 
a bandlike sensation around the trunk or a feeling of 
tight pressure in one or more limbs. Flexion of the 
neck sometimes leads to an electric shock–like sen-
sation that radiates down the back and into the legs 
(Lhermitte’s sign) in patients with a cervical lesion 
affecting the posterior columns, such as from multiple 
sclerosis, cervical spondylosis, or recent irradiation to 
the cervical region.
Brainstem
Crossed patterns of sensory disturbance, in which one 
side of the face and the opposite side of the body are 
affected, localize to the lateral medulla. Here a small 
lesion may damage both the ipsilateral descending tri-
geminal tract and the ascending spinothalamic ﬁbers 
subserving the opposite arm, leg, and hemitorso (see 
“Lateral medullary syndrome” in Fig. 27-10). A lesion 
in the tegmentum of the pons and midbrain, where the 
lemniscal and spinothalamic tracts merge, causes pansen-
sory loss contralaterally.
Thalamus
Hemisensory disturbance with tingling numbness from 
head to foot is often thalamic in origin but also can arise 
from the anterior parietal region. If abrupt in onset, 
the lesion is likely to be due to a small stroke (lacu-
nar infarction), particularly if localized to the thalamus. 
Occasionally, with lesions affecting the VPL nucleus or 
adjacent white matter, a syndrome of thalamic pain, also 
called Déjerine-Roussy syndrome, may ensue. The per-
sistent, unrelenting unilateral pain often is described in 
dramatic terms.
Cortex
With lesions of the parietal lobe involving either the 
cortex or the subjacent white matter, the most promi-
nent symptoms are contralateral hemineglect, hemi-
inattention, and a tendency not to use the affected hand 
and arm. On cortical sensory testing (e.g., two-point 
discrimination, graphesthesia), abnormalities are often 
found but primary sensation is usually intact. Anterior 
parietal infarction may present as a pseudothalamic syn-
drome with contralateral loss of primary sensation from 
head to toe. Dysesthesias or a sense of numbness may 
also occur and, rarely, a painful state.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
124
Focal sensory seizures
These seizures generally are due to lesions in the area 
of the postcentral or precentral gyrus. The principal 
symptom of focal sensory seizures is tingling, but addi-
tional, more complex sensations may occur, such as a 
rushing feeling, a sense of warmth, or a sense of move-
ment without detectable motion. Symptoms typically are 
unilateral; commonly begin in the arm or hand, face, or 
foot; and often spread in a manner that reﬂects the corti-
cal representation of different bodily parts, as in a Jack-
sonian march. Duration of seizures is variable; seizures 
may be transient, lasting only for seconds, or persist for 
an hour or more. Focal motor features may supervene, 
often becoming generalized with loss of consciousness 
and tonic-clonic jerking.
 S. Andrew Josephson  ■   Bruce L. Miller 
125
 Confusion , a mental and behavioral state of reduced 
comprehension, coherence, and capacity to reason, 
is one of the most common problems encountered in 
medicine, accounting for a large number of emergency 
department visits, hospital admissions, and inpatient 
consultations.  Delirium , a term used to describe an acute 
confusional state, remains a major cause of morbidity 
and mortality rates, costing billions of dollars yearly in 
health care costs in the United States alone. Delirium 
often goes unrecognized despite clear evidence that it is 
usually the cognitive manifestation of serious underlying 
medical or neurologic illness. 
 CLINICAL FEATURES OF DELIRIUM 
 A multitude of terms are used to describe delirium, 
including  encephalopathy, acute brain failure, acute confu-
sional state, and  postoperative or intensive care unit (ICU) 
psychosis . Delirium has many clinical manifestations, 
but essentially it is deﬁ ned as a relatively acute decline 
in cognition that ﬂ uctuates over hours or days. The 
hallmark of delirium is a deﬁ cit of attention, although 
all cognitive domains—including memory, executive 
function, visuospatial tasks, and language—are variably 
involved. Associated symptoms may include altered 
sleep-wake cycles, perceptual disturbances such as hal-
lucinations or delusions, affect changes, and autonomic 
ﬁ ndings that include heart rate and blood pressure 
instability. 
 Delirium is a clinical diagnosis that can be made only 
at the bedside. Two broad clinical categories have been 
described—the hyperactive and hypoactive subtypes—
that are based on differential psychomotor features. The 
cognitive syndrome associated with severe alcohol with-
drawal remains the classic example of the hyperactive 
subtype, featuring prominent hallucinations, agitation, 
and hyperarousal, often accompanied by life-threatening 
autonomic instability. In striking contrast is the hypo-
active subtype, exempliﬁ ed by opiate intoxication, in 
which patients are withdrawn and quiet, with promi-
nent apathy and psychomotor slowing. 
 This dichotomy between subtypes of delirium is a 
useful construct, but patients often fall somewhere along 
a spectrum between the hyperactive and hypoactive 
extremes, sometimes ﬂ uctuating from one to the other 
within minutes. Therefore, clinicians must recognize 
the broad range of presentations of delirium to identify 
all patients with this potentially reversible cognitive dis-
turbance. Hyperactive patients, such as those with delir-
ium tremens, are easily recognized by their characteristic 
severe agitation, tremor, hallucinations, and autonomic 
instability. Patients who are quietly disturbed are over-
looked more often on the medical wards and in the ICU, 
yet multiple studies suggest that this underrecognized 
hypoactive subtype is associated with worse outcomes. 
 The reversibility of delirium is emphasized because 
many etiologies, such as systemic infection and medi-
cation effects, can be treated easily. However, the 
long-term cognitive effects of delirium remain largely 
unknown and understudied. Some episodes of delirium 
continue for weeks, months, or even years. The persis-
tence of delirium in some patients and its high recur-
rence rate may be due to inadequate treatment of the 
underlying etiology of the syndrome. In some instances, 
delirium does not disappear because there is underlying 
permanent neuronal damage. Even after an episode of 
delirium resolves, there may be lingering effects of the 
disorder. A patient’s recall of events after delirium var-
ies widely, ranging from complete amnesia to repeated 
reexperiencing of the frightening period of confusion in 
a disturbing manner, similar to what is seen in patients 
with posttraumatic stress disorder. 
 RISK FACTORS 
 An effective primary prevention strategy for delirium 
begins with identiﬁ cation of patients at highest risk, 
including those preparing for elective surgery or being 
 CONFUSION AND DELIRIUM 
 CHAPTER 16 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
126
admitted to the hospital. Although no single validated 
scoring system has been widely accepted as a screen 
for asymptomatic patients, there are multiple well-
established risk factors for delirium.
The two most consistently identiﬁed risks are older 
age and baseline cognitive dysfunction. Individuals 
who are over age 65 or exhibit low scores on stan-
dardized tests of cognition develop delirium upon hos-
pitalization at a rate approaching 50%. Whether age 
and baseline cognitive dysfunction are truly indepen-
dent risk factors is uncertain. Other predisposing fac-
tors include sensory deprivation, such as preexisting 
hearing and visual impairment, as well as indices for 
poor overall health, including baseline immobility, 
malnutrition, and underlying medical or neurologic 
illness.
In-hospital risks for delirium include the use of blad-
der catheterization, physical restraints, sleep and sen-
sory deprivation, and the addition of three or more new 
medications. Avoiding such risks remains a key compo-
nent of delirium prevention as well as treatment. Sur-
gical and anesthetic risk factors for the development of 
postoperative delirium include speciﬁc procedures such 
as those involving cardiopulmonary bypass and inad-
equate or excessive treatment of pain in the immediate 
postoperative period.
The relationship between delirium and demen-
tia (Chap. 29) is complicated by signiﬁcant overlap 
between the two conditions, and it is not always sim-
ple to distinguish between them. Dementia and preex-
isting cognitive dysfunction serve as major risk factors 
for delirium, and at least two-thirds of cases of delirium 
occur in patients with coexisting underlying dementia. 
A form of dementia with parkinsonism, termed dementia 
with Lewy bodies, is characterized by a ﬂuctuating course, 
prominent visual hallucinations, parkinsonism, and an 
attentional deﬁcit that clinically resembles hyperactive 
delirium. Delirium in the elderly often reﬂects an insult 
to the brain that is vulnerable due to an underlying neu-
rodegenerative condition. Therefore, the development 
of delirium sometimes heralds the onset of a previously 
unrecognized brain disorder.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Delirium is a common disease, but its reported inci-
dence has varied widely with the criteria used to 
deﬁne the disorder. Estimates of delirium in hospital-
ized patients range from 14 to 56%, with higher rates 
reported for elderly patients and patients undergoing hip 
surgery. Older patients in the ICU have especially high 
rates of delirium that range from 70 to 87%. The con-
dition is not recognized in up to one-third of delirious 
inpatients, and the diagnosis is especially problematic in 
the ICU environment, where cognitive dysfunction is 
often difﬁcult to appreciate in the setting of serious sys-
temic illness and sedation. Delirium in the ICU should 
be viewed as an important manifestation of organ dys-
function not unlike liver, kidney, or heart failure. 
Outside the acute hospital setting, delirium occurs in 
nearly two-thirds of patients in nursing homes and in 
over 80% of those at the end of life. These estimates 
emphasize the remarkably high frequency of this cogni-
tive syndrome in older patients, a population expected 
to grow in the upcoming decade with the aging of the 
“baby boom” generation.
In previous decades an episode of delirium was 
viewed as a transient condition that carried a benign 
prognosis. Delirium now has been clearly associated 
with substantial morbidity rate and increased mortality 
rate and increasingly is recognized as a sign of serious 
underlying illness. Recent estimates of in-hospital mor-
tality rates among delirious patients have ranged from 
25 to 33%, a rate similar to that of patients with sepsis. 
Patients with an in-hospital episode of delirium have a 
higher mortality rate in the months and years after their 
illness compared with age-matched nondelirious hos-
pitalized patients. Delirious hospitalized patients have a 
longer length of stay, are more likely to be discharged 
to a nursing home, and are more likely to experience 
subsequent episodes of delirium; as a result, this condi-
tion has enormous economic implications.
PATHOGENESIS
The pathogenesis and anatomy of delirium are incom-
pletely understood. The attentional deﬁcit that serves 
as the neuropsychological hallmark of delirium appears 
to have a diffuse localization with the brainstem, thala-
mus, prefrontal cortex, and parietal lobes. Rarely, focal 
lesions such as ischemic strokes have led to delirium 
in otherwise healthy persons; right parietal and medial 
dorsal thalamic lesions have been reported most com-
monly, pointing to the relevance of these areas to delir-
ium pathogenesis. In most cases, delirium results from 
widespread disturbances in cortical and subcortical 
regions rather than a focal neuroanatomic cause. Elec-
troencephalogram (EEG) data in persons with delirium 
usually show symmetric slowing, a nonspeciﬁc ﬁnding 
that supports diffuse cerebral dysfunction.
Deﬁciency of acetylcholine often plays a key role in 
delirium pathogenesis. Medications with anticholin-
ergic properties can precipitate delirium in susceptible 
individuals, and therapies designed to boost choliner-
gic tone such as cholinesterase inhibitors have, in small 
trials, been shown to relieve symptoms of delirium. 
Dementia patients are susceptible to episodes of delir-
ium, and those with Alzheimer’s pathology are known 
to have a chronic cholinergic deﬁciency state due to 
degeneration of acetylcholine-producing neurons in 
 
CHAPTER 16
Confusion and Delirium
127
the basal forebrain. Another common dementia asso-
ciated with decreased acetylcholine levels, dementia 
with Lewy bodies, clinically mimics delirium in some 
patients. Other neurotransmitters are also likely to be 
involved in this diffuse cerebral disorder. For example, 
increases in dopamine can also lead to delirium. Patients 
with Parkinson’s disease treated with dopaminergic 
medications can develop a delirium-like state that fea-
tures visual hallucinations, ﬂuctuations, and confusion. 
In contrast, reducing dopaminergic tone with dopamine 
antagonists such as typical and atypical antipsychotic 
medications has long been recognized as effective symp-
tomatic treatment in patients with delirium.
Not all individuals exposed to the same insult will 
develop signs of delirium. A low dose of an anticho-
linergic medication may have no cognitive effects on a 
healthy young adult but may produce a ﬂorid delirium 
in an elderly person with known underlying dementia. 
However, an extremely high dose of the same anti-
cholinergic medication may lead to delirium even in 
healthy young persons. This concept of delirium devel-
oping as the result of an insult in predisposed individuals 
is currently the most widely accepted pathogenic con-
struct. Therefore, if a previously healthy individual with 
no known history of cognitive illness develops delirium 
in the setting of a relatively minor insult such as elective 
surgery or hospitalization, an unrecognized underlying 
neurologic illness such as a neurodegenerative disease, 
multiple previous strokes, or another diffuse cerebral 
cause should be considered. In this context, delirium 
can be viewed as the symptom resulting from a “stress 
test for the brain” induced by the insult. Exposure to 
known inciting factors such as systemic infection and 
offending drugs can unmask a decreased cerebral reserve 
and herald a serious underlying and potentially treatable 
illness.
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Delirium
As the diagnosis of delirium is clinical and is made at 
the bedside, a careful history and physical examination 
is necessary in evaluating patients with possible con-
fusional states. Screening tools can aid physicians and 
nurses in identifying patients with delirium, including 
the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM); the Organic 
Brain Syndrome Scale; the Delirium Rating Scale; and, in 
the ICU, the Delirium Detection Score and the ICU ver-
sion of the CAM. Using the CAM, a diagnosis of delirium 
is made if there is (1) an acute onset and fluctuating 
course and (2) inattention accompanied by either (3) 
disorganized thinking or (4) an altered level of con-
sciousness. These scales are based on criteria from the 
American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Sta-
tistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) or the World 
Health Organization’s International Classification of Dis-
eases (ICD). Unfortunately, these scales do not identify 
the full spectrum of patients with delirium. All patients 
who are acutely confused should be presumed deliri-
ous regardless of their presentation due to the wide 
variety of possible clinical features. A course that fluc-
tuates over hours or days and may worsen at night 
(termed sundowning) is typical but not essential for the 
diagnosis. Observation of the patient usually will reveal 
an altered level of consciousness or a deficit of atten-
tion. Other hallmark features that may be present in a 
delirious patient include alteration of sleep-wake cycles, 
thought disturbances such as hallucinations or delu-
sions, autonomic instability, and changes in affect.
HISTORY It may be difficult to elicit an accurate 
history in delirious patients who have altered levels of 
consciousness or impaired attention. Information from 
a collateral source such as a spouse or another family 
member is therefore invaluable. The three most impor-
tant pieces of history are the patient’s baseline cognitive 
function, the time course of the present illness, and cur-
rent medications.
Premorbid cognitive function can be assessed 
through the collateral source or, if needed, via a review 
of outpatient records. Delirium by definition represents 
a change that is relatively acute, usually over hours to 
days, from a cognitive baseline. As a result, an acute con-
fusional state is nearly impossible to diagnose without 
some knowledge of baseline cognitive function. With-
out this information, many patients with dementia or 
depression may be mistaken as delirious during a single 
initial evaluation. Patients with a more hypoactive, apa-
thetic presentation with psychomotor slowing may be 
identified as being different from baseline only through 
conversations with family members. A number of vali-
dated instruments have been shown to diagnose cogni-
tive dysfunction accurately by using a collateral source, 
including the modified Blessed Dementia Rating Scale 
and the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR). Baseline cogni-
tive impairment is common in patients with delirium. 
Even when no such history of cognitive impairment is 
elicited, there should still be a high suspicion for a previ-
ously unrecognized underlying neurologic disorder.
Establishing the time course of cognitive change is 
important not only to make a diagnosis of delirium but 
also to correlate the onset of the illness with potentially 
treatable etiologies such as recent medication changes 
or symptoms of systemic infection.
Medications remain a common cause of delirium, 
especially compounds with anticholinergic or sedative 
properties. It is estimated that nearly one-third of all 
cases of delirium are secondary to medications, espe-
cially in the elderly. Medication histories should include 
all prescription as well as over-the-counter and herbal 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
128
substances taken by the patient and any recent changes 
in dosing or formulation, including substitution of 
generics for brand-name medications.
Other important elements of the history include 
screening for symptoms of organ failure or systemic 
infection, which often contributes to delirium in the 
elderly. A history of illicit drug use, alcoholism, or toxin 
exposure is common in younger delirious patients. 
Finally, asking the patient and collateral source about 
other symptoms that may accompany delirium, such as 
depression and hallucinations, may help identify poten-
tial therapeutic targets.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION The general physical 
examination in a delirious patient should include a care-
ful screening for signs of infection such as fever, tachy-
pnea, pulmonary consolidation, heart murmur, and stiff 
neck. The patient’s fluid status should be assessed; both 
dehydration and fluid overload with resultant hypox-
emia have been associated with delirium, and each is 
usually easily rectified. The appearance of the skin can 
be helpful, showing jaundice in hepatic encephalopa-
thy, cyanosis in hypoxemia, or needle tracks in patients 
using intravenous drugs.
The neurologic examination requires a careful assess-
ment of mental status. Patients with delirium often pres-
ent with a fluctuating course; therefore, the diagnosis 
can be missed when one relies on a single time point of 
evaluation. Some but not all patients exhibit the charac-
teristic pattern of sundowning, a worsening of their con-
dition in the evening. In these cases, assessment only 
during morning rounds may be falsely reassuring.
An altered level of consciousness ranging from 
hyperarousal to lethargy to coma is present in most 
patients with delirium and can be assessed easily at 
the bedside. In a patient with a relatively normal level 
of consciousness, a screen for an attentional deficit is 
in order, as this deficit is the classic neuropsychological 
hallmark of delirium. Attention can be assessed while 
taking a history from the patient. Tangential speech, a 
fragmentary flow of ideas, or inability to follow complex 
commands often signifies an attentional problem. There 
are formal neuropsychological tests to assess atten-
tion, but a simple bedside test of digit span forward is 
quick and fairly sensitive. In this task, patients are asked 
to repeat successively longer random strings of digits 
beginning with two digits in a row. Average adults can 
repeat a string of five to seven digits before faltering; a 
digit span of four or less usually indicates an attentional 
deficit unless hearing or language barriers are present.
More formal neuropsychological testing can be 
extraordinarily helpful in assessing a delirious patient, 
but it is usually too cumbersome and time-consuming 
 in the inpatient setting. A simple Mini Mental Status 
Examination (MMSE) (see Table 29-5) can provide  
some information regarding orientation, language, and 
visuospatial skills; however, performance of some tasks 
on the MMSE such as spelling “world” backward and 
serial subtraction of digits will be impaired by delirious 
patients’ attentional deficits alone and are therefore 
unreliable.
The remainder of the screening neurologic examina-
tion should focus on identifying new focal neurologic 
deficits. Focal strokes or mass lesions in isolation are 
rarely the cause of delirium, but patients with underly-
ing extensive cerebrovascular disease or neurodegener-
ative conditions may not be able to cognitively tolerate 
even relatively small new insults. Patients also should be 
screened for additional signs of neurodegenerative con-
ditions such as parkinsonism, which is seen not only in 
idiopathic Parkinson’s disease but also in other dement-
ing conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease, dementia 
with Lewy bodies, and progressive supranuclear palsy. 
The presence of multifocal myoclonus or asterixis on the 
motor examination is nonspecific but usually indicates a 
metabolic or toxic etiology of the delirium.
ETIOLOGY Some etiologies can be easily discerned 
through a careful history and physical examination, 
whereas others require confirmation with laboratory 
studies, imaging, or other ancillary tests. A large, diverse 
group of insults can lead to delirium, and the cause in 
many patients is often multifactorial. Common etiolo-
gies are listed in Table 16-1.
Prescribed, over-the-counter, and herbal medica-
tions are common precipitants of delirium. Drugs with 
anticholinergic properties, narcotics, and benzodiaz-
epines are especially common offenders, but nearly any 
compound can lead to cognitive dysfunction in a pre-
disposed patient. Whereas an elderly patient with base-
line dementia may become delirious upon exposure to 
a relatively low dose of a medication, less susceptible 
individuals may become delirious only with very high 
doses of the same medication. This observation empha-
sizes the importance of correlating the timing of recent 
medication changes, including dose and formulation, 
with the onset of cognitive dysfunction.
In younger patients especially, illicit drugs and tox-
ins are common causes of delirium. In addition to more 
classic drugs of abuse, the recent rise in availability of 
so-called club drugs, such as methylenedioxymetham-
phetamine (MDMA, ecstasy), γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), 
and the phencyclidine (PCP)-like agent ketamine, has 
led to an increase in delirious young persons present-
ing to acute care settings. Many common prescription 
drugs such as oral narcotics and benzodiazepines are 
often abused and readily available on the street. Alco-
hol intoxication with high serum levels can cause confu-
sion, but more commonly it is withdrawal from alcohol 
that leads to a classic hyperactive delirium. Alcohol and 
 
CHAPTER 16
Confusion and Delirium
129
benzodiazepine withdrawal should be considered in all 
cases of delirium as even patients who drink only a few 
servings of alcohol every day can experience relatively 
severe withdrawal symptoms upon hospitalization.
Metabolic abnormalities such as electrolyte distur-
bances of sodium, calcium, magnesium, or glucose 
can cause delirium, and mild derangements can lead 
to substantial cognitive disturbances in susceptible 
individuals. Other common metabolic etiologies include 
liver and renal failure, hypercarbia and hypoxemia, vita-
min deficiencies of thiamine and B12, autoimmune dis-
orders including central nervous system (CNS) vascu-
litis, and endocrinopathies such as thyroid and adrenal 
disorders.
Systemic infections often cause delirium, especially 
in the elderly. A common scenario involves the devel-
opment of an acute cognitive decline in the setting 
of a urinary tract infection in a patient with baseline 
dementia. Pneumonia, skin infections such as cellulitis, 
and frank sepsis also can lead to delirium. This so-called 
septic encephalopathy, often seen in the ICU, is prob-
ably due to the release of proinflammatory cytokines 
and their diffuse cerebral effects. CNS infections such as 
meningitis, encephalitis, and abscess are less common 
etiologies of delirium; however, in light of the high mor-
tality rates associated with these conditions when they 
are not treated quickly, clinicians must always maintain 
a high index of suspicion.
In some susceptible individuals, exposure to the 
unfamiliar environment of a hospital can lead to delir-
ium. This etiology usually occurs as part of a multifac-
torial delirium and should be considered a diagnosis of 
exclusion after all other causes have been thoroughly 
investigated. Many primary prevention and treatment 
strategies for delirium involve relatively simple methods 
to address the aspects of the inpatient setting that are 
most confusing.
Cerebrovascular etiologies are usually due to global 
hypoperfusion in the setting of systemic hypotension 
from heart failure, septic shock, dehydration, or anemia. 
Focal strokes in the right parietal lobe and medial dor-
sal thalamus rarely can lead to a delirious state. A more 
common scenario involves a new focal stroke or hemor-
rhage causing confusion in a patient who has decreased 
cerebral reserve. In these individuals, it is sometimes 
difficult to distinguish between cognitive dysfunction 
resulting from the new neurovascular insult itself and 
delirium due to the infectious, metabolic, and pharma-
cologic complications that can accompany hospitaliza-
tion after stroke.
Because a fluctuating course often is seen in delir-
ium, intermittent seizures may be overlooked when one 
is considering potential etiologies. Both nonconvulsive 
status epilepticus and recurrent focal or generalized 
seizures followed by postictal confusion can cause delir-
ium; EEG remains essential for this diagnosis. Seizure 
activity spreading from an electrical focus in a mass or 
infarct can explain global cognitive dysfunction caused 
by relatively small lesions.
TABLE 16-1
COMMON ETIOLOGIES OF DELIRIUM
Toxins
 Prescription medications: especially those with anticho-
linergic properties, narcotics, and benzodiazepines
 Drugs of abuse: alcohol intoxication and alcohol with-
drawal, opiates, ecstasy, LSD, GHB, PCP, ketamine, 
cocaine
 Poisons: inhalants, carbon monoxide, ethylene glycol, 
pesticides
Metabolic conditions
 Electrolyte disturbances: hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, 
hyponatremia, hypernatremia, hypercalcemia, hypocal-
cemia, hypomagnesemia
 Hypothermia and hyperthermia
 Pulmonary failure: hypoxemia and hypercarbia
 Liver failure/hepatic encephalopathy
 Renal failure/uremia
 Cardiac failure
 Vitamin deﬁciencies: B12, thiamine, folate, niacin
 Dehydration and malnutrition
 Anemia
Infections
 Systemic infections: urinary tract infections, pneumonia, 
skin and soft tissue infections, sepsis
 CNS infections: meningitis, encephalitis, brain abscess
Endocrinologic conditions
 Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Adrenal insufﬁciency
Cerebrovascular disorders
 Global hypoperfusion states
 Hypertensive encephalopathy
 Focal ischemic strokes and hemorrhages: especially 
nondominant parietal and thalamic lesions
Autoimmune disorders
 CNS vasculitis
 Cerebral lupus
Seizure-related disorders
 Nonconvulsive status epilepticus
 Intermittent seizures with prolonged postictal states
Neoplastic disorders
 Diffuse metastases to the brain
 Gliomatosis cerebri
 Carcinomatous meningitis
Hospitalization
 Terminal end-of-life delirium
Abbreviations: LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; GHB, γ-hydroxy-
butyrate; PCP, phencyclidine; CNS, central nervous system.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
130
It is very common for patients to experience delirium 
at the end of life in palliative care settings. This condi-
tion, sometimes described as terminal restlessness, must 
be identified and treated aggressively as it is an impor-
tant cause of patient and family discomfort at the end 
of life. It should be remembered that these patients also 
may be suffering from more common etiologies of delir-
ium such as systemic infection.
LABORATORY AND DIAGNOSTIC EVALU-
ATION A cost-effective approach to the diagnostic 
evaluation of delirium allows the history and physi-
cal examination to guide tests. No established algo-
rithm for workup will fit all delirious patients due to 
the staggering number of potential etiologies, but one 
stepwise approach is detailed in Table 16-2. If a clear 
precipitant is identified early, such as an offending 
medication, little further workup is required. If, how-
ever, no likely etiology is uncovered with initial evalu-
ation, an aggressive search for an underlying cause 
should be initiated.
Basic screening labs, including a complete blood 
count, electrolyte panel, and tests of liver and renal 
function, should be obtained in all patients with delir-
ium. In elderly patients, screening for systemic infection, 
including chest radiography, urinalysis and culture, and 
possibly blood cultures, is important. In younger indi-
viduals, serum and urine drug and toxicology screen-
ing may be appropriate early in the workup. Additional 
laboratory tests addressing other autoimmune, endo-
crinologic, metabolic, and infectious etiologies should 
be reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis remains 
unclear after initial testing.
Multiple studies have demonstrated that brain 
imaging in patients with delirium is often unhelpful. 
However, if the initial workup is unrevealing, most cli-
nicians quickly move toward imaging of the brain to 
exclude structural causes. A noncontrast CT scan can 
identify large masses and hemorrhages but is other-
wise relatively insensitive for discovering an etiology 
of delirium. The ability of MRI to identify most acute 
ischemic strokes as well as to provide neuroanatomic 
detail that gives clues to possible infectious, inflam-
matory, neurodegenerative, and neoplastic condi-
tions makes it the test of choice. Since MRI tech-
niques are limited by availability, speed of imaging, 
patient cooperation, and contraindications to mag-
netic exposure, many clinicians begin with CT scan-
ning and proceed to MRI if the etiology of delirium 
remains elusive.
Lumbar puncture (LP) must be obtained immediately 
after appropriate neuroimaging in all patients in whom 
CNS infection is suspected. Spinal fluid examination 
can also be useful in identifying inflammatory and neo-
plastic conditions as well as in the diagnosis of hepatic 
encephalopathy through elevated cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) glutamine levels. As a result, LP should be consid-
ered in any delirious patient with a negative workup. 
EEG does not have a routine role in the workup of delir-
ium, but it remains invaluable if seizure-related etiolo-
gies are considered.
TABLE 16-2
STEPWISE EVALUATION OF A PATIENT WITH 
DELIRIUM
Initial evaluation
 History with special attention to medications (including 
over-the-counter and herbals)
 General physical examination and neurologic examina-
tion
 Complete blood count
 Electrolyte panel including calcium, magnesium, phos-
phorus
 Liver function tests, including albumin
 Renal function tests
First-tier further evaluation guided by initial evaluation
 Systemic infection screen
  Urinalysis and culture
  Chest radiograph
  Blood cultures
 Electrocardiogram
 Arterial blood gas
 Serum and/or urine toxicology screen (perform earlier 
in young persons)
 Brain imaging with MRI with diffusion and gadolinium 
(preferred) or CT
 Suspected CNS infection: lumbar puncture after brain 
imaging
 Suspected seizure-related etiology: electroencephalo-
gram (EEG) (if high suspicion, should be performed 
immediately)
Second-tier further evaluation
 Vitamin levels: B12, folate, thiamine
 Endocrinologic laboratories: thyroid-stimulating hor-
mone (TSH) and free T4; cortisol
 Serum ammonia
 Sedimentation rate
 Autoimmune serologies: antinuclear antibodies (ANA), 
complement levels; p-ANCA, c-ANCA
 Infectious serologies: rapid plasmin reagin (RPR); fungal 
and viral serologies if high suspicion; HIV antibody
 Lumbar puncture (if not already performed)
 Brain MRI with and without gadolinium (if not already 
performed)
Abbreviations: p-ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody; c-ANCA, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic anti-
body.
 
CHAPTER 16
Confusion and Delirium
131
TREATMENT 
Delirium
Management of delirium begins with treatment of the 
underlying inciting factor (e.g., patients with systemic 
infections should be given appropriate antibiotics, and 
underlying electrolyte disturbances judiciously cor-
rected). These treatments often lead to prompt reso-
lution of delirium. Blindly targeting the symptoms of 
delirium pharmacologically only serves to prolong the 
time patients remain in the confused state and may 
mask important diagnostic information. Recent trials of 
medications used to boost cholinergic tone in delirious 
patients have led to mixed results, and this strategy is 
not currently recommended.
Relatively simple methods of supportive care can 
be highly effective in treating patients with delirium. 
Reorientation by the nursing staff and family com-
bined with visible clocks, calendars, and outside-facing 
windows can reduce confusion. Sensory isolation 
should be prevented by providing glasses and hearing 
aids to patients who need them. Sundowning can be 
addressed to a large extent through vigilance to appro-
priate sleep-wake cycles. During the day, a well-lit room 
should be accompanied by activities or exercises to pre-
vent napping. At night, a quiet, dark environment with 
limited interruptions by staff can assure proper rest. 
These sleep-wake cycle interventions are especially 
important in the ICU setting as the usual constant 24-h 
activity commonly provokes delirium. Attempting to 
mimic the home environment as much as possible also 
has been shown to help treat and even prevent delir-
ium. Visits from friends and family throughout the day 
minimize the anxiety associated with the constant flow 
of new faces of staff and physicians. Allowing hospital-
ized patients to have access to home bedding, clothing, 
and nightstand objects makes the hospital environ-
ment less foreign and therefore less confusing. Simple 
standard nursing practices such as maintaining proper 
nutrition and volume status as well as managing incon-
tinence and skin breakdown also help alleviate discom-
fort and resulting confusion.
In some instances, patients pose a threat to their own 
safety or to the safety of staff members, and acute man-
agement is required. Bed alarms and personal sitters are 
more effective and much less disorienting than physical 
restraints. Chemical restraints should be avoided, but 
when necessary, very low dose typical or atypical anti-
psychotic medications administered on an as-needed 
basis are effective. The recent association of antipsy-
chotic use in the elderly with increased mortality rates 
underscores the importance of using these medications 
judiciously and only as a last resort. Benzodiazepines 
are not as effective as antipsychotics and often worsen 
confusion through their sedative properties. Although 
many clinicians still use benzodiazepines to treat acute 
confusion, their use should be limited to cases in which 
delirium is caused by alcohol or benzodiazepine with-
drawal.
PREVENTION
In light of the high morbidity associated with delirium 
and the tremendously increased health care costs that 
accompany it, development of an effective strategy to 
prevent delirium in hospitalized patients is extremely 
important. Successful identiﬁcation of high-risk patients 
is the ﬁrst step, followed by initiation of appropri-
ate interventions. One trial randomized more than 850 
elderly inpatients to simple standardized protocols used 
to manage risk factors for delirium, including cogni-
tive impairment, immobility, visual impairment, hearing 
impairment, sleep deprivation, and dehydration. Signiﬁ-
cant reductions in the number and duration of episodes 
of delirium were observed in the treatment group, but 
unfortunately, delirium recurrence rates were unchanged. 
Recent trials in the ICU have focused on identifying 
sedatives, such as dexmedetomidine, that are less likely to 
lead to delirium in critically ill patients. All hospitals and 
health care systems should work toward developing stan-
dardized protocols to address common risk factors with 
the goal of decreasing the incidence of delirium.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
In the 16th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
cine, Allan H. Ropper contributed to a section on acute confu-
sional states that was incorporated into this current chapter.
 Allan H. Ropper 
132
 Coma is among the most common and striking prob-
lems in general medicine. It accounts for a substantial 
portion of admissions to emergency wards and occurs 
on all hospital services. Coma demands immediate 
attention and requires an organized approach. 
 There is a continuum of states of reduced alert-
ness, the most severe form being  coma , deﬁ ned as a 
deep sleeplike state from which the patient cannot be 
aroused.  Stupor refers to a higher degree of arousability 
in which the patient can be transiently awakened only 
by vigorous stimuli, accompanied by motor behavior 
that leads to avoidance of uncomfortable or aggravating 
stimuli.  Drowsiness , which is familiar to all persons, sim-
ulates light sleep and is characterized by easy arousal and 
the persistence of alertness for brief periods. Drowsiness 
and stupor are usually accompanied by some degree of 
confusion ( Chap. 16 ). A precise narrative description of 
the level of arousal and of the type of responses evoked 
by various stimuli as observed at the bedside is prefer-
able to ambiguous terms such as  lethargy ,  semicoma , or 
 obtundation . 
 Several other conditions that render patients unre-
sponsive and thereby simulate coma are considered 
separately because of their special signiﬁ cance. The  veg-
etative state signiﬁ es an awake but nonresponsive state in 
a patient who has emerged from coma. In the vegeta-
tive state, the eyelids may open, giving the appearance 
of wakefulness. Respiratory and autonomic functions 
are retained. Yawning, coughing, swallowing, as well as 
limb and head movements persist and the patient may 
follow visually presented objects, but there are few, if 
any, meaningful responses to the external and inter-
nal environment—in essence, an “awake coma.” The 
term  vegetative is unfortunate as it is subject to mis-
interpretation. There are always accompanying signs 
that indicate extensive damage in both cerebral hemi-
spheres, e.g., decerebrate or decorticate limb postur-
ing and absent responses to visual stimuli (see later). 
In the closely related but less severe  minimally conscious 
state , the patient has rudimentary vocal or motor behav-
iors, often spontaneous, but some in response to touch, 
visual stimuli, or command. Cardiac arrest with cerebral 
hypoperfusion and head injuries are the most common 
causes of the vegetative and minimally conscious states 
( Chap. 28 ). The prognosis for regaining mental facul-
ties once the vegetative state has supervened for several 
months is very poor, and after a year, almost nil, hence 
the term  persistent vegetative state . Most reports of dra-
matic recovery, when investigated carefully, are found 
to yield to the usual rules for prognosis but there have 
been rare instances in which recovery has occurred to a 
severely disabled condition and, in rare childhood cases, 
to an even better state. The possibility of incorrectly 
attributing meaningful behavior to patients in the veg-
etative and minimally conscious states has created inor-
dinate problems and anguish for families. On the other 
hand, the question of whether these patients lack any 
capability for cognition has been reopened by functional 
imaging studies demonstrating, in a small proportion of 
posttraumatic cases, cerebral activation in response to 
external stimuli. 
 Apart from the above conditions, several syndromes 
that affect alertness are prone to be misinterpreted 
as stupor or coma.  Akinetic mutism refers to a partially 
or fully awake state in which the patient is able to 
form impressions and think, as demonstrated by later 
recounting of events, but remains virtually immobile 
and mute. The condition results from damage in the 
regions of the medial thalamic nuclei or the frontal 
lobes (particularly lesions situated deeply or on the orbi-
tofrontal surfaces) or from extreme hydrocephalus. The 
term  abulia describes a milder form of akinetic mut-
ism characterized by mental and physical slowness and 
diminished ability to initiate activity. It is also usually 
the result of damage to the frontal lobes and its connec-
tions ( Chap. 18 ).  Catatonia is a curious hypomobile and 
mute syndrome that occurs as part of a major psycho-
sis, usually schizophrenia or major depression. Catatonic 
 COMA 
 CHAPTER 17 
 
CHAPTER 17
Coma
133
patients make few voluntary or responsive movements, 
although they blink, swallow, and may not appear dis-
tressed. There are nonetheless signs that the patient is 
responsive, although it may take ingenuity on the part 
of the examiner to demonstrate them. For example, 
eyelid elevation is actively resisted, blinking occurs in 
response to a visual threat, and the eyes move concomi-
tantly with head rotation, all of which are inconsistent 
with the presence of a brain lesion causing unrespon-
siveness. It is characteristic but not invariable in catato-
nia for the limbs to retain the postures in which they 
have been placed by the examiner (“waxy ﬂexibility,” 
or catalepsy). With recovery, patients often have some 
memory of events that occurred during their catatonic 
stupor. Catatonia is superﬁcially similar to akinetic mut-
ism, but clinical evidence of cerebral damage such as 
Babinski signs and hypertonicity of the limbs is lacking. 
The special problem of coma in brain death is discussed 
later in this chapter.
The locked-in state describes yet another type of pseu-
docoma in which an awake patient has no means of 
producing speech or volitional movement but retains 
voluntary vertical eye movements and lid elevation, 
thus allowing the patient to signal with a clear mind. 
The pupils are normally reactive. Such individuals have 
written entire treatises using Morse code. The usual 
cause is an infarction or hemorrhage of the ventral 
pons that transects all descending motor (corticospinal 
and corticobulbar) pathways. A similar awake but de-
efferented state occurs as a result of total paralysis of the 
musculature in severe cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome 
(Chap. 46), critical illness neuropathy (Chap. 28), and 
pharmacologic neuromuscular blockade.
THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY  
OF COMA
Almost all instances of diminished alertness can be 
traced to widespread abnormalities of the cerebral 
hemispheres or to reduced activity of a special thala-
mocortical alerting system termed the reticular activating 
system (RAS). The proper functioning of this system, 
its ascending projections to the cortex, and the cortex 
itself are required to maintain alertness and coherence 
of thought. It follows that the principal causes of coma 
are (1) lesions that damage the RAS in the upper mid-
brain or its projections; (2) destruction of large portions 
of both cerebral hemispheres; and (3) suppression of 
reticulocerebral function by drugs, toxins, or metabolic 
derangements such as hypoglycemia, anoxia, uremia, 
and hepatic failure.
The proximity of the RAS to midbrain structures 
that control pupillary function and eye movements per-
mits clinical localization of the cause of coma in many 
cases. Pupillary enlargement with loss of light reaction 
and loss of vertical and adduction movements of the 
eyes suggests that the lesion is in the upper brainstem. 
Conversely, preservation of pupillary light reactivity and 
of eye movements absolves the upper brainstem and 
indicates that widespread structural lesions or metabolic 
suppression of the cerebral hemispheres is responsible 
for coma.
Coma due to cerebral mass lesions  
and herniations
The cranial cavity is separated into compartments by 
infoldings of the dura. The two cerebral hemispheres 
are separated by the falx, and the anterior and posterior 
fossae by the tentorium. Herniation refers to displace-
ment of brain tissue into a compartment that it normally 
does not occupy. Coma and many of its associated 
signs can be attributed to these tissue shifts, and certain 
clinical features are characteristic of speciﬁc herniations 
(Fig. 17-1). They are in essence “false localizing” signs 
since they derive from compression of brain structures 
at a distance from the mass.
The most common herniations are those in which 
a part of the brain is displaced from the supratentorial 
to the infratentorial compartment through the tento-
rial opening; this is referred to as transtentorial hernia-
tion. Uncal transtentorial herniation refers to impaction 
of the anterior medial temporal gyrus (the uncus) into 
the tentorial opening just anterior to and adjacent to the 
midbrain (Fig. 17-1A). The uncus compresses the third 
nerve as it traverses the subarachnoid space, causing 
enlargement of the ipsilateral pupil (putatively because 
A
B
D
C
FIGURE 17-1 
Types of cerebral herniation. (A) Uncal; (B) central; (C) 
transfalcial; (D) foraminal.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
134
the ﬁbers subserving parasympathetic pupillary function 
are located peripherally in the nerve). The coma that 
follows is due to compression of the midbrain against 
the opposite tentorial edge by the displaced parahippo-
campal gyrus (Fig. 17-2). Lateral displacement of the 
midbrain may compress the opposite cerebral peduncle, 
producing a Babinski’s sign and hemiparesis contralat-
eral to the original hemiparesis (the Kernohan-Woltman 
sign). Herniation may also compress the anterior and 
posterior cerebral arteries as they pass over the tentorial 
reﬂections, with resultant brain infarction. The distor-
tions may also entrap portions of the ventricular system, 
resulting in hydrocephalus.
Central transtentorial herniation denotes a symmetric 
downward movement of the thalamic medial structures 
through the tentorial opening with compression of the 
upper midbrain (Fig. 17-1B). Miotic pupils and drowsi-
ness are the heralding signs. Both temporal and central 
transtentorial herniations have been considered causes 
of progressive compression of the brainstem, with ini-
tial damage to the midbrain, then the pons, and ﬁnally 
the medulla. The result is a sequence of neurologic signs 
that corresponds to each affected level. Other forms of 
herniation are transfalcial herniation (displacement of the 
cingulate gyrus under the falx and across the midline, 
Fig. 17-1C), and foraminal herniation (downward forc-
ing of the cerebellar tonsils into the foramen magnum, 
Fig. 17-1D), which causes compression of the medulla, 
respiratory arrest, and death.
A direct relationship between the various conﬁgura-
tions of transtentorial herniation and coma is not always 
found. Drowsiness and stupor can occur with moder-
ate horizontal displacement of the diencephalon (thala-
mus), before transtentorial herniation is evident. This 
lateral shift may be quantiﬁed on axial images of CT 
and MRI scans (Fig.  17-2). In cases of acutely appearing 
masses, horizontal displacement of the pineal calciﬁca-
tion of 3–5 mm is generally associated with drowsiness, 
6–8 mm with stupor, and >9 mm with coma. Intrusion 
of the medial temporal lobe into the tentorial opening 
is also apparent on MRI and CT scans as obliteration of 
the cisterna that surround the upper brainstem.
Coma due to metabolic disorders
Many systemic metabolic abnormalities cause coma 
by interrupting the delivery of energy substrates (e.g., 
hypoxia, ischemia, hypoglycemia) or by altering neu-
ronal excitability (drug and alcohol intoxication, anes-
thesia, and epilepsy). The same metabolic abnormali-
ties that produce coma may, in milder forms, induce 
an acute confusional state. Thus, in metabolic enceph-
alopathies, clouded consciousness and coma are in a 
continuum.
Cerebral neurons are fully dependent on cere-
bral blood ﬂow (CBF) and the delivery of oxygen and 
glucose. CBF is ∼75 mL per 100 g/min in gray mat-
ter and 30 mL per 100 g/min in white matter (mean 
∼55 mL per 100 g/min); oxygen consumption is 
3.5 mL per 100 g/min, and glucose utilization is 5 mg 
per 100 g/min. Brain stores of glucose provide energy 
for ∼2 min after blood ﬂow is interrupted, and oxy-
gen stores last 8–10 s after the cessation of blood ﬂow. 
Simultaneous hypoxia and ischemia exhaust glucose 
more rapidly. The electroencephalogram (EEG) rhythm 
in these circumstances becomes diffusely slowed, typical 
of metabolic encephalopathies, and as conditions of sub-
strate delivery worsen, eventually brain electrical activ-
ity ceases.
Unlike hypoxia-ischemia, which causes neuronal des- 
truction, most metabolic disorders such as hypogly-
cemia, hyponatremia, hyperosmolarity, hypercapnia, 
hypercalcemia, and hepatic and renal failure cause only 
minor neuropathologic changes. The causes of the 
reversible effects of these conditions on the brain are 
not understood but may result from impaired energy 
supplies, changes in ion ﬂuxes across neuronal mem-
branes, and neurotransmitter abnormalities. For exam-
ple, the high ammonia concentration of hepatic coma 
interferes with cerebral energy metabolism and with 
the Na+, K+-ATPase pump, increases the number 
and size of astrocytes, and causes increased concentra-
tions of potentially toxic products of ammonia metabo-
lism; it may also affect neurotransmitters, including the 
A
B
FIGURE 17-2 
Coronal (A) and axial (B) magnetic resonance images 
from a stuporous patient with a left third nerve palsy as 
a result of a large left-sided subdural hematoma (seen as 
a gray-white rim). The upper midbrain and lower thalamic 
regions are compressed and displaced horizontally away 
from the mass, and there is transtentorial herniation of the 
medial temporal lobe structures, including the uncus ante-
riorly. The lateral ventricle opposite to the hematoma has 
become enlarged as a result of compression of the third 
ventricle.
 
CHAPTER 17
Coma
135
production of putative “false” neurotransmitters that are 
active at receptor sites. Apart from hyperammonemia, 
which of these mechanisms is of critical importance is 
not clear. The mechanism of the encephalopathy of 
renal failure is also not known. Unlike ammonia, urea 
does not produce central nervous system (CNS) toxicity 
and a multifactorial causation has been proposed for the 
encephalopathy, including increased permeability of the 
blood-brain barrier to toxic substances such as organic 
acids and an increase in brain calcium and cerebrospinal 
ﬂuid (CSF) phosphate content.
Coma and seizures are common accompaniments of 
large shifts in sodium and water balance in the brain. 
These changes in osmolarity arise from systemic medi-
cal disorders, including diabetic ketoacidosis, the non-
ketotic hyperosmolar state, and hyponatremia from 
any cause (e.g., water intoxication, excessive secretion 
of antidiuretic hormone, or atrial natriuretic peptides). 
Sodium levels <125 mmol/L induce confusion, and 
levels <115 mmol/L are associated with coma and con-
vulsions. In hyperosmolar coma, the serum osmolarity 
is generally >350 mosmol/L. Hypercapnia depresses 
the level of consciousness in proportion to the rise in 
carbon dioxide (co2) tension in the blood. In all of these 
metabolic encephalopathies, the degree of neurologic change 
depends to a large extent on the rapidity with which the serum 
changes occur. The pathophysiology of other metabolic 
encephalopathies such as hypercalcemia, hypothy-
roidism, vitamin B12 deﬁciency, and hypothermia are 
incompletely understood but must also reﬂect derange-
ments of CNS biochemistry, membrane function, and 
neurotransmitters.
Epileptic coma
Generalized electrical discharges of the cortex (seizures) 
are associated with coma, even in the absence of epi-
leptic motor activity (convulsions). The self-limited coma 
that follows a seizure, the postictal state, may be due to 
exhaustion of energy reserves or effects of locally toxic 
molecules that are the by-product of seizures. The post-
ictal state produces a pattern of continuous, generalized 
slowing of the background EEG activity similar to that 
of other metabolic encephalopathies.
Toxic (including drug–induced) coma
This common class of encephalopathy is in large mea-
sure reversible and leaves no residual damage provided 
there has not been cardiorespiratory failure. Many 
drugs and toxins are capable of depressing nervous sys-
tem function. Some produce coma by affecting both 
the brainstem nuclei, including the RAS, and the cere-
bral cortex. The combination of cortical and brainstem 
signs, which occurs in certain drug overdoses, may lead 
to an incorrect diagnosis of structural brainstem disease. 
Overdose of medications that have atropinic actions 
produces signs such as dilated pupils, tachycardia, and 
dry skin; opiate overdose produces pinpoint pupils 
<1 mm in diameter.
Coma due to widespread damage to the 
cerebral hemispheres
This category, comprising a number of unrelated disor-
ders, results from widespread structural cerebral damage, 
thereby simulating a metabolic disorder of the cortex. 
Hypoxia-ischemia is perhaps the best known and one in 
which it is not possible initially to distinguish the acute 
reversible effects of hypoperfusion and oxygen depriva-
tion of the brain from the subsequent effects of neuro-
nal damage. Similar bihemispheral damage is produced 
by disorders that occlude small blood vessels throughout 
the brain; examples include cerebral malaria, thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura, and hyperviscosity. Diffuse 
white matter damage from cranial trauma or inﬂamma-
tory demyelinating diseases causes a similar syndrome of 
coma.
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Coma
Acute respiratory and cardiovascular problems should 
be attended to prior to neurologic assessment. In most 
instances, a complete medical evaluation, except for 
vital signs, funduscopy, and examination for nuchal 
rigidity, may be deferred until the neurologic evaluation 
has established the severity and nature of coma. The 
approach to the patient with coma from cranial trauma 
is discussed in Chap. 36.
HISTORY In many cases, the cause of coma is imme-
diately evident (e.g., trauma, cardiac arrest, or reported 
drug ingestion). In the remainder, certain points are 
especially useful: (1) the circumstances and rapidity 
with which neurologic symptoms developed; (2) the 
antecedent symptoms (confusion, weakness, headache, 
fever, seizures, dizziness, double vision, or vomiting); 
(3) the use of medications, illicit drugs, or alcohol; and 
(4) chronic liver, kidney, lung, heart, or other medical 
disease. Direct interrogation of family, observers, and 
ambulance technicians on the scene, in person or by 
telephone, is an important part of the evaluation.
GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Fever 
suggests a systemic infection, bacterial meningitis, 
encephalitis, heat stroke, neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome, malignant hyperthermia due to anesthetics 
or anticholinergic drug intoxication; only rarely is it 
attributable to a lesion that has disturbed hypotha-
lamic temperature-regulating centers (“central fever”). 
A slight elevation in temperature may follow vigorous 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
136
convulsions. Hypothermia is observed with exposure; 
alcoholic, barbiturate, sedative, or phenothiazine intoxi-
cation; hypoglycemia; peripheral circulatory failure; or 
extreme hypothyroidism. Hypothermia itself causes 
coma only when the temperature is <31°C (87.8°F). 
Tachypnea may indicate systemic acidosis or pneumo-
nia or rarely infiltration of the brain with lymphoma. 
Aberrant respiratory patterns that reflect brainstem 
disorders are discussed later. Marked hypertension sug-
gests hypertensive encephalopathy, but it may also be 
secondary to a rapid rise in intracranial pressure (ICP) 
(the Cushing response) most often after cerebral hem-
orrhage or head injury. Hypotension is characteristic of 
coma from alcohol or barbiturate intoxication, internal 
hemorrhage, myocardial infarction, sepsis, profound 
hypothyroidism, or Addisonian crisis.
The funduscopic examination can detect subarach-
noid hemorrhage (subhyaloid hemorrhages), hyperten-
sive encephalopathy (exudates, hemorrhages, vessel- 
crossing changes, papilledema), and increased ICP 
(papilledema). Cutaneous petechiae suggest throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura, meningococcemia, 
or a bleeding diathesis associated with an intracerebral 
hemorrhage. Cyanosis, reddish or anemic skin color-
ation are other indications of an underlying systemic 
disease responsible for the coma.
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION The patient should 
first be observed without intervention by the exam-
iner. Tossing about in the bed, reaching up toward the 
face, crossing legs, yawning, swallowing, coughing, or 
moaning reflect a drowsy state that is close to normal 
awakeness. Lack of restless movements on one side or 
an outturned leg suggests a hemiplegia. Intermittent 
twitching movements of a foot, finger, or facial muscle 
may be the only sign of seizures. Multifocal myoclonus 
almost always indicates a metabolic disorder, particu-
larly uremia, anoxia, drug intoxication (especially with 
lithium or haloperidol), or a prion disease (Chap. 43). 
In a drowsy and confused patient, bilateral asterixis is a 
certain sign of metabolic encephalopathy or drug intox-
ication.
Decorticate rigidity and decerebrate rigidity, or “pos-
turing,” describe stereotyped arm and leg movements 
occurring spontaneously or elicited by sensory stimula-
tion. Flexion of the elbows and wrists and supination of 
the arm (decortication) suggests bilateral damage ros-
tral to the midbrain, whereas extension of the elbows 
and wrists with pronation (decerebration) indicates 
damage to motor tracts in the midbrain or caudal dien-
cephalon. The less frequent combination of arm exten-
sion with leg flexion or flaccid legs is associated with 
lesions in the pons. These concepts have been adapted 
from animal work and cannot be applied with preci-
sion to coma in humans. In fact, acute and widespread 
disorders of any type, regardless of location, frequently 
cause limb extension, and almost all extensor posturing 
becomes predominantly flexor as time passes.
LEVEL OF AROUSAL A sequence of increasingly 
intense stimuli is used to determine the threshold for 
arousal and the motor response of each side of the 
body. The results of testing may vary from minute to 
minute, and serial examinations are most useful. Tick-
ling the nostrils with a cotton wisp is a moderate stimu-
lus to arousal—all but deeply stuporous and comatose 
patients will move the head away and arouse to some 
degree. An even greater degree of responsiveness 
is present if the patient uses his hand to remove an 
offending stimulus. Pressure on the knuckles or bony 
prominences and pinprick stimulation are humane 
forms of noxious stimuli; pinching the skin causes 
unsightly ecchymoses and is generally not necessary 
but may be useful in eliciting abduction withdrawal 
movements of the limbs. Posturing in response to nox-
ious stimuli indicates severe damage to the corticospi-
nal system, whereas abduction-avoidance movement of 
a limb is usually purposeful and denotes an intact cor-
ticospinal system. Posturing may also be unilateral and 
coexists with purposeful limb movements, reflecting 
incomplete damage to the motor system.
BRAINSTEM REFLEXES Assessment of brain-
stem function is essential to localization of the lesion in 
coma (Fig. 17-3). The brainstem reflexes that are con-
veniently examined are pupillary size and reaction to 
light, spontaneous and elicited eye movements, corneal 
responses, and the respiratory pattern. As a rule, coma is 
due to bilateral hemispheral disease when these brain-
stem activities are preserved, particularly the pupillary 
reactions and eye movements. However, the presence 
of abnormal brainstem signs does not always indicate 
that the primary lesion is in the brainstem because 
hemispheral masses can cause secondary brainstem 
pathology by transtentorial herniation.
Pupillary Signs Pupillary reactions are examined 
with a bright, diffuse light (not an ophthalmoscope). 
Reactive and round pupils of midsize (2.5–5 mm) essen-
tially exclude midbrain damage, either primary or sec-
ondary to compression. A response to light may be dif-
ficult to appreciate in pupils <2 mm in diameter, and 
bright room lighting mutes pupillary reactivity. One 
enlarged and poorly reactive pupil (>6 mm) signifies 
compression or stretching of the third nerve from the 
effects of a cerebral mass above. Enlargement of the 
pupil contralateral to a hemispheral mass may occur 
but is infrequent. An oval and slightly eccentric pupil 
is a transitional sign that accompanies early midbrain–
third nerve compression. The most extreme pupillary 
sign, bilaterally dilated and unreactive pupils, indicates 
 
CHAPTER 17
Coma
137
severe midbrain damage, usually from compression by a 
supratentorial mass. Ingestion of drugs with anticholin-
ergic activity, the use of mydriatic eye drops, and direct 
ocular trauma are among the causes of misleading 
pupillary enlargement.
Unilateral miosis in coma has been attributed to dys-
function of sympathetic efferents originating in the pos-
terior hypothalamus and descending in the tegmentum 
of the brainstem to the cervical cord. It is therefore of 
limited localizing value but is an occasional finding in 
patients with a large cerebral hemorrhage that affects 
the thalamus. Reactive and bilaterally small (1–2.5 mm) 
but not pinpoint pupils are seen in metabolic encepha-
lopathies or in deep bilateral hemispheral lesions such 
as hydrocephalus or thalamic hemorrhage. Even smaller 
reactive pupils (<1 mm) characterize narcotic or barbi-
turate overdoses but also occur with extensive pontine 
hemorrhage. The response to naloxone and the pres-
ence of reflex eye movements (see next) assist in distin-
guishing these.
Ocular Movements The eyes are first observed 
by elevating the lids and noting the resting position and 
spontaneous movements of the globes. Lid tone, tested 
by lifting the eyelids and noting their resistance to open-
ing and the speed of closure, is progressively reduced as 
unresponsiveness progresses. Horizontal divergence of 
the eyes at rest is normal in drowsiness. As coma deep-
ens, the ocular axes may become parallel again.
Spontaneous eye movements in coma often take 
the form of conjugate horizontal roving. This finding 
alone exonerates damage in the midbrain and pons and 
has the same significance as normal reflex eye move-
ments (see next). Conjugate horizontal ocular devia-
tion to one side indicates damage to the pons on the 
opposite side or alternatively, to the frontal lobe on the 
same side. This phenomenon is summarized by the fol-
lowing maxim: The eyes look toward a hemispheral lesion 
and away from a brainstem lesion. Seizures also drive the 
eyes to one side but usually with superimposed clonic 
movements of the globes. The eyes may occasionally 
turn paradoxically away from the side of a deep hemi-
spheral lesion (“wrong-way eyes”). The eyes turn down 
and inward with thalamic and upper midbrain lesions, 
typically thalamic hemorrhage. “Ocular bobbing” des-
cribes brisk downward and slow upward movements 
of the eyes associated with loss of horizontal eye move-
ments and is diagnostic of bilateral pontine damage, 
usually from thrombosis of the basilar artery. “Ocular 
dipping” is a slower, arrhythmic downward movement 
followed by a faster upward movement in patients with 
normal reflex horizontal gaze; it indicates diffuse cortical 
anoxic damage.
The oculocephalic reflexes, elicited by moving the 
head from side to side or vertically and observing eye 
movements in the direction opposite to the head move-
ment, depend on the integrity of the ocular motor 
nuclei and their interconnecting tracts that extend from 
the midbrain to the pons and medulla (Fig. 17-3). The 
movements, called somewhat inappropriately “doll’s 
eyes” (which refers more accurately to the reflex eleva-
tion of the eyelids with flexion of the neck), are nor-
mally suppressed in the awake patient. The ability to 
elicit them therefore indicates both reduced cortical 
influence on the brainstem and intact brainstem path-
ways, indicating that coma is caused by a lesion or dys-
function in the cerebral hemispheres. The opposite, an 
absence of reflex eye movements, usually signifies dam-
age within the brainstem but can result infrequently 
from overdoses of certain drugs. Normal pupillary size 
and light reaction distinguishes most drug-induced 
comas from structural brainstem damage.
Pupillary light reflex
Reflex conjugate
eye movements
Medulla
Pons
M
L
F
III
V
Vll
Vl
Vlll
III
Respiratory
neurons
Corneal-blink
reflex
FIGURE 17-3 
Examination of brainstem reﬂexes in coma. Midbrain and 
third nerve function are tested by pupillary reaction to light, 
pontine function by spontaneous and reﬂex eye movements 
and corneal responses, and medullary function by respira-
tory and pharyngeal responses. Reﬂex conjugate, horizontal 
eye movements are dependent on the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus (MLF) interconnecting the sixth and contralateral 
third nerve nuclei. Head rotation (oculocephalic reﬂex) or 
caloric stimulation of the labyrinths (oculovestibular reﬂex) 
elicits contraversive eye movements (for details, see text).
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
138
Thermal, or “caloric,” stimulation of the vestibular 
apparatus (oculovestibular response) provides a more 
intense stimulus for the oculocephalic reflex but pro-
vides essentially the same information. The test is per-
formed by irrigating the external auditory canal with 
cool water in order to induce convection currents in the 
labyrinths. After a brief latency, the result is tonic devia-
tion of both eyes to the side of cool-water irrigation 
and nystagmus in the opposite direction. (The acronym 
“COWS” has been used to remind generations of medi-
cal students of the direction of nystagmus—”cold water 
opposite, warm water same.”) The loss of induced con-
jugate ocular movements indicates brainstem damage. 
The presence of corrective nystagmus indicates that 
the frontal lobes are functioning and connected to the 
brainstem; thus functional or hysterical coma is likely.
By touching the cornea with a wisp of cotton, a 
response consisting of brief bilateral lid closure is nor-
mally observed. The corneal reflex depends on the 
integrity of pontine pathways between the fifth (affer-
ent) and both seventh (efferent) cranial nerves; in con-
junction with reflex eye movements, it is a useful test 
of pontine function. CNS-depressant drugs diminish or 
eliminate the corneal responses soon after reflex eye 
movements are paralyzed but before the pupils become 
unreactive to light. The corneal (and pharyngeal) 
response may be lost for a time on the side of an acute 
hemiplegia.
Respiratory Patterns These are of less localiz-
ing value in comparison to other brainstem signs. Shal-
low, slow, but regular breathing suggests metabolic or 
drug depression. Cheyne-Stokes respiration in its classic 
cyclic form, ending with a brief apneic period, signifies 
bihemispheral damage or metabolic suppression and 
commonly accompanies light coma. Rapid, deep (Kuss-
maul) breathing usually implies metabolic acidosis but 
may also occur with pontomesencephalic lesions. Tachy-
pnea occurs with lymphoma of the CNS. Agonal gasps 
are the result of lower brainstem (medullary) damage 
and are recognized as the terminal respiratory pat-
tern of severe brain damage. A number of other cyclic 
breathing variations have been described but are of 
lesser significance.
calcium, osmolarity, and renal (blood urea nitrogen) 
and hepatic (NH3) function. Toxicologic analysis is 
necessary in any case of acute coma where the diag-
nosis is not immediately clear. However, the presence 
of exogenous drugs or toxins, especially alcohol, does 
not exclude the possibility that other factors, particu-
larly head trauma, are also contributing to the clini-
cal state. An ethanol level of 43 mmol/L (0.2 g/dL) in 
nonhabituated patients generally causes impaired men-
tal activity; a level of >65 mmol/L (0.3 g/dL) is asso-
ciated with stupor. The development of tolerance may 
allow the chronic alcoholic to remain awake at levels 
>87 mmol/L (0.4 g/dL).
The availability of CT and MRI has focused atten-
tion on causes of coma that are detectable by imaging 
(e.g., hemorrhage, tumor, or hydrocephalus). Resorting 
primarily to this approach, although at times expedient, 
is imprudent because most cases of coma (and confu-
sion) are metabolic or toxic in origin. Furthermore, the 
notion that a normal CT scan excludes anatomic lesion 
as the cause of coma is erroneous. Bilateral hemisphere 
infarction, acute brainstem infarction, encephalitis, me- 
ningitis, mechanical shearing of axons as a result of 
closed head trauma, sagittal sinus thrombosis, and sub-
dural hematoma isodense to adjacent brain are some of 
the disorders that may not be detected. Nevertheless, if 
the source of coma remains unknown, a scan should be 
obtained.
The EEG (Chap. 5) is useful in metabolic or drug-
induced states but is rarely diagnostic, except when 
coma is due to clinically unrecognized seizure, to her-
pesvirus encephalitis, or to prion (Creutzfeldt-Jakob) 
disease. The amount of background slowing of the 
EEG is a reﬂection of the severity of an encephalopa-
thy. Predominant high-voltage slowing (δ or triphasic 
waves) in the frontal regions is typical of metabolic 
coma, as from hepatic failure, and widespread fast (β) 
activity implicates sedative drugs (e.g., diazepines, bar-
biturates). A special pattern of “alpha coma,” deﬁned 
by widespread, variable 8- to 12-Hz activity, superﬁ-
cially resembles the normal α rhythm of waking but, 
unlike normal α activity, is not altered by environ-
mental stimuli. Alpha coma results from pontine or 
diffuse cortical damage and is associated with a poor 
prognosis. Normal α activity on the EEG, which is 
suppressed by stimulating the patient, also alerts the 
clinician to the locked-in syndrome or to hysteria or 
catatonia. The most important use of EEG record-
ings in coma is to reveal clinically inapparent epileptic 
discharges.
Lumbar puncture is performed less frequently than in 
the past for coma diagnosis because neuroimaging effec-
tively excludes intracerebral and extensive subarach-
noid hemorrhage. However, examination of the CSF 
remains indispensable in the diagnosis of meningitis and 
LABORATORY STUDIES AND IMAGING
The studies that are most useful in the diagnosis of 
coma are: chemical-toxicologic analysis of blood and 
urine, cranial CT or MRI, EEG, and CSF examina-
tion. Arterial blood gas analysis is helpful in patients 
with lung disease and acid-base disorders. The meta-
bolic aberrations commonly encountered in clinical 
practice require measurement of electrolytes, glucose, 
 
CHAPTER 17
Coma
139
encephalitis. For patients with an altered level of con-
sciousness, it is generally recommended that an imaging 
study be performed prior to lumbar puncture to exclude 
a large intracranial mass lesion. Blood culture and anti-
biotic administration usually precede the imaging study 
if meningitis is suspected (Chap. 6).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF COMA
(Table 17-1) The causes of coma can be divided into 
three broad categories: those without focal neurologic 
signs (e.g., metabolic and toxic encephalopathies); men-
ingitis syndromes, characterized by fever or stiff neck 
and an excess of cells in the spinal ﬂuid (e.g., bacte-
rial meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage); and condi-
tions associated with prominent focal signs (e.g., stroke, 
cerebral hemorrhage). In most instances, coma is part 
of an obvious medical problem, such as drug ingestion, 
hypoxia, stroke, trauma, or liver or kidney failure. Con-
ditions that cause sudden coma include drug ingestion, 
cerebral hemorrhage, trauma, cardiac arrest, epilepsy, or 
basilar artery embolism. Coma that appears subacutely 
is usually related to a preexisting medical or neurologic 
problem or, less often, to secondary brain swelling of a 
mass such as tumor or cerebral infarction.
When cerebrovascular disease is the cause of coma, 
diagnosis can be difﬁcult (Chap. 27). The most common 
diseases are (1) basal ganglia and thalamic hemorrhage 
(acute but not instantaneous onset, vomiting, head-
ache, hemiplegia, and characteristic eye signs); (2) pon-
tine hemorrhage (sudden onset, pinpoint pupils, loss 
of reﬂex eye movements and corneal responses, ocu-
lar bobbing, posturing, hyperventilation, and excessive 
sweating); (3) cerebellar hemorrhage (occipital headache, 
vomiting, gaze paresis, and inability to stand); (4) basi-
lar artery thrombosis (neurologic prodrome or warning 
spells, diplopia, dysarthria, vomiting, eye movement and 
corneal response abnormalities, and asymmetric limb 
paresis); and (5) subarachnoid hemorrhage (precipitous 
coma after headache and vomiting). The most common 
stroke, infarction in the territory of the middle cerebral 
artery, does not generally cause coma, but edema sur-
rounding large infarctions may expand during the ﬁrst 
few days and act as a mass.
The syndrome of acute hydrocephalus accompanies 
many intracranial diseases, particularly subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. It is characterized by headache and some-
times vomiting that may progress quickly to coma with 
extensor posturing of the limbs, bilateral Babinski signs, 
small unreactive pupils, and impaired oculocephalic 
movements in the vertical direction.
If the history and examination do not indicate the 
cause of coma, then information obtained from CT 
or MRI is needed. The majority of medical causes of 
coma can be established without a neuroimaging study. 
Sometimes imaging results can be misleading such as 
when small subdural hematomas or old strokes are 
found, but the patient’s coma is due to intoxication.
TABLE 17-1
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF COMA
1.  Diseases that cause no focal or lateralizing neurologic 
signs, usually with normal brainstem functions; CT 
scan and cellular content of the CSF are normal
 a. Intoxications: alcohol, sedative drugs, opiates, etc.
 
b.  Metabolic disturbances: anoxia, hyponatremia, 
hypernatremia, hypercalcemia, diabetic acidosis, 
nonketotic hyperosmolar hyperglycemia, hypogly-
cemia, uremia, hepatic coma, hypercarbia, addiso-
nian crisis, hypo- and hyperthyroid states, profound 
nutritional deﬁciency
 c.  Severe systemic infections: pneumonia, septicemia, 
typhoid fever, malaria, Waterhouse-Friderichsen 
syndrome
 d. Shock from any cause
 e.  Postseizure states, status epilepticus, subclinical 
epilepsy
 f. Hypertensive encephalopathy, eclampsia
 g. Severe hyperthermia, hypothermia
 h. Concussion
 i. Acute hydrocephalus
2.  Diseases that cause meningeal irritation with or with-
out fever, and with an excess of WBCs or RBCs in the 
CSF, usually without focal or lateralizing cerebral or 
brainstem signs; CT or MRI shows no mass lesion
a.  Subarachnoid hemorrhage from ruptured aneurysm, 
arteriovenous malformation, trauma
b. Acute bacterial meningitis
c. Viral encephalitis
d.  Miscellaneous: fat embolism, cholesterol embolism, 
carcinomatous and lymphomatous meningitis, etc.
3.  Diseases that cause focal brainstem or lateralizing 
cerebral signs, with or without changes in the CSF; CT 
and MRI are abnormal
a.  Hemispheral hemorrhage (basal ganglionic, 
thalamic) or infarction (large middle cerebral artery 
territory) with secondary brainstem compression
b.  Brainstem infarction due to basilar artery 
thrombosis or embolism
c. Brain abscess, subdural empyema
d. Epidural and subdural hemorrhage, brain contusion
e. Brain tumor with surrounding edema
f. Cerebellar and pontine hemorrhage and infarction
g. Widespread traumatic brain injury
h.  Metabolic coma (see earlier) with preexisting focal 
damage
i.  Miscellaneous: cortical vein thrombosis, herpes 
simplex encephalitis, multiple cerebral emboli due 
to bacterial endocarditis, acute hemorrhagic leuko-
encephalitis, acute disseminated (postinfectious) 
encephalomyelitis, thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, cerebral vasculitis, gliomatosis cerebri, 
pituitary apoplexy, intravascular lymphoma, etc.
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; RBCs, red blood cells; 
WBCs, white blood cells.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
140
BRAIN DEATH
This is a state of cessation of cerebral function with 
preservation of cardiac activity and maintenance of 
somatic function by artiﬁcial means. It is the only type 
of brain damage recognized as equivalent to death. 
Several sets of criteria have been advanced for the 
diagnosis of brain death and it is essential to adhere to 
those standards endorsed by the local medical com-
munity. Ideal criteria are simple, can be assessed at 
the bedside, and allow no chance of diagnostic error. 
They contain three essential elements: (1) widespread 
cortical destruction that is reﬂected by deep coma and 
unresponsiveness to all forms of stimulation; (2) global 
brainstem damage demonstrated by absent pupillary 
light reaction and by the loss of oculovestibular and 
corneal reﬂexes; and (3) destruction of the medulla, 
manifested by complete apnea. The heart rate is 
invariant and unresponsive to atropine. Diabetes insip-
idus is often present but may only develop hours or 
days after the other clinical signs of brain death. The 
pupils are usually midsized but may be enlarged; they 
should not, however, be small. Loss of deep tendon 
reﬂexes is not required because the spinal cord remains 
functional. Babinski signs are generally absent and the 
toe response is often ﬂexor.
Demonstration that apnea is due to irreversible med-
ullary damage requires that the Pco2 be high enough 
to stimulate respiration during a test of spontaneous 
breathing. Apnea testing can be done safely by the use 
of diffusion oxygenation prior to removing the ventila-
tor. This is accomplished by preoxygenation with 100% 
oxygen, which is then sustained during the test by oxy-
gen administered through a tracheal cannula. co2 ten-
sion increases ∼0.3–0.4 kPa/min (2–3 mmHg/min) 
during apnea. At the end of a period of observation, 
typically several minutes, arterial Pco2 should be at least 
>6.6–8.0 kPa (50–60 mmHg) for the test to be valid. 
Apnea is conﬁrmed if no respiratory effort has been 
observed in the presence of a sufﬁciently elevated Pco2. 
Other techniques, including the administration of co2 
to accelerate the test, are used in special circumstances. 
The test is usually stopped if there is serious cardiovas-
cular instability.
An isoelectric EEG may be used as a conﬁrmatory test 
for total cerebral damage. Radionuclide brain scanning, 
cerebral angiography, or transcranial Doppler measure-
ments may also be included to demonstrate the absence 
of CBF but they have not been extensively correlated 
with pathologic changes.
The possibility of profound drug-induced or hypo-
thermic depression of the nervous system should be 
excluded, and some period of observation, usually 
6–24 h, is desirable, during which the clinical signs of 
brain death are sustained. It is advisable to delay clinical 
testing for at least 24 h if a cardiac arrest has caused 
brain death or if the inciting disease is not known.
Although it is largely accepted in Western society 
that the respirator can be disconnected from a brain-
dead patient, problems frequently arise because of poor 
communication and inadequate preparation of the 
family by the physician. Reasonable medical practice, 
ideally with the agreement of the family, allows the 
removal of support or transfer out of an intensive care 
unit of patients who are not brain dead but whose neu-
rologic conditions are nonetheless hopeless.
TREATMENT 
Coma
The immediate goal in a comatose patient is prevention 
of further nervous system damage. Hypotension, hypo-
glycemia, hypercalcemia, hypoxia, hypercapnia, and 
hyperthermia should be corrected rapidly. An oropha-
ryngeal airway is adequate to keep the pharynx open 
in a drowsy patient who is breathing normally. Tracheal 
intubation is indicated if there is apnea, upper airway 
obstruction, hypoventilation, or emesis, or if the patient 
is liable to aspirate because of coma. Mechanical ven-
tilation is required if there is hypoventilation or a need 
to induce hypocapnia in order to lower ICP. IV access 
is established, and naloxone and dextrose are admin-
istered if narcotic overdose or hypoglycemia are pos-
sibilities; thiamine is given along with glucose to avoid 
provoking Wernicke’s disease in malnourished patients. 
In cases of suspected basilar thrombosis with brainstem 
ischemia, IV heparin or a thrombolytic agent is often 
utilized, after cerebral hemorrhage has been excluded 
by a neuroimaging study. Physostigmine may awaken 
patients with anticholinergic-type drug overdose but 
should be used only with careful monitoring; many phy-
sicians believe that it should only be used to treat anti-
cholinergic overdose–associated cardiac arrhythmias. 
The use of benzodiazepine antagonists offers some 
prospect of improvement after overdose of soporific 
drugs and has transient benefit in hepatic encephalopa-
thy.
Administration of hypotonic solutions should be 
monitored carefully in any serious acute brain illness 
because of the potential for exacerbating brain swell-
ing. Cervical spine injuries must not be overlooked, 
particularly before attempting intubation or evaluation 
of oculocephalic responses. Fever and meningismus 
indicate an urgent need for examination of the CSF to 
diagnose meningitis. If the lumbar puncture in a case of 
suspected meningitis is delayed, an antibiotic such as a 
third-generation cephalosporin may be administered, 
preferably after obtaining blood cultures. The manage-
ment of raised ICP is discussed in Chap. 28.
 
CHAPTER 17
Coma
141
PROGNOSIS
One hopes to avoid the anguishing outcome of a 
patient who is left severely disabled or vegetative. The 
uniformly poor outcome of the persistent vegetative 
state has already been mentioned. Children and young 
adults may have ominous early clinical ﬁndings such as 
abnormal brainstem reﬂexes and yet recover; tempori-
zation in offering a prognosis in this group of patients 
is wise. Metabolic comas have a far better prognosis 
than traumatic ones. All systems for estimating prog-
nosis in adults should be taken as approximations, 
and medical judgments must be tempered by factors 
such as age, underlying systemic disease, and general 
medical condition. In an attempt to collect prognostic 
information from large numbers of patients with head 
injury, the Glasgow Coma Scale was devised; empiri-
cally, it has predictive value in cases of brain trauma 
(Table  36-2). For anoxic and metabolic coma, clinical 
signs such as the pupillary and motor responses after 
1 day, 3 days, and 1 week have been shown to have 
predictive value (Fig.  28-4). Other studies suggest that 
the absence of corneal responses may have the most 
discriminative value. The absence of the cortical waves 
of the somatosensory evoked potentials has also proved 
a strong indicator of poor outcome in coma from any 
cause.
There have been recent advances using functional 
imaging that demonstrate some preserved cogni-
tive abilities of vegetative and minimally conscious 
patients. In one series, about 10% of such patients 
could be trained to activate the frontal or temporal 
lobes in response to requests by an examiner to imag-
ine certain visuospatial tasks. In one case, a rudimen-
tary form of one-way communication could be estab-
lished. There are also reports in a limited number of 
patients of improvement in cognitive function with 
the implantation of thalamic-stimulating electrodes. 
It is prudent to avoid generalizations from these 
experiments.
 M.-Marsel Mesulam 
142
 The cerebral cortex of the human brain contains 
approximately 20 billion neurons spread over an area of 
2.5 m 2 . The  primary sensory areas provide an obligatory 
portal for the entry of sensory information into corti-
cal circuitry, and the  primary motor areas provide a ﬁ nal 
common pathway for coordinating complex motor acts. 
The primary sensory and motor areas constitute 10% of 
the cerebral cortex. The rest is subsumed by modality-
selective, heteromodal, paralimbic, and limbic areas col-
lectively known as the  association cortex ( Fig. 18-1 ). The 
association cortex mediates the integrative processes that 
subserve cognition, emotion, and behavior. A system-
atic testing of these mental functions is necessary for the 
effective clinical assessment of the association cortex and 
its diseases. 
 According to current thinking, there are no cen-
ters for “hearing words,” “perceiving space,” or “stor-
ing memories.” Cognitive and behavioral functions 
(domains) are coordinated by intersecting  large-scale 
neural networks that contain interconnected cortical and 
subcortical components. The network approach to 
higher cerebral function has at least four implications 
of clinical relevance: (1) A single domain such as lan-
guage or memory can be disrupted by damage to any 
one of several areas as long as those areas belong to the 
same network, (2) damage conﬁ ned to a single area can 
give rise to multiple deﬁ cits involving the functions of 
all the networks that intersect in that region, (3) dam-
age to a network component may give rise to mini-
mal or transient deﬁ cits if other parts of the network 
undergo compensatory reorganization, and (4) indi-
vidual anatomic sites within a network display a rela-
tive (but not absolute) specialization for different behav-
ioral aspects of the relevant function. Five anatomically 
deﬁ ned large-scale networks are most relevant to clini-
cal practice: (1) a perisylvian network for language, (2) 
a parietofrontal network for spatial cognition, (3) an 
occipitotemporal network for face and object recogni-
tion, (4) a limbic network for retentive memory, and 
(5) a prefrontal network for cognitive and behavioral 
control. 
 THE LEFT PERISYLVIAN NETWORK FOR 
LANGUAGE: APHASIAS AND RELATED 
CONDITIONS 
 Language allows the communication and elaboration of 
thoughts and experiences by linking them to arbitrary 
symbols known as words. The neural substrate of lan-
guage is composed of a distributed network centered in 
the perisylvian region of the  left hemisphere. The poste-
rior pole of this network is located at the temporopari-
etal junction and includes a region known as  Wernicke’s 
area . An essential function of Wernicke’s area is to trans-
form sensory inputs into their neural word representa-
tions so that they can establish the distributed associa-
tions that give a word its meaning. The anterior pole 
of the language network is located in the inferior fron-
tal gyrus and includes a region known as  Broca’s area . 
An essential function of this area is to transform neural 
word representations into their articulatory sequences 
so that the words can be uttered in the form of spo-
ken language. The sequencing function of Broca’s area 
also appears to involve the ordering of words into sen-
tences that contain a meaning-appropriate  syntax (gram-
mar). Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas are interconnected 
with each other and with additional perisylvian, tempo-
ral, prefrontal, and posterior parietal regions, making up 
a neural network that subserves the various aspects of 
language function. Damage to any one of these com-
ponents or to their interconnections can give rise to 
language disturbances ( aphasia ). Aphasia should be diag-
nosed only when there are deﬁ cits in the formal aspects 
 APHASIA, MEMORY LOSS, AND OTHER FOCAL 
CEREBRAL DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 18 
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
143
of language, such as naming, word choice, comprehen-
sion, spelling, and syntax. Dysarthria and mutism do not 
by themselves lead to a diagnosis of aphasia. The lan-
guage network shows a left hemisphere dominance pat-
tern in the vast majority of the population. In approxi-
mately 90% of right-handers and 60% of left-handers, 
aphasia occurs only after lesions of the left hemisphere. 
In some individuals no hemispheric dominance for 
language can be discerned, and in some others (includ-
ing a small minority of right handers) there is a right 
hemisphere dominance for language. A language dis-
turbance that occurs after a right hemisphere lesion in a 
right hander is called crossed aphasia.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The clinical examination of language should include the 
assessment of naming, spontaneous speech, comprehen-
sion, repetition, reading, and writing. A deﬁcit of nam-
ing (anomia) is the single most common ﬁnding in apha-
sic patients. When asked to name a common object 
(pencil or wristwatch), the patient may fail to come up 
with the appropriate word, may provide a circumlocu-
tious description of the object (“the thing for writing”), 
or may come up with the wrong word (paraphasia). If 
the patient offers an incorrect but related word (“pen” 
for “pencil”), the naming error is known as a semantic 
paraphasia; if the word approximates the correct answer 
but is phonetically inaccurate (“plentil” for “pencil”), it 
is known as a phonemic paraphasia. Asking the patient to 
name body parts, geometric shapes, and component parts 
of objects (lapel of coat, cap of pen) can elicit mild forms 
of anomia in patients who otherwise can name common 
objects. In most anomias, the patient cannot retrieve the 
appropriate name when shown an object but can point 
to the appropriate object when the name is provided by 
the examiner. This is known as a one-way (or retrieval-
based) naming deﬁcit. A two-way naming deﬁcit exists 
if the patient can neither provide nor recognize the cor-
rect name, indicating the likely presence of a compre-
hension impairment for the word. Spontaneous speech is 
described as “ﬂuent” if it maintains appropriate output 
volume, phrase length, and melody or as “nonﬂuent” 
if it is sparse and halting and average utterance length 
is below four words. The examiner also should note if 
the speech is paraphasic or circumlocutious; if it shows 
a relative paucity of substantive nouns and action verbs 
versus function words (prepositions, conjunctions); and 
if word order, tenses, sufﬁxes, preﬁxes, plurals, and pos-
sessives are appropriate. Comprehension can be tested by 
assessing the patient’s ability to follow conversation, ask-
ing yes-no questions (“Can a dog ﬂy?”, “Does it snow 
in summer?”) or asking the patient to point to appropri-
ate objects (“Where is the source of illumination in this 
room?”). Statements with embedded clauses or a passive 
voice construction (“If a tiger is eaten by a lion, which 
animal stays alive?”) help assess the ability to compre-
hend complex syntactic structure. Commands to close or 
open the eyes, stand up, sit down, or roll over should not 
be used to assess overall comprehension since appropri-
ate responses aimed at such axial movements can be pre-
served in patients who otherwise have profound compre-
hension deﬁcits.
FIGURE 18-1 
Lateral (top) and medial (bottom) views of the cerebral 
hemispheres. The numbers refer to the Brodmann cyto-
architectonic designations. Area 17 corresponds to the pri-
mary visual cortex, 41–42 to the primary auditory cortex, 1–3 
to the primary somatosensory cortex, and 4 to the primary 
motor cortex. The rest of the cerebral cortex contains asso-
ciation areas. AG, angular gyrus; B, Broca’s area; CC, cor-
pus callosum; CG, cingulate gyrus; DLPFC, dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex; FEF, frontal eye ﬁelds (premotor cortex); FG, 
fusiform gyrus; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; ITG, inferior tem-
poral gyrus; LG, lingual gyrus; MPFC, medial prefrontal cor-
tex; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; 
PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; 
PSC, peristriate cortex; SC, striate cortex; SMG, supramar-
ginal gyrus; SPL, superior parietal lobule; STG, superior tem-
poral gyrus; STS, superior temporal sulcus; TP, temporopolar 
cortex; W, Wernicke’s area.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
144
Repetition is assessed by asking the patient to repeat 
single words, short sentences, or strings of words such 
as “No ifs, ands, or buts.” The testing of repetition with 
tongue twisters such as “hippopotamus” and “Irish con-
stabulary” provides a better assessment of dysarthria and 
pallilalia than of aphasia. Aphasic patients who have lit-
tle difﬁculty with tongue twisters may have a particu-
larly hard time repeating a string of function words. It 
is important to make sure that the number of words 
does not exceed the patient’s attention span. Other-
wise, the failure of repetition becomes a reﬂection of 
the narrowed attention span rather than an indication of 
an aphasic deﬁcit. Reading should be assessed for deﬁ-
cits in reading aloud as well as comprehension. Writing 
is assessed for spelling errors, word order, and gram-
mar. Alexia describes an inability to either read aloud or 
comprehend single words and simple sentences; agraphia 
(or dysgraphia) is used to describe an acquired deﬁcit in 
the spelling or grammar of written language.
The correspondence between individual deﬁcits of 
language function and lesion location does not display 
a rigid one-to-one relationship and should be concep-
tualized within the context of the distributed network 
model. Nonetheless, the classiﬁcation of aphasias into 
speciﬁc clinical syndromes helps determine the most 
likely anatomic distribution of the underlying neuro-
logic disease and has implications for etiology and prog-
nosis (Table 18-1). The syndromes listed in Table 18-1 
are most applicable to aphasias caused by cerebrovascu-
lar accidents (CVAs). They can be divided into “central” 
syndromes, which result from damage to the two epi-
centers of the language network (Broca’s and Wernicke’s 
areas), and “disconnection” syndromes, which arise from 
lesions that interrupt the functional connectivity of those 
centers with each other and with the other components 
of the language network. The syndromes outlined next 
are idealizations; pure syndromes occur rarely.
Wernicke’s aphasia
Comprehension is impaired for spoken and written lan-
guage, for single words as well as sentences. Language 
output is ﬂuent but is highly paraphasic and circumlo-
cutious. The tendency for paraphasic errors may be so 
pronounced that it leads to strings of neologisms, which 
form the basis of what is known as “jargon aphasia.” 
Speech contains large numbers of function words (e.g., 
prepositions, conjunctions) but few substantive nouns 
or verbs that refer to speciﬁc actions. The output is 
therefore voluminous but uninformative. For example, 
a patient attempts to describe how his wife acciden-
tally threw away something important, perhaps his den-
tures: “We don’t need it anymore, she says. And with 
it when that was downstairs was my teeth-tick…a…
den…dentith…my dentist. And they happened to be 
in that bag…see? How could this have happened? How 
could a thing like this happen…So she says we won’t 
need it anymore…I didn’t think we’d use it. And now 
if I have any problems anybody coming a month from 
now, 4 months from now, or 6 months from now, I 
have a new dentist. Where my two…two little pieces 
of dentist that I use…that I…all gone. If she throws the 
whole thing away…visit some friends of hers and she 
can’t throw them away.”
Gestures and pantomime do not improve communi-
cation. The patient does not seem to realize that his or 
her language is incomprehensible and may appear angry 
and impatient when the examiner fails to decipher the 
TABLE 18-1
CLINICAL FEATURES OF APHASIAS AND RELATED CONDITIONS
COMPREHENSION
REPETITION OF 
SPOKEN LANGUAGE
NAMING
FLUENCY
Wernicke’s
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Preserved or increased
Broca’s
Preserved (except grammar)
Impaired
Impaired
Decreased
Global
Impaired
Impaired
Impaired
Decreased
Conduction
Preserved
Impaired
Impaired
Preserved
Nonﬂuent (motor) 
transcortical
Preserved
Preserved
Impaired
Impaired
Fluent (sensory) 
transcortical
Impaired
Preserved
Impaired
Preserved
Isolation
Impaired
Echolalia
Impaired
No purposeful speech
Anomic
Preserved
Preserved
Impaired
Preserved except for 
word-ﬁnding pauses
Pure word deafness
Impaired only for spoken language
Impaired
Preserved
Preserved
Pure alexia
Impaired only for reading
Preserved
Preserved
Preserved
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
145
meaning of a severely paraphasic statement. In some 
patients this type of aphasia can be associated with 
severe agitation and paranoid behaviors. One area of 
comprehension that may be preserved is the ability to 
follow commands aimed at axial musculature. The dis-
sociation between the failure to understand simple ques-
tions (“What is your name?”) in a patient who rapidly 
closes his or her eyes, sits up, or rolls over when asked 
to do so is characteristic of Wernicke’s aphasia and helps 
differentiate it from deafness, psychiatric disease, or 
malingering. Patients with Wernicke’s aphasia cannot 
express their thoughts in meaning-appropriate words 
and cannot decode the meaning of words in any modal-
ity of input. This aphasia therefore has expressive as well 
as receptive components. Repetition, naming, reading, 
and writing also are impaired.
The lesion site most commonly associated with 
Wernicke’s aphasia is the posterior portion of the lan-
guage network and tends to involve at least parts of 
Wernicke’s area. An embolus to the inferior division 
of the middle cerebral artery, to the posterior tempo-
ral or angular branches in particular, is the most com-
mon etiology. Intracerebral hemorrhage, severe head 
trauma, and neoplasm are other causes. A coexisting 
right hemianopia or superior quadrantanopia is com-
mon and mild right nasolabial ﬂattening may be found, 
but otherwise the examination is often unreveal-
ing. The paraphasic, neologistic speech in an agitated 
patient with an otherwise unremarkable neurologic 
examination may lead to the suspicion of a primary 
psychiatric disorder such as schizophrenia or mania, 
but the other components characteristic of acquired 
aphasia and the absence of prior psychiatric disease 
usually settle the issue. Some patients with Wernicke’s 
aphasia due to intracerebral hemorrhage or head 
trauma may improve as the hemorrhage or the injury 
heals. In most other patients, prognosis for recovery of 
language function is guarded.
Broca’s aphasia
Speech is nonﬂuent, labored, interrupted by many 
word-ﬁnding pauses, and usually dysarthric. It is impov-
erished in function words but enriched in meaning-
appropriate nouns and verbs. Abnormal word order 
and the inappropriate deployment of bound morphemes 
(word endings used to denote tenses, possessives, or 
plurals) lead to a characteristic agrammatism. Speech is 
telegraphic and pithy but quite informative. In the fol-
lowing passage, a patient with Broca’s aphasia describes 
his medical history: “I see…the dotor, dotor sent me…
Bosson. Go to hospital. Dotor…kept me beside. Two, 
tee days, doctor send me home.”
Output may be reduced to a grunt or single word 
(“yes” or “no”), which is emitted with different intona-
tions in an attempt to express approval or disapproval. In 
addition to ﬂuency, naming and repetition are impaired. 
Comprehension of spoken language is intact except 
for syntactically difﬁcult sentences with a passive voice 
structure or embedded clauses. Reading comprehension 
also is preserved with the occasional exception of a spe-
ciﬁc inability to read small grammatical words such as 
conjunctions and pronouns. The last two features indi-
cate that Broca’s aphasia is not just an “expressive” or 
“motor” disorder and that it also may involve a compre-
hension deﬁcit for function words and syntax. Patients 
with Broca’s aphasia can be tearful, easily frustrated, and 
profoundly depressed. Insight into their condition is pre-
served, in contrast to Wernicke’s aphasia. Even when 
spontaneous speech is severely dysarthric, the patient 
may be able to display a relatively normal articulation of 
words when singing. This dissociation has been used to 
develop speciﬁc therapeutic approaches (melodic intona-
tion therapy) for Broca’s aphasia. Additional neurologic 
deﬁcits usually include right facial weakness, hemipare-
sis or hemiplegia, and a buccofacial apraxia characterized 
by an inability to carry out motor commands involving 
oropharyngeal and facial musculature (e.g., patients are 
unable to demonstrate how to blow out a match or suck 
through a straw). Visual ﬁelds are intact. The cause is 
most often infarction of Broca’s area (the inferior fron-
tal convolution; “B” in Fig. 18-1) and surrounding ante-
rior perisylvian and insular cortex due to occlusion of 
the superior division of the middle cerebral artery. Mass 
lesions, including tumor, intracerebral hemorrhage, and 
abscess, also may be responsible. Small lesions conﬁned 
to the posterior part of Broca’s area may lead to a nona-
phasic and often reversible deﬁcit of speech articulation 
that usually is accompanied by mild right facial weakness. 
When the cause of Broca’s aphasia is stroke, recovery of 
language function generally peaks within 2 to 6 months, 
after which time further progress is limited.
Global aphasia
Speech output is nonﬂuent, and comprehension of spo-
ken language is severely impaired. Naming, repetition, 
reading, and writing also are impaired. This syndrome 
represents the combined dysfunction of Broca’s and 
Wernicke’s areas and usually results from strokes that 
involve the entire middle cerebral artery distribution in 
the left hemisphere. Most patients are initially mute or 
say a few words, such as “hi” or “yes.” Related signs 
include right hemiplegia, hemisensory loss, and homon-
ymous hemianopia. Occasionally, a patient with a lesion 
in Wernicke’s area will present with a global aphasia 
that soon resolves into Wernicke’s aphasia.
Conduction aphasia
Speech output is ﬂuent but paraphasic, comprehension 
of spoken language is intact, and repetition is severely 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
146
impaired. Naming and writing also are impaired. 
Reading aloud is impaired, but reading comprehension 
is preserved. The lesion sites spare Broca’s and Wer-
nicke’s areas but may induce a functional disconnection 
between the two so that neural word representations 
formed in Wernicke’s area and adjacent regions can-
not be conveyed to Broca’s area for assembly into cor-
responding articulatory patterns. Occasionally, a Wer-
nicke’s area lesion gives rise to a transient Wernicke’s 
aphasia that rapidly resolves into a conduction aphasia. 
The paraphasic output in conduction aphasia interferes 
with the ability to express meaning, but this deﬁcit is 
not nearly as severe as the one displayed by patients 
with Wernicke’s aphasia. Associated neurologic signs 
in conduction aphasia vary according to the primary 
lesion site.
Nonﬂuent transcortical aphasia (transcortical 
motor aphasia)
The features are similar to those of Broca’s aphasia, but 
repetition is intact and agrammatism may be less pro-
nounced. The neurologic examination may be other-
wise intact, but a right hemiparesis also can exist. The 
lesion site disconnects the intact language network from 
prefrontal areas of the brain and usually involves the 
anterior watershed zone between anterior and middle 
cerebral artery territories or the supplementary motor 
cortex in the territory of the anterior cerebral artery.
Fluent transcortical aphasia (transcortical 
sensory aphasia)
Clinical features are similar to those of Wernicke’s 
aphasia, but repetition is intact. The lesion site discon-
nects the intact core of the language network from 
other temporoparietal association areas. Associated neu-
rologic ﬁndings may include hemianopia. Cerebrovas-
cular lesions (e.g., infarctions in the posterior watershed 
zone) and neoplasms that involve the temporoparietal 
cortex posterior to Wernicke’s area are the most com-
mon causes.
Isolation aphasia
This rare syndrome represents a combination of the 
two transcortical aphasias. Comprehension is severely 
impaired, and there is no purposeful speech output. 
The patient may parrot fragments of heard conversa-
tions (echolalia), indicating that the neural mechanisms 
for repetition are at least partially intact. This condi-
tion represents the pathologic function of the language 
network when it is isolated from other regions of the 
brain. Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas tend to be spared, 
but there is damage to the surrounding frontal, pari-
etal, and temporal cortex. Lesions are patchy and can be 
associated with anoxia, carbon monoxide poisoning, or 
complete watershed zone infarctions.
Anomic aphasia
This form of aphasia may be considered the “mini-
mal dysfunction” syndrome of the language network. 
Articulation, comprehension, and repetition are intact, 
but confrontation naming, word ﬁnding, and spelling 
are impaired. Speech is enriched in function words but 
impoverished in substantive nouns and verbs denoting 
speciﬁc actions. Language output is ﬂuent but parapha-
sic, circumlocutious, and uninformative. Fluency may 
be interrupted by word-ﬁnding hesitations. The lesion 
sites can be anywhere within the left hemisphere lan-
guage network, including the middle and inferior 
temporal gyri. Anomic aphasia is the single most common 
language disturbance seen in head trauma, metabolic encepha-
lopathy, and Alzheimer’s disease.
Pure word deafness
The most common causes are either bilateral or left-
sided middle cerebral artery (MCA) strokes affect-
ing the superior temporal gyrus. The net effect of the 
underlying lesion is to interrupt the ﬂow of informa-
tion from the auditory association cortex to Wernicke’s 
area. Patients have no difﬁculty understanding written 
language and can express themselves well in spoken or 
written language. They have no difﬁculty interpret-
ing and reacting to environmental sounds since pri-
mary auditory cortex and subcortical auditory relays 
are intact. Since auditory information cannot be con-
veyed to the language network, however, it cannot 
be decoded into neural word representations, and the 
patient reacts to speech as if it were in an alien tongue 
that cannot be deciphered. Patients cannot repeat spo-
ken language but have no difﬁculty naming objects. In 
time, patients with pure word deafness teach themselves 
lipreading and may appear to have improved. There 
may be no additional neurologic ﬁndings, but agitated 
paranoid reactions are common in the acute stages. 
Cerebrovascular lesions are the most common cause.
Pure alexia without agraphia
This is the visual equivalent of pure word deafness. 
The lesions (usually a combination of damage to the 
left occipital cortex and to a posterior sector of the 
corpus callosum—the splenium) interrupt the ﬂow of 
visual input into the language network. There is usu-
ally a right hemianopia, but the core language network 
remains unaffected. The patient can understand and 
produce spoken language, name objects in the left visual 
hemiﬁeld, repeat, and write. However, the patient acts 
as if illiterate when asked to read even the simplest 
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
147
sentence because the visual information from the writ-
ten words (presented to the intact left visual hemiﬁeld) 
cannot reach the language network. Objects in the left 
hemiﬁeld may be named accurately because they acti-
vate nonvisual associations in the right hemisphere, 
which in turn can access the language network through 
transcallosal pathways anterior to the splenium. Patients 
with this syndrome also may lose the ability to name 
colors, although they can match colors. This is known 
as a color anomia. The most common etiology of pure 
alexia is a vascular lesion in the territory of the poste-
rior cerebral artery or an inﬁltrating neoplasm in the left 
occipital cortex that involves the optic radiations as well 
as the crossing ﬁbers of the splenium. Since the poste-
rior cerebral artery also supplies medial temporal com-
ponents of the limbic system, a patient with pure alexia 
also may experience an amnesia, but this is usually tran-
sient because the limbic lesion is unilateral.
Aphemia
There is an acute onset of severely impaired ﬂuency 
(often mutism), which cannot be accounted for by cor-
ticobulbar, cerebellar, or extrapyramidal dysfunction. 
Recovery is the rule and involves an intermediate stage 
of hoarse whispering. Writing, reading, and comprehen-
sion are intact, and so this is not a true aphasic syndrome. 
Partial lesions of Broca’s area or subcortical lesions that 
undercut its connections with other parts of the brain 
may be present. Occasionally, the lesion site is on the 
medial aspects of the frontal lobes and may involve the 
supplementary motor cortex of the left hemisphere.
Apraxia
This generic term designates a complex motor deﬁcit 
that cannot be attributed to pyramidal, extrapyramidal, 
cerebellar, or sensory dysfunction and that does not arise 
from the patient’s failure to understand the nature of 
the task. The form that is encountered most frequently 
in clinical practice is known as ideomotor apraxia. Com-
mands to perform a speciﬁc motor act (“cough,” “blow 
out a match”) or pantomime the use of a common tool 
(a comb, hammer, straw, or toothbrush) in the absence 
of the real object cannot be followed. The patient’s 
ability to comprehend the command is ascertained by 
demonstrating multiple movements and establishing 
that the correct one can be recognized. Some patients 
with this type of apraxia can imitate the appropriate 
movement (when it is demonstrated by the examiner) 
and show no impairment when handed the real object, 
indicating that the sensorimotor mechanisms necessary 
for the movement are intact. Some forms of ideomotor 
apraxia represent a disconnection of the language net-
work from pyramidal motor systems: commands to exe-
cute complex movements are understood but cannot be 
conveyed to the appropriate motor areas even though 
the relevant motor mechanisms are intact. Buccofa-
cial apraxia involves apraxic deﬁcits in movements of 
the face and mouth. Limb apraxia encompasses apraxic 
deﬁcits in movements of the arms and legs. Ideomo-
tor apraxia almost always is caused by lesions in the left 
hemisphere and is commonly associated with aphasic 
syndromes, especially Broca’s aphasia and conduction 
aphasia. Its presence cannot be ascertained in patients 
with language comprehension deﬁcits. The ability to 
follow commands aimed at axial musculature (“close the 
eyes,” “stand up”) is subserved by different pathways 
and may be intact in otherwise severely aphasic and 
apraxic patients. Since the handling of real objects is not 
impaired, ideomotor apraxia by itself causes no major 
limitation of daily living activities. Patients with lesions 
of the anterior corpus callosum can display ideomo-
tor apraxia conﬁned to the left side of the body, a sign 
known as sympathetic dyspraxia. A severe form of sym-
pathetic dyspraxia known as the alien hand syndrome is 
characterized by additional features of motor disinhibi-
tion on the left hand.
Ideational apraxia refers to a deﬁcit in the execu-
tion of a goal-directed sequence of movements in 
patients who have no difﬁculty executing the individ-
ual components of the sequence. For example, when 
the patient is asked to pick up a pen and write, the 
sequence of uncapping the pen, placing the cap at the 
opposite end, turning the point toward the writing 
surface, and writing may be disrupted, and the patient 
may be seen trying to write with the wrong end of 
the pen or even with the removed cap. These motor 
sequencing problems usually are seen in the context 
of confusional states and dementias rather than focal 
lesions associated with aphasic conditions. Limb-kinetic 
apraxia involves a clumsiness in the actual use of tools 
that cannot be attributed to sensory, pyramidal, extra-
pyramidal, or cerebellar dysfunction. This condition 
can emerge in the context of focal premotor cortex 
lesions or corticobasal degeneration.
Gerstmann’s syndrome
The combination of acalculia (impairment of simple 
arithmetic), dysgraphia (impaired writing), ﬁnger anomia 
(an inability to name individual ﬁngers such as the index 
and thumb), and right-left confusion (an inability to tell 
whether a hand, foot, or arm of the patient or examiner 
is on the right or left side of the body) is known as Ger-
stmann’s syndrome. In making this diagnosis it is impor-
tant to establish that the ﬁnger and left-right naming 
deﬁcits are not part of a more generalized anomia and 
that the patient is not otherwise aphasic. When Gerst-
mann’s syndrome is seen in isolation, it is commonly 
associated with damage to the inferior parietal lobule 
(especially the angular gyrus) in the left hemisphere.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
148
Aprosodia
Variations of melodic stress and intonation inﬂuence the 
meaning and impact of spoken language. For example, 
the two statements “He is clever.” and “He is clever?” 
contain an identical word choice and syntax but con-
vey vastly different messages because of differences in 
the intonation and stress with which the statements are 
uttered. This aspect of language is known as prosody. 
Damage to perisylvian areas in the right hemisphere can 
interfere with speech prosody and can lead to syndromes 
of aprosodia. Damage to right hemisphere regions cor-
responding to Wernicke’s area can selectively impair 
decoding of speech prosody, whereas damage to right 
hemisphere regions corresponding to Broca’s area yields 
a greater impairment in the ability to introduce meaning-
appropriate prosody into spoken language. The latter def-
icit is the most common type of aprosodia identiﬁed in 
clinical practice; the patient produces grammatically cor-
rect language with accurate word choice, but the state-
ments are uttered in a monotone that interferes with the 
ability to convey the intended stress and affect. Patients 
with this type of aprosodia give the mistaken impression 
of being depressed or indifferent.
Subcortical aphasia
Damage to subcortical components of the language 
network (e.g., the striatum and thalamus of the left 
hemisphere) also can lead to aphasia. The resulting syn-
dromes contain combinations of deﬁcits in the various 
aspects of language but rarely ﬁt the speciﬁc patterns 
described in Table 18-1. In a patient with a CVA, an 
anomic aphasia accompanied by dysarthria or a ﬂuent 
aphasia with hemiparesis should raise the suspicion of a 
subcortical lesion site.
Progressive aphasias
Aphasias caused by cerebrovascular accidents start sud-
denly and display maximal deﬁcits at the onset. The 
underlying lesion is relatively circumscribed and is 
associated with a total loss of neural function in at least 
part of the lesion site. These are the “classic” aphasias 
described earlier in this chapter. Aphasias caused by 
neurodegenerative diseases have an insidious onset and 
a relentless progression so that the symptomatology 
changes over time. Since the neuronal loss within the 
areas encompassed by the neurodegeneration is partial 
and since it tends to include multiple components of the 
language network, the clinico-anatomic patterns are dif-
ferent from those described in Table 18-1.
 Clinical presentation and diagnosis of primary 
progressive aphasia (PPA)
When a neurodegenerative disease selectively under-
mines language function, a clinical diagnosis of PPA is 
made. A patient with PPA comes to medical attention 
because of word-ﬁnding difﬁculties, abnormal speech 
patterns, word-comprehension impairments, or spell-
ing errors of recent onset. PPA is diagnosed when other 
mental faculties, such as memory for daily events, visuo-
spatial skills (assessed by tests of drawing and face recog-
nition), and comportment (assessed by history obtained 
from a third party), remain relatively intact; when lan-
guage is the major area of dysfunction for the ﬁrst few 
years of the disease; and when structural brain imag-
ing does not reveal a speciﬁc lesion, other than atro-
phy, that accounts for the language deﬁcit. Impairments 
in other cognitive functions may emerge eventually, 
but the language dysfunction remains the most salient 
feature and deteriorates most rapidly throughout the 
illness.
Language in PPA
The language impairment in PPA varies from patient 
to patient. Some patients cannot ﬁnd the right words to 
express thoughts; others cannot understand the mean-
ing of heard or seen words; still others cannot name 
objects in the environment. The language impairment 
can be ﬂuent (that is, with normal articulation, ﬂow, 
and number of words per utterance) or nonﬂuent. The 
single most common sign of primary progressive aphasia 
is an inability to come up with the right word during 
conversation and/or an inability to name objects shown 
by the examiner (anomia). Distinct forms of agramma-
tism and/or word comprehension deﬁcits also can arise. 
The agrammatism consists of inappropriate word order 
and misuse of small grammatical words. Comprehension 
deﬁcits, if present, start with an occasional inability to 
understand single low-frequency words and gradually 
progress to encompass the comprehension of conversa-
tional speech.
The impairments of syntax, comprehension, nam-
ing, or writing in PPA form slightly different patterns 
from those seen in CVA-caused aphasias. Three sub-
types of PPA can be recognized: an agrammatic variant 
characterized by poor ﬂuency and impaired grammar, 
a semantic variant characterized by preserved ﬂuency 
and syntax but poor single word comprehension, and a 
logopenic variant characterized by preserved syntax and 
comprehension but frequent word-ﬁnding pauses dur-
ing spontaneous speech. The agrammatic variant also is 
known as progressive nonﬂuent aphasia and displays simi-
larities to Broca’s aphasia. However, dysarthria is usually 
absent. The semantic variant of PPA displays similarities 
to Wernicke’s aphasia, but the comprehension difﬁculty 
tends to be most profound for single words denoting 
concrete objects.
Pathophysiology
The three variants of PPA display overlapping distri-
butions of neuronal loss, but the agrammatic variant 
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
149
is most closely associated with atrophy in the anterior 
parts of the language network (where Broca’s area is 
located), the semantic variant with atrophy in the ante-
rior temporal components of the language network, and 
the logopenic variant with atrophy in the temporopari-
etal component of the language network. The abnor-
malities may remain conﬁned to the left hemisphere 
perisylvian and anterior temporal cortices initially, but 
gradual deterioration in PPA leads to a loss of syn-
dromic speciﬁcity as the disease progresses.
Neuropathology
In the majority of PPA cases, the neuropathology falls 
within the family of frontotemporal lobar degenera-
tions (FTLDs) and displays various combinations of 
focal neuronal loss, gliosis, tau-positive inclusions 
including Pick bodies, and tau-negative TDP-43 inclu-
sions. Familial forms of PPA with TDP-43 inclusions 
recently were linked to mutations of the progranulin 
gene on chromosome 17. The agrammatic variant most 
frequently is associated with tauopathy, whereas the 
semantic variant is most closely associated with TDP-
43 inclusions. Alzheimer’s pathology is seen most fre-
quently in the logopenic variant. The clinical subtyping 
of PPA thus may help predict the nature of the underly-
ing neuropathology. The intriguing possibility has been 
raised that a personal or family history of dyslexia may 
be a risk factor for primary progressive aphasia, at least 
in some patients, suggesting that this disease may arise 
on a background of genetic or developmental vulner-
ability that affects language-related areas of the brain.
THE PARIETOFRONTAL NETWORK FOR 
SPATIAL ORIENTATION: NEGLECT AND 
RELATED CONDITIONS
HEMISPATIAL NEGLECT
Adaptive orientation to signiﬁcant events within the 
extrapersonal space is subserved by a large-scale net-
work containing three major cortical components. The 
cingulate cortex provides access to a motivational mapping 
of the extrapersonal space, the posterior parietal cortex to 
a sensorimotor representation of salient extrapersonal 
events, and the frontal eye ﬁelds to motor strategies for 
attentional behaviors (Fig. 18-2). Subcortical com-
ponents of this network include the striatum and the 
thalamus. Contralesional hemispatial neglect represents 
one outcome of damage to any of the cortical or sub-
cortical components of this network. The traditional view 
that hemispatial neglect always denotes a parietal lobe lesion 
is inaccurate. In keeping with this anatomic organiza-
tion, the clinical manifestations of neglect display three 
behavioral components: sensory events (or their mental 
representations) within the neglected hemispace have 
a lesser impact on overall awareness, there is a paucity 
of exploratory and orienting acts directed toward the 
neglected hemispace, and the patient behaves as if the 
neglected hemispace were motivationally devalued.
According to one model of spatial cognition, the right 
hemisphere directs attention within the entire extraper-
sonal space, whereas the left hemisphere directs attention 
mostly within the contralateral right hemispace. Con-
sequently, unilateral left hemisphere lesions do not give 
rise to much contralesional neglect since the global atten-
tional mechanisms of the right hemisphere can compen-
sate for the loss of the contralaterally directed attentional 
FIGURE 18-2 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of language and 
spatial attention in neurologically intact subjects. The red 
and black areas show regions of task-related signiﬁcant 
activation. (Top) The subjects were asked to determine if 
two words were synonymous. This language task led to the 
simultaneous activation of the two epicenters of the lan-
guage network, Broca’s area (B) and Wernicke’s area (W). 
The activations are exclusively in the left hemisphere. (Bot-
tom) The subjects were asked to shift spatial attention to a 
peripheral target. This task led to the simultaneous activation 
of the three epicenters of the attentional network: the poste-
rior parietal cortex (P), the frontal eye ﬁelds (F), and the cin-
gulate gyrus (CG). The activations are predominantly in the 
right hemisphere. (Courtesy of Darren Gitelman, MD; with 
permission.)
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
150
functions of the left hemisphere. Unilateral right hemi-
sphere lesions, however, give rise to severe contralesional 
left hemispatial neglect because the unaffected left hemi-
sphere does not contain ipsilateral attentional mecha-
nisms. This model is consistent with clinical experience, 
which shows that contralesional neglect is more com-
mon, severe, and lasting after damage to the right hemi-
sphere than after damage to the left hemisphere. Severe 
neglect for the right hemispace is rare, even in left-hand-
ers with left hemisphere lesions.
Clinical examination
Patients with severe neglect may fail to dress, shave, 
or groom the left side of the body; fail to eat food 
placed on the left side of the tray; and fail to read the 
left half of sentences. When the examiner draws a large 
circle (12 to 15 cm [5 to 6 in.] in diameter) and asks 
the patient to place the numbers 1 to 12 as if the circle 
represented the face of a clock, there is a tendency to 
crowd the numbers on the right side and leave the left 
side empty. When asked to copy a simple line drawing, 
the patient fails to copy detail on the left, and when the 
patient is asked to write, there is a tendency to leave an 
unusually wide margin on the left.
Two bedside tests that are useful in assessing neglect 
are simultaneous bilateral stimulation and visual target cancel-
lation. In the former, the examiner provides either uni-
lateral or simultaneous bilateral stimulation in the visual, 
auditory, and tactile modalities. After right hemisphere 
injury, patients who have no difﬁculty detecting uni-
lateral stimuli on either side experience the bilaterally 
presented stimulus as coming only from the right. This 
phenomenon is known as extinction and is a manifesta-
tion of the sensory-representational aspect of hemispa-
tial neglect. In the target detection task, targets (e.g., 
A’s) are interspersed with foils (e.g., other letters of the 
alphabet) on a 21.5- to 28.0-cm (8.5 to 11 in.) sheet 
of paper, and the patient is asked to circle all the tar-
gets. A failure to detect targets on the left is a manifes-
tation of the exploratory deﬁcit in hemispatial neglect 
(Fig. 18-3A). Hemianopia is not by itself sufﬁcient to 
cause the target detection failure since the patient is free 
to turn the head and eyes to the left. Target detection 
failures therefore reﬂect a distortion of spatial atten-
tion, not just of sensory input. The normal tendency 
in target detection tasks is to start from the left upper 
quadrant and move systematically in horizontal or verti-
cal sweeps. Some patients show a tendency to start the 
process from the right and proceed in a haphazard fash-
ion. This represents a subtle manifestation of left neglect 
even if the patient eventually manages to detect all the 
appropriate targets. Some patients with neglect also may 
deny the existence of hemiparesis and may even deny 
ownership of the paralyzed limb, a condition known as 
anosognosia.
BÁLINT’S SYNDROME, SIMULTANAGNOSIA, 
DRESSING APRAXIA, AND CONSTRUCTION 
APRAXIA
Bilateral involvement of the network for spatial atten-
tion, especially its parietal components, leads to a state 
of severe spatial disorientation known as Bálint’s syn-
drome. Bálint’s syndrome involves deﬁcits in the orderly 
visuomotor scanning of the environment (oculomotor 
apraxia) and in accurate manual reaching toward visual 
targets (optic ataxia). The third and most dramatic com-
ponent of Bálint’s syndrome is known as simultanagnosia 
and reﬂects an inability to integrate visual information 
in the center of gaze with more peripheral informa-
tion. The patient gets stuck on the detail that falls in 
the center of gaze without attempting to scan the visual 
environment for additional information. A patient with 
simultanagnosia “misses the forest for the trees.” Com-
plex visual scenes cannot be grasped in their entirety, 
leading to severe limitations in the visual identiﬁcation 
of objects and scenes. For example, a patient who is 
shown a table lamp and asked to name the object may 
look at its circular base and call it an ashtray. Some 
patients with simultanagnosia report that objects they 
look at may vanish suddenly, probably indicating an 
inability to look back at the original point of gaze after 
brief saccadic displacements. Movement and distracting 
stimuli greatly exacerbate the difﬁculties of visual per-
ception. Simultanagnosia sometimes can occur without 
the other two components of Bálint’s syndrome.
A modiﬁcation of the letter cancellation task 
described earlier can be used for the bedside diagnosis 
of simultanagnosia. In this modiﬁcation, some of the 
targets (e.g., A’s) are made to be much larger than the 
others (7.5 to 10 cm vs. 2.5 cm [3 to 4 in. vs. 1 in.] 
in height), and all targets are embedded among foils. 
Patients with simultanagnosia display a counterintui-
tive but characteristic tendency to miss the larger tar-
gets (Fig. 18-3B). This occurs because the informa-
tion needed for the identiﬁcation of the larger targets 
cannot be conﬁned to the immediate line of gaze and 
requires the integration of visual information across 
a more extensive ﬁeld of view. The greater difﬁculty 
in the detection of the larger targets also indicates that 
poor acuity is not responsible for the impairment of 
visual function and that the problem is central rather 
than peripheral.
Another manifestation of bilateral (or right-sided) 
dorsal parietal lobe lesions is dressing apraxia. A patient 
with this condition is unable to align the body axis with 
the axis of the garment and can be seen struggling as 
he or she holds a coat from its bottom or extends his 
or her arm into a fold of the garment rather than into 
its sleeve. Lesions that involve the posterior parietal 
cortex also lead to severe difﬁculties in copying simple 
line drawings. This is known as a construction apraxia and 
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
151
is much more severe if the lesion is in the right hemi-
sphere. In some patients with right hemisphere lesions, 
the drawing difﬁculties are conﬁned to the left side of 
the ﬁgure and represent a manifestation of hemispatial 
neglect; in others, there is a more universal deﬁcit in 
reproducing contours and three-dimensional perspec-
tive. Dressing apraxia and construction apraxia represent 
special instances of a more general disturbance in spatial 
orientation.
Causes of spatial disorientation
Cerebrovascular lesions and neoplasms in the right 
hemisphere are the most common causes of hemispatial 
neglect. Depending on the site of the lesion, a patient 
A
FIGURE 18-3
A. A 47-year-old man with a 
large frontoparietal lesion in the 
right hemisphere was asked to 
circle all the A’s. Only targets 
on the right are circled. This is 
a manifestation of left hemis-
patial neglect. B. A 70-year-old 
woman with a 2-year history of 
degenerative dementia was able 
to circle most of the small tar-
gets but ignored the larger ones. 
This is a manifestation of simul-
tanagnosia.
B
with neglect also may have hemiparesis, hemihypesthe-
sia, and hemianopia on the left, but these are not invari-
ant ﬁndings. The majority of these patients display con-
siderable improvement of hemispatial neglect, usually 
within the ﬁrst several weeks. Bálint’s syndrome results 
from bilateral dorsal parietal lesions; common settings 
include watershed infarction between the middle and 
posterior cerebral artery territories, hypoglycemia, and 
sagittal sinus thrombosis.
A progressive form of spatial disorientation known 
as the posterior cortical atrophy syndrome most commonly 
represents a variant of Alzheimer’s disease with unusual 
concentrations of neuroﬁbrillary degeneration in the 
parieto-occipital cortex and the superior colliculus. The 
patient displays a progressive Bálint’s syndrome, usually 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
152
accompanied by dressing and construction apraxia. Cor-
ticobasal degeneration, a type of FTLD with abnormal 
tau inclusions, can have an asymmetric distribution. 
When the atrophy shows a predilection for the right 
cerebral hemisphere, a progressive left hemineglect syn-
drome emerges on a background of left-sided extrapyra-
midal dysfunction.
THE OCCIPITOTEMPORAL NETWORK 
FOR FACE AND OBJECT RECOGNITION: 
PROSOPAGNOSIA AND OBJECT AGNOSIA
Perceptual information about faces and objects initially 
is encoded in primary (striate) visual cortex and adja-
cent (upstream) peristriate visual association areas. This 
information subsequently is relayed ﬁrst to the down-
stream visual association areas of occipitotemporal cor-
tex and then to other heteromodal and paralimbic areas 
of the cerebral cortex. Bilateral lesions in the fusiform 
and lingual gyri of the occipitotemporal cortex disrupt 
this process and interfere with the ability of otherwise 
intact perceptual information to activate the distributed 
multimodal associations that lead to the recognition of 
faces and objects. The resultant face and object recog-
nition deﬁcits are known as associative prosopagnosia and 
visual object agnosia.
A patient with prosopagnosia cannot recognize famil-
iar faces, including, sometimes, the reﬂection of his 
or her own face in the mirror. This is not a percep-
tual deﬁcit since prosopagnosic patients easily can tell 
whether two faces are identical. Furthermore, a prosop-
agnosic patient who cannot recognize a familiar face by 
visual inspection alone can use auditory cues to reach 
appropriate recognition if allowed to listen to the per-
son’s voice. The deﬁcit in prosopagnosia is therefore 
modality-speciﬁc and reﬂects the existence of a lesion 
that prevents the activation of otherwise intact multi-
modal templates by relevant visual input. The deﬁcit in 
prosopagnosia is not limited to the recognition of faces 
but also can extend to the recognition of individual 
members of larger generic object groups. For example, 
prosopagnosic patients characteristically have no difﬁ-
culty with the generic identiﬁcation of a face as a face 
or a car as a car, but they cannot recognize the iden-
tity of an individual face or the make of an individual 
car. This reﬂects a visual recognition deﬁcit for propri-
etary features that characterize individual members of an 
object class. When recognition problems become more 
generalized and extend to the generic identiﬁcation of 
common objects, the condition is known as visual object 
agnosia. In contrast to prosopagnosic patients, those with 
object agnosia cannot recognize a face as a face or a car 
as a car. It is important to distinguish visual object agno-
sia from anomia. A patient with anomia cannot name 
the object but can describe its use. In contrast, a patient 
with visual agnosia is unable either to name a visually 
presented object or to describe its use. Face and object 
recognition disorders also can result from the simul-
tanagnosia of Bálint’s syndrome, in which case they are 
known as apperceptive agnosias as opposed to the asso-
ciative agnosias that result from inferior temporal lobe 
lesions.
CAUSES
The characteristic lesions in prosopagnosia and visual 
object agnosia consist of bilateral infarctions in the ter-
ritory of the posterior cerebral arteries. Associated deﬁ-
cits can include visual ﬁeld defects (especially superior 
quadrantanopias) and a centrally based color blindness 
known as achromatopsia. Rarely, the responsible lesion 
is unilateral. In such cases, prosopagnosia is associated 
with lesions in the right hemisphere, and object agnosia 
with lesions in the left. Degenerative diseases of anterior 
and inferior temporal cortex can cause progressive asso-
ciative prosopagnosia and object agnosia. The combina-
tion of progressive associative agnosia and a ﬂuent apha-
sia is known as semantic dementia and usually is caused by 
FTLD with TDP-43 inclusions. Patients with semantic 
dementia fail to recognize faces and objects and cannot 
understand the meaning of words denoting objects.
THE LIMBIC NETWORK FOR EPISODIC 
MEMORY: AMNESIAS
Limbic and paralimbic areas (such as the hippocam-
pus, amygdala, and entorhinal cortex), the anterior and 
medial nuclei of the thalamus, the medial and basal parts 
of the striatum, and the hypothalamus collectively con-
stitute a distributed network known as the limbic system. 
The behavioral afﬁliations of this network include the 
coordination of emotion, motivation, autonomic tone, 
and endocrine function. An additional area of spe-
cialization for the limbic network and the one that is 
of most relevance to clinical practice is that of declara-
tive (conscious) memory for recent episodes and expe-
riences. A disturbance in this function is known as an 
amnestic state. In the absence of deﬁcits in motivation, 
attention, language, or visuospatial function, the clinical 
diagnosis of a persistent global amnestic state is always 
associated with bilateral damage to the limbic network, 
usually within the hippocampo-entorhinal complex or 
the thalamus.
Although the limbic network is the site of damage 
for amnestic states, it is almost certainly not the stor-
age site for memories. Memories are stored in widely 
distributed form throughout the cerebral cortex. The 
role attributed to the limbic network is to bind these 
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
153
distributed fragments into coherent events and experi-
ences that can sustain conscious recall. Damage to the 
limbic network does not necessarily destroy memories 
but interferes with their conscious (declarative) recall in 
coherent form. The individual fragments of informa-
tion remain preserved despite the limbic lesions and can 
sustain what is known as implicit memory. For example, 
patients with amnestic states can acquire new motor or 
perceptual skills even though they may have no con-
scious knowledge of the experiences that led to the 
acquisition of these skills.
The memory disturbance in the amnestic state is 
multimodal and includes retrograde and anterograde 
components. The retrograde amnesia involves an inabil-
ity to recall experiences that occurred before the onset 
of the amnestic state. Relatively recent events are more 
vulnerable to retrograde amnesia than are more remote 
and more extensively consolidated events. A patient 
who comes to the emergency room complaining that 
he cannot remember his or her identity but can remem-
ber the events of the previous day almost certainly does 
not have a neurologic cause of memory disturbance. 
The second and most important component of the 
amnestic state is the anterograde amnesia, which indicates 
an inability to store, retain, and recall new knowledge. 
Patients with amnestic states cannot remember what 
they ate a few minutes ago or the details of an impor-
tant event they may have experienced a few hours ago. 
In the acute stages, there also may be a tendency to ﬁll 
in memory gaps with inaccurate, fabricated, and often 
implausible information. This is known as confabula-
tion. Patients with the amnestic syndrome forget that 
they forget and tend to deny the existence of a memory 
problem when questioned.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
A patient with an amnestic state is almost always dis-
oriented, especially to time. Accurate temporal orienta-
tion and accurate knowledge of current news rule out 
a major amnestic state. The anterograde component of 
an amnestic state can be tested with a list of four to ﬁve 
words read aloud by the examiner up to ﬁve times or 
until the patient can immediately repeat the entire list 
without an intervening delay. In the next phase of test-
ing, the patient is allowed to concentrate on the words 
and rehearse them internally for 1 min before being 
asked to recall them. Accurate performance in this 
phase indicates that the patient is motivated and suf-
ﬁciently attentive to hold the words online for at least 
1 min. The ﬁnal phase of the testing involves a reten-
tion period of 5 to 10 min during which the patient 
is engaged in other tasks. Adequate recall at the end 
of this interval requires ofﬂine storage, retention, and 
retrieval. Amnestic patients fail this phase of the task and 
may even forget that they were given a list of words to 
remember. Accurate recognition of the words by multi-
ple choice in a patient who cannot recall them indicates 
a less severe memory disturbance that affects mostly the 
retrieval stage of memory. The retrograde component 
of an amnesia can be assessed with questions related to 
autobiographical or historic events. The anterograde 
component of amnestic states is usually much more 
prominent than the retrograde component. In rare 
instances, usually associated with temporal lobe epilepsy 
or benzodiazepine intake, the retrograde component 
may dominate.
The assessment of memory can be quite challenging. 
Bedside evaluations may detect only the most severe 
impairments. Less severe memory impairments, as in the 
case of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy, mild head 
injury, or early dementia, require quantitative evalua-
tions by neuropsychologists. Confusional states caused 
by toxic-metabolic encephalopathies and some types of 
frontal lobe damage interfere with attentional capacity 
and lead to secondary memory impairments, even in 
the absence of any limbic lesions. This sort of memory 
impairment can be differentiated from the amnestic state 
by the presence of additional impairments in the atten-
tion-related tasks described in the section on the frontal 
lobes.
CAUSES, INCLUDING ALZHEIMER’S 
DISEASE
Many neurologic diseases can give rise to an amnes-
tic state. They include tumors (of the sphenoid wing, 
posterior corpus callosum, thalamus, or medial tempo-
ral lobe), infarctions (in the territories of the anterior 
or posterior cerebral arteries), head trauma, herpes sim-
plex encephalitis, Wernicke-Korsakoff encephalopathy, 
paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis, and degenerative 
dementias such as Alzheimer’s disease and Pick’s dis-
ease. The one common denominator of all these dis-
eases is the presence of bilateral lesions within one or 
more components in the limbic network. Occasionally, 
unilateral left-sided hippocampal lesions can give rise to 
an amnestic state, but the memory disorder tends to be 
transient. Depending on the nature and distribution of 
the underlying neurologic disease, the patient also may 
have visual ﬁeld deﬁcits, eye movement limitations, or 
cerebellar ﬁndings.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and its prodromal state of 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) are the most com-
mon causes of progressive memory impairments. Tem-
poral disorientation and poor recall of recent conver-
sations are early manifestations. The predilection of 
the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus for early neu-
roﬁbrillary degeneration in the MCI-AD spectrum 
is responsible for the initially selective impairment of 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
154
episodic memory. In time, a full amnestic state emerges, 
but usually with additional impairments in language, 
attention, and visuospatial skills as the neuroﬁbrillary 
degeneration spreads to additional neocortical areas.
Transient global amnesia is a distinctive syndrome usually 
seen in late middle age. Patients become acutely disori-
ented and repeatedly ask who they are, where they are, 
and what they are doing. The spell is characterized by 
anterograde amnesia (inability to retain new information) 
and a retrograde amnesia for relatively recent events that 
occurred before the onset. The syndrome usually resolves 
within 24 to 48 h and is followed by the ﬁlling in of the 
period affected by the retrograde amnesia, although there 
is persistent loss of memory for the events that occurred 
during the ictus. Recurrences are noted in approximately 
20% of patients. Migraine, temporal lobe seizures, and 
perfusion abnormalities in the posterior cerebral territory 
have been postulated as causes of transient global amnesia. 
The absence of associated neurologic ﬁndings occasion-
ally may lead to the incorrect diagnosis of a psychiatric 
disorder.
THE PREFRONTAL NETWORK FOR 
ATTENTION AND BEHAVIOR
Approximately one-third of all the cerebral cortex in 
the human brain is situated in the frontal lobes. The 
frontal lobes can be subdivided into motor-premotor, 
dorsolateral prefrontal, medial prefrontal, and orbi-
tofrontal components. The terms frontal lobe syndrome 
and prefrontal cortex refer only to the last three of these 
four components. These are the parts of the cerebral 
cortex that show the greatest phylogenetic expan-
sion in primates, especially in humans. The dorsolat-
eral prefrontal, medial prefrontal, and orbitofrontal 
areas, along with the subcortical structures with which 
they are interconnected (i.e., the head of the caudate 
and the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus), collec-
tively make up a large-scale network that coordinates 
exceedingly complex aspects of human cognition and 
behavior.
The prefrontal network plays an important role in 
behaviors that require multitasking and the integration 
of thought with emotion. Its integrity appears impor-
tant for the simultaneous awareness of context, options, 
consequences, relevance, and emotional impact that 
allows the formulation of adaptive inferences, decisions, 
and actions. Damage to this part of the brain impairs 
mental ﬂexibility, reasoning, hypothesis formation, 
abstract thinking, foresight, judgment, the online (atten-
tive) holding of information, and the ability to inhibit 
inappropriate responses. Cognitive operations impaired 
by prefrontal cortex lesions often are referred to as 
“executive functions.”
Even very large bilateral prefrontal lesions may leave 
all sensory, motor, and basic cognitive functions intact 
while leading to isolated but dramatic alterations of per-
sonality and behavior. The most common clinical mani-
festations of damage to the prefrontal network take the 
form of two relatively distinct syndromes. In the frontal 
abulic syndrome, the patient shows a loss of initiative, cre-
ativity, and curiosity and displays a pervasive emotional 
blandness and apathy. In the frontal disinhibition syndrome, 
the patient becomes socially disinhibited and shows 
severe impairments of judgment, insight, and foresight. 
The dissociation between intact intellectual function 
and a total lack of even rudimentary common sense is 
striking. Despite the preservation of all essential mem-
ory functions, the patient cannot learn from experience 
and continues to display inappropriate behaviors with-
out appearing to feel emotional pain, guilt, or regret 
when those behaviors repeatedly lead to disastrous con-
sequences. The impairments may emerge only in real-
life situations when behavior is under minimal external 
control and may not be apparent within the structured 
environment of the medical ofﬁce. Testing judgment by 
asking patients what they would do if they detected a 
ﬁre in a theater or found a stamped and addressed enve-
lope on the road is not very informative since patients 
who answer these questions wisely in the ofﬁce may still 
act very foolishly in the more complex real-life setting. 
The physician must therefore be prepared to make a 
diagnosis of frontal lobe disease on the basis of historic 
information alone even when the mental state is quite 
intact in the ofﬁce examination.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The emergence of developmentally primitive reﬂexes, 
also known as frontal release signs, such as grasping 
(elicited by stroking the palm) and sucking (elicited by 
stroking the lips) are seen primarily in patients with 
large structural lesions that extend into the premo-
tor components of the frontal lobes or in the context 
of metabolic encephalopathies. The vast majority of 
patients with prefrontal lesions and frontal lobe behav-
ioral syndromes do not display these reﬂexes.
Damage to the frontal lobe disrupts a variety of 
attention-related functions, including working memory 
(the transient online holding of information), concen-
tration span, the scanning and retrieval of stored infor-
mation, the inhibition of immediate but inappropri-
ate responses, and mental ﬂexibility. The capacity for 
focusing on a trend of thought and the ability to shift 
the focus of attention voluntarily from one thought 
or stimulus to another can become impaired. Digit 
span (which should be seven forward and ﬁve reverse) 
is decreased; the recitation of the months of the year 
in reverse order (which should take less than 15 s) is 
 
CHAPTER 18
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders
155
slowed; and the ﬂuency in producing words starting 
with the letter a, f, or s that can be generated in 1 min 
(normally v 12 per letter) is diminished even in nona-
phasic patients. Characteristically, there is a progres-
sive slowing of performance as the task proceeds; e.g., 
a patient asked to count backward by threes may say 
“100, 97, 94,…91,…88,” etc., and may not complete 
the task. In “go–no go” tasks (where the instruction is 
to raise the ﬁnger upon hearing one tap but keep it still 
upon hearing two taps), the patient shows a character-
istic inability to keep still in response to the “no go” 
stimulus. Mental ﬂexibility (tested by the ability to shift 
from one criterion to another in sorting or matching 
tasks) is impoverished; distractibility by irrelevant stim-
uli is increased; and there is a pronounced tendency for 
impersistence and perseveration.
These attentional deﬁcits disrupt the orderly registra-
tion and retrieval of new information and lead to secondary 
memory deﬁcits. Those memory deﬁcits can be differenti-
ated from the primary memory impairments of the amnes-
tic state by showing that they improve when the attentional 
load of the task is decreased. Working memory (also known 
as immediate memory) is an attentional function based on 
the temporary online holding of information. It is closely 
associated with the integrity of the prefrontal network and 
the ascending reticular activating system. Retentive mem-
ory, in contrast, depends on the stable (ofﬂine) storage of 
information and is associated with the integrity of the limbic 
network. The distinction of the underlying neural mecha-
nisms is illustrated by the observation that severely amnestic 
patients who cannot remember events that occurred a few 
minutes ago may have intact if not superior working mem-
ory capacity as shown in tests of digit span.
CAUSES: TRAUMA, NEOPLASM, AND 
FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
The abulic syndrome tends to be associated with dam-
age in dorsal prefrontal cortex, and the disinhibition 
syndrome with damage in ventral prefrontal cortex. 
These syndromes tend to arise almost exclusively after 
bilateral lesions. Unilateral lesions conﬁned to the pre-
frontal cortex may remain silent until the pathology 
spreads to the other side; this explains why thrombo-
embolic CVA is an unusual cause of the frontal lobe 
syndrome. Common settings for frontal lobe syndromes 
include head trauma, ruptured aneurysms, hydrocepha-
lus, tumors (including metastases, glioblastoma, and falx 
or olfactory groove meningiomas), and focal degener-
ative diseases. A major clinical form of FTLD known 
as the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia 
(bvFTD) causes a progressive frontal lobe syndrome 
that can start as early as the ﬁfth decade of life. In these 
patients, the anterior temporal lobe and caudate nucleus 
are also atrophic. The behavioral changes can include 
shoplifting, compulsive gambling, sexual indiscretions, 
and obsessive-compulsive preoccupations, arising on 
a background of indifference. In many patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease, neuroﬁbrillary degeneration even-
tually spreads to prefrontal cortex and gives rise to com-
ponents of the frontal lobe syndrome, but almost always 
on a background of severe memory impairment.
Lesions in the caudate nucleus or in the dorsomedial 
nucleus of the thalamus (subcortical components of the 
prefrontal network) also can produce a frontal lobe syn-
drome. This is one reason why the changes in mental 
state associated with degenerative basal ganglia diseases 
such as Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease may 
take the form of a frontal lobe syndrome. Because of its 
widespread connections with other regions of association 
cortex, one essential computational role of the prefron-
tal network is to function as an integrator, or “orches-
trator,” for other networks. Bilateral multifocal lesions 
of the cerebral hemispheres, none of which are indi-
vidually large enough to cause speciﬁc cognitive deﬁ-
cits such as aphasia and neglect, can collectively interfere 
with the connectivity and integrating function of the 
prefrontal cortex. A frontal lobe syndrome is the single 
most common behavioral proﬁle associated with a vari-
ety of bilateral multifocal brain diseases, including meta-
bolic encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis, and vitamin B12 
deﬁciency, among others. Many patients with the clini-
cal diagnosis of a frontal lobe syndrome tend to have 
lesions that do not involve prefrontal cortex but involve 
either the subcortical components of the prefrontal net-
work or its connections with other parts of the brain. To 
avoid making a diagnosis of “frontal lobe syndrome” in 
a patient with no evidence of frontal cortex disease, it is 
advisable to use the diagnostic term frontal network syn-
drome, with the understanding that the responsible lesions 
can lie anywhere within this distributed network.
A patient with frontal lobe disease raises potential 
dilemmas in differential diagnosis: the abulia and bland-
ness may be misinterpreted as depression, and the dis-
inhibition as idiopathic mania or acting out. Appropri-
ate intervention may be delayed while a treatable tumor 
keeps expanding. An informed approach to frontal lobe 
disease and its behavioral manifestations may help pre-
vent such errors.
CARING FOR PATIENTS WITH DEFICITS 
OF HIGHER CEREBRAL FUNCTION
Some of the deﬁcits described in this chapter are so com-
plex that they may bewilder not only the patient and 
family but also the physician. It is imperative to carry 
out a systematic clinical evaluation to characterize the 
nature of the deﬁcits and explain them in lay terms to the 
patient and family. Such an explanation can allay at least 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
156
some of the anxieties, address the mistaken impression 
that the deﬁcit (e.g., social disinhibition or inability to 
recognize family members) is psychologically motivated, 
and lead to practical suggestions for daily living activities. 
The consultation of a skilled neuropsychologist may aid 
in the formulation of diagnosis and management. Patients 
with simultanagnosia, for example, may beneﬁt from the 
counterintuitive instruction to stand back when they can-
not ﬁnd an item so that a greater search area falls within 
the immediate ﬁeld of gaze. Some patients with frontal 
lobe disease can be extremely irritable and abusive to 
spouses yet display all the appropriate social graces dur-
ing a visit to the medical ofﬁce. In such cases, the history 
may be more important than the bedside examination in 
charting a course of treatment.
Reactive depression is common in patients with 
higher cerebral dysfunction and should be treated. These 
patients may be overly sensitive to the usual doses of anti-
depressants or anxiolytics and require a careful titration of 
dosage. Brain damage may cause a dissociation between 
feeling states and their expression so that a patient who 
may superﬁcially appear jocular could still be suffering 
from an underlying depression that needs to be treated. 
In many cases, agitation may be controlled with reas-
surance. In other cases, treatment with benzodiazepines, 
antiepilectics, or sedating antidepressants may become 
necessary. If neuroleptics become absolutely necessary for 
the control of agitation, atypical neuroleptics are prefer-
able because of their lower extrapyramidal side effects. 
Treatment with neuroleptics in elderly patients with 
dementia requires weighing the potential beneﬁts against 
the potentially serious side effects.
Spontaneous improvement of cognitive deﬁcits due 
to acute neurologic lesions is common. It is most rapid 
in the ﬁrst few weeks but may continue for up to 
2 years, especially in young individuals with single brain 
lesions. The mechanisms for this recovery are incom-
pletely understood. Some of the initial deﬁcits appear 
to arise from remote dysfunction (diaschisis) in parts of 
the brain that are interconnected with the site of ini-
tial injury. Improvement in these patients may reﬂect, 
at least in part, a normalization of the remote dysfunc-
tion. Other mechanisms may involve functional reor-
ganization in surviving neurons adjacent to the injury 
or the compensatory use of homologous structures, 
e.g., the right superior temporal gyrus with recovery 
from Wernicke’s aphasia. In some patients with large 
lesions involving Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, only 
Wernicke’s area may show contralateral compensatory 
reorganization (or bilateral functionality), giving rise to 
a situation in which a lesion that should have caused a 
global aphasia becomes associated with a residual Bro-
ca’s aphasia. Prognosis for recovery from aphasia is best 
when Wernicke’s area is spared. Cognitive rehabilita-
tion procedures have been used in the treatment of 
higher cortical deﬁcits. There are few controlled studies, 
but some show a beneﬁt of rehabilitation in the recov-
ery from hemispatial neglect and aphasia. Some types 
of deﬁcits may be more prone to recovery than others. 
For example, patients with CVA and nonﬂuent apha-
sias are more likely to beneﬁt from speech therapy than 
are patients with ﬂuent aphasias and comprehension 
deﬁcits. In general, lesions that lead to a denial of illness 
(e.g., anosognosia) are associated with cognitive deﬁcits 
that are more resistant to rehabilitation. Periodic neuro-
psychological assessment is necessary for quantifying the 
pace of the improvement (or of the progression in the 
case of dementias) and for generating speciﬁc recom-
mendations for cognitive rehabilitation, modiﬁcations 
in the home environment, the timetable for return-
ing to work in patients recovering from acute lesions, 
and the scheduling of retirement or disability status in 
patients with degenerative diseases. Determining driving 
competence is challenging, especially in the early stages 
of dementing diseases. The diagnosis of a neurodegen-
erative disease is not by itself sufﬁcient for asking the 
patient to stop driving. An on-the-road driving test and 
reports from family members may help time decisions 
related to this very important activity.
There is a mistaken belief that dementias are ana-
tomically diffuse and that they cause global cogni-
tive impairments. This is true only at the terminal 
stages. During most of the clinical course, dementias 
are exquisitely selective with respect to anatomy and 
cognitive pattern. Alzheimer’s disease, for example, 
causes the greatest destruction in medial temporal areas 
belonging to the memory network and is clinically 
characterized by a correspondingly severe amnesia. 
There are other dementias in which memory is intact. 
Selective degeneration of the frontal lobes in FTLD 
leads to a gradual dissolution of behavior and execu-
tive functions. Primary progressive aphasia is charac-
terized by a gradual atrophy of the left perisylvian lan-
guage network and a selective dissolution of language 
that can remain isolated for up to 10 years. An enlight-
ened approach to the differential diagnosis and to the 
individualized care of patients with acute and progres-
sive damage to the cerebral cortex requires an under-
standing of the principles that link neural networks to 
higher cerebral functions.
 Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini  ■   Jennifer Ogar  ■   Joel Kramer 
■   Bruce L. Miller  ■   Gil Rabinovici  ■   Maria Carmela Tartaglia 
157
 Language and memory are essential human functions. 
For the experienced clinician, the recognition of different 
types of language and memory disturbances often pro-
vides essential clues to the anatomic localization and diag-
nosis of neurologic disorders. This video illustrates classic 
disorders of language and speech (including the aphasias), 
memory (the amnesias), and other disorders of cognition 
that are commonly encountered in clinical practice. Vid-
eos for this chapter can be accessed at the following link: 
http://www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/.
VIDEO ATLAS: PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE 
APHASIA, MEMORY LOSS, AND OTHER FOCAL 
CEREBRAL DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 19 
 Charles A. Czeisler  ■  John W. Winkelman  ■  Gary S. Richardson 
158
 Disturbed sleep is among the most frequent health 
complaints physicians encounter. More than one-half 
of adults in the United States experience at least inter-
mittent sleep disturbance. For most, it is an occasional 
night of poor sleep or daytime sleepiness. However, the 
Institute of Medicine has estimated that 50–70 million 
Americans suffer from a chronic disorder of sleep and 
wakefulness, which can lead to serious impairment of 
daytime functioning. In addition, such problems may 
contribute to or exacerbate medical or psychiatric con-
ditions. Thirty years ago, many such complaints were 
treated with hypnotic medications without further diag-
nostic evaluation. Since then, a distinct class of sleep and 
arousal disorders has been identiﬁ ed. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF SLEEP AND 
WAKEFULNESS 
 Given the opportunity, most adults will sleep 7–8 h per 
night, although the timing, duration, and internal struc-
ture of sleep vary among healthy individuals and as a 
function of age. At the extremes, infants and the elderly 
have frequent interruptions of sleep. In the United 
States, adults tend to have one consolidated sleep epi-
sode per day, although in some cultures sleep may be 
divided into a mid-afternoon nap and a shortened night 
sleep. Two principal neural systems govern the expres-
sion of the sleep and wakefulness states within the daily 
cycle. The ﬁ rst potentiates sleep in proportion to the 
duration of wakefulness (the “sleep homeostat”), while 
the second rhythmically modulates sleep and wakeful-
ness tendencies at appropriate phases of the 24-h day 
(the circadian clock). Intrinsic abnormalities in the func-
tion of either of these systems, or extrinsic disturbances 
(environmental, drug- or illness-related) that supersede 
their normal expression, can lead to clinically recogniz-
able sleep disorders. 
 STATES AND STAGES OF SLEEP 
 States and stages of human sleep are deﬁ ned on the 
basis of characteristic patterns in the electroencephalo-
gram (EEG), the electrooculogram (EOG—a measure 
of eye-movement activity), and the surface electro-
myogram (EMG) measured on the chin and neck. The 
continuous recording of this array of electrophysiologic 
parameters to deﬁ ne sleep and wakefulness is termed 
polysomnography . 
 Polysomnographic proﬁ les deﬁ ne two states of sleep: 
(1) rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep and (2) non-
rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep. NREM sleep is 
further subdivided into three stages, characterized by 
increasing arousal threshold and slowing of the cortical 
EEG. REM sleep is characterized by a low-amplitude, 
mixed-frequency EEG similar to that of NREM stage 
N1 sleep. The EOG shows bursts of REM similar to 
those seen during eyes-open wakefulness. Chin EMG 
activity is absent, reﬂ ecting the brainstem-mediated 
muscle atonia that is characteristic of that state. 
 ORGANIZATION OF HUMAN SLEEP 
 Normal nocturnal sleep in adults displays a consistent 
organization from night to night  ( Fig. 20-1 ) . After 
sleep onset, sleep usually progresses through NREM 
stages N1–N3 sleep within 45–60 min. Slow-wave 
sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep) predominates in the ﬁ rst 
third of the night and comprises 15–25% of total noc-
turnal sleep time in young adults. The percentage of 
slow-wave sleep is inﬂ uenced by several factors, most 
notably age (see later). Prior sleep deprivation increases 
the rapidity of sleep onset and both the intensity and 
amount of slow-wave sleep. 
 The ﬁ rst REM sleep episode usually occurs in 
the second hour of sleep. More rapid onset of REM 
sleep in an adult (particularly if <30 min) may suggest 
pathology such as endogenous depression, narcolepsy, 
 SLEEP DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 20 
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
159
circadian rhythm disorders, or drug withdrawal. NREM 
and REM alternate through the night with an aver-
age period of 90–110 min (the “ultradian” sleep cycle). 
Overall, REM sleep constitutes 20–25% of total sleep, 
and NREM stages N1 and N2 are 50–60%.
Age has a profound impact on sleep state organi-
zation (Fig.  20-1). Slow-wave sleep is most intense 
and prominent during childhood, decreasing sharply 
coincident with puberty and across the second and 
third decades of life. After age 30, there is a contin-
ued decline in the amount of slow-wave sleep, and the 
amplitude of delta EEG activity comprising slow-wave 
sleep is profoundly reduced. The depth of slow-wave 
sleep, as measured by the arousal threshold to auditory 
stimulation, also decreases with age. In the otherwise 
healthy older person, slow-wave sleep may be com-
pletely absent, particularly in males. Paradoxically, older 
people are better able to tolerate acute sleep deprivation 
than young adults, maintaining reaction time and sus-
taining vigilance with fewer lapses of attention.
A different age proﬁle exists for REM sleep than for 
slow-wave sleep. In infancy, REM sleep may comprise 
50% of total sleep time, and the percentage is inversely 
proportional to developmental age. The amount of 
REM sleep falls off sharply over the ﬁrst postnatal year 
as a mature REM-NREM cycle develops; thereafter, 
REM sleep occupies a relatively constant percentage of 
total sleep time.
NEUROANATOMY OF SLEEP
Experimental studies in animals have variously impli-
cated the medullary reticular formation, the thalamus, 
and the basal forebrain in the generation of sleep, while 
the brainstem reticular formation, the midbrain, the 
subthalamus, the thalamus, and the basal forebrain have 
all been suggested to play a role in the generation of 
wakefulness or EEG arousal.
Current models suggest that the capacity for sleep 
and wakefulness generation is distributed along an axial 
“core” of neurons extending from the brainstem ros-
trally to the basal forebrain. A cluster of γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) and galaninergic neurons in the ventro-
lateral preoptic (VLPO) hypothalamus is selectively 
activated coincident with sleep onset. These neurons 
project to and inhibit the multiple neural wakefulness 
centers that comprise the ascending arousal system, 
and selective cell-speciﬁc lesions of VLPO substantially 
reduce sleep time, indicating that the hypothalamic 
VLPO neurons play an executive role in sleep regula-
tion. More recent data have identiﬁed another sleep 
center, the median preoptic nucleus (MnPOn) of the 
hypothalamus with similar activation patterns and pro-
jections, suggesting that, like that of wakefulness, exec-
utive control of sleep may also be multicentric.
Speciﬁc regions in the pons are associated with the 
neurophysiologic correlates of REM sleep. Small lesions 
in the dorsal pons result in the loss of the descend-
ing muscle inhibition normally associated with REM 
sleep; microinjections of the cholinergic agonist car-
bachol into the pontine reticular formation produce 
a state with all of the features of REM sleep. These 
experimental manipulations are mimicked by patho-
logic conditions in humans and animals. A prominent 
feature of narcolepsy, for example, is abrupt, complete, 
or partial paralysis (cataplexy) in response to a variety of 
stimuli, a pathologic activation of neural systems medi-
ating the atonia of normal REM sleep. In narcoleptic 
23
Age
68
Age
Awake
00:00
02:00
04:00
06:00
08:00
Clock time
Sleep stage
REM
Awake
N3
N2
N1
N3
N2
N1
REM
FIGURE 20-1 
Stages of REM sleep (solid bars), the three stages of NREM 
sleep, and wakefulness over the course of the entire night 
for representative young and older adult men. Characteristic 
features of sleep in older people include reduction of slow-
wave sleep, frequent spontaneous awakenings, early sleep 
onset, and early morning awakening. (From the Division of 
Sleep Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital.)
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
160
dogs, physostigmine, a central cholinesterase inhibitor, 
increases the frequency of cataplexy episodes, while 
atropine decreases their frequency. Conversely, in REM 
sleep behavior disorder (see later), patients suffer from a 
failure of normal motor inhibition during REM sleep, 
resulting in involuntary, occasionally violent, movement 
arising out of dream episodes.
NEUROCHEMISTRY OF SLEEP
Early experimental studies that focused on the raphe 
nuclei of the brainstem appeared to implicate serotonin 
as the primary sleep-promoting neurotransmitter, while 
catecholamines were considered to be responsible for 
wakefulness. Simple neurochemical models have given 
way to more complex formulations involving multiple 
parallel waking systems. Pharmacologic studies suggest 
that histamine, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, and 
noradrenaline are all involved in wake promotion. A 
novel neuropeptide, orexin (also known as hypocretin), 
localized to a cluster of neurons in the lateral hypothal-
amus and originally identiﬁed based on its pathogenic 
role in narcolepsy (see later), also appears to be involved 
in the control of wakefulness.
In the basal forebrain (BF), adenosine receptors on 
cholinergic neurons are thought to play a role in assess-
ing homeostatic sleep need by providing an index of 
cellular energy status. Projections from these BF neu-
rons to executive sleep centers such as VLPO thus allow 
incorporation of homeostatic sleep need into the con-
trol of sleep state expression. At a practical level, this 
model suggests that the alerting effects of caffeine, an 
adenosine receptor antagonist, reﬂect the attenuation of 
the homeostatic signal from the basal forebrain.
The prominent hypnotic effects of benzodiazepine 
receptor agonists suggest that endogenous ligands of this 
receptor may be involved in normal sleep physiology. 
While neurosteroids with activity at this receptor have 
been identiﬁed, their role in normal sleep-wake control 
remains unclear. In addition, a broad array of endogenous 
sleep- and wake-promoting substances have been iden-
tiﬁed, the role of which in normal sleep-wake control 
remains unclear. These include corticotropin-releasing 
hormone (CRH), prostaglandin D2, delta sleep–inducing 
peptide, muramyl dipeptide, interleukin 1, fatty acid pri-
mary amides, and melatonin.
PHYSIOLOGY OF CIRCADIAN RHYTHMICITY
The sleep-wake cycle is the most evident of the many 
24-h rhythms in humans. Prominent daily variations 
also occur in endocrine, thermoregulatory, cardiac, pul-
monary, renal, gastrointestinal, and neurobehavioral 
functions. At the molecular level, endogenous circadian 
rhythmicity is driven by self-sustaining transcriptional/
translational feedback loops (Fig. 20-2). In evaluating a 
daily variation in humans, it is important to distinguish 
between those rhythmic components passively evoked 
by periodic environmental or behavioral changes (e.g., 
the increase in blood pressure and heart rate that occurs 
upon assumption of the upright posture) and those 
actively driven by an endogenous oscillatory process 
(e.g., the circadian variation in plasma cortisol that per-
sists under a variety of environmental and behavioral 
conditions).
While it is now recognized that many peripheral 
tissues in mammals have circadian clocks that regulate 
diverse physiologic processes, these independent tissue-
speciﬁc oscillations are coordinated by a central neural 
pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) 
+
–
TIM
CLOCK
BMAL1
TIM
CRY1
CRY2
PER3
CK1E
PER2
?
?
PER1
E-Box
Per1 gene
FIGURE 20-2 
Model of the molecular feedback loop at the core of the 
mammalian circadian clock. The positive element of the 
feedback loop (+) is the transcriptional activation of the Per1 
gene (and probably other clock genes) by a heterodimer of 
the transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1 (also called 
MOP3) bound to an E-box DNA regulatory element. The Per1 
transcript and its product, the clock component PER1 pro-
tein, accumulate in the cell cytoplasm. As it accumulates, 
the PER1 protein is recruited into a multiprotein complex 
thought to contain other circadian clock component proteins 
such as cryptochromes (CRYs), Period proteins (PERs), and 
others. This complex is then transported into the cell nucleus 
(across the dotted line), where it functions as the negative 
element in the feedback loop (–) by inhibiting the activity of 
the CLOCK-BMAL1 transcription factor heterodimer. As a 
consequence of this action, the concentration of PER1 and 
other clock proteins in the inhibitory complex falls, allowing 
CLOCK-BMAL1 to activate transcription of Per1 and other 
genes and begin another cycle. The dynamics of the 24-h 
molecular cycle are controlled at several levels, including 
regulation of the rate of PER protein degradation by casein 
kinase-1 epsilon (CK1E). Additional limbs of this genetic reg-
ulatory network, omitted for the sake of clarity, are thought 
to contribute stability. Question marks denote putative clock 
proteins, such as Timeless (TIM), as yet lacking genetic proof 
of a role in the mammalian clock mechanism. (vghghg 
Charles J. Weitz, PhD, Department of Neurobiology, Harvard 
Medical School.)
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
161
of the hypothalamus. Bilateral destruction of these 
nuclei results in a loss of the endogenous circadian 
rhythm of locomotor activity, which can be restored 
only by transplantation of the same structure from a 
donor animal. The genetically determined period of this 
endogenous neural oscillator, which averages ~24.2 h 
in humans, is normally synchronized to the 24-h period 
of the environmental light-dark cycle. Small differences 
in circadian period underlie variations in diurnal pref-
erence, with the circadian period shorter in individuals 
who typically rise early compared to those who typi-
cally go to bed late. Entrainment of mammalian circa-
dian rhythms by the light-dark cycle is mediated via the 
retinohypothalamic tract, a monosynaptic pathway that 
links specialized, photoreceptive retinal ganglion cells 
directly to the SCN. Humans are exquisitely sensitive 
to the resetting effects of light, particularly the shorter 
wavelengths (~460–500 nm) of the visible spectrum.
The timing and internal architecture of sleep are 
directly coupled to the output of the endogenous cir-
cadian pacemaker. Paradoxically, the endogenous cir-
cadian rhythms of sleep tendency, sleepiness, and REM 
sleep propensity all peak near the habitual wake time, 
just after the nadir of the endogenous circadian tem-
perature cycle, whereas the circadian wake propensity 
rhythm peaks 1–3 h before the habitual bedtime. These 
rhythms are thus timed to oppose the homeostatic 
decline of sleep tendency during the habitual sleep epi-
sode and the rise of sleep tendency throughout the usual 
waking day, respectively. Misalignment of the output of 
the endogenous circadian pacemaker with the desired 
sleep-wake cycle can, therefore, induce insomnia, 
decreased alertness, and impaired performance evident 
in night-shift workers and airline travelers.
BEHAVIORAL CORRELATES OF SLEEP 
STATES AND STAGES
Polysomnographic staging of sleep correlates with 
behavioral changes during speciﬁc states and stages. 
During the transitional state between wakefulness and 
sleep (stage N1 sleep), subjects may respond to faint 
auditory or visual signals without “awakening.” Short-
term memory incorporation is inhibited at the onset of 
NREM stage N1 sleep, which may explain why indi-
viduals aroused from that transitional sleep stage fre-
quently deny having been asleep. Such transitions may 
intrude upon behavioral wakefulness after sleep depri-
vation, notwithstanding attempts to remain continuously 
awake (see “Shift-Work Disorder,” later in this chapter).
Awakenings from REM sleep are associated with 
recall of vivid dream imagery >80% of the time. The 
reliability of dream recall increases with REM sleep epi-
sodes occurring later in the night. Imagery may also be 
reported after NREM sleep interruptions, though these 
typically lack the detail and vividness of REM sleep 
dreams. The incidence of NREM sleep dream recall 
can be increased by selective REM sleep deprivation, 
suggesting that REM sleep and dreaming per se are not 
inexorably linked.
PHYSIOLOGIC CORRELATES OF SLEEP 
STATES AND STAGES
All major physiologic systems are inﬂuenced by sleep. 
Changes in cardiovascular function include a decrease in 
blood pressure and heart rate during NREM and partic-
ularly during slow-wave sleep. During REM sleep, pha-
sic activity (bursts of eye movements) is associated with 
variability in both blood pressure and heart rate medi-
ated principally by the vagus nerve. Cardiac dysrhyth-
mias may occur selectively during REM sleep. Respi-
ratory function also changes. In comparison to relaxed 
wakefulness, respiratory rate becomes more regular dur-
ing NREM sleep (especially slow-wave sleep) and tonic 
REM sleep and becomes very irregular during phasic 
REM sleep. Minute ventilation decreases in NREM 
sleep out of proportion to the decrease in metabolic rate 
at sleep onset, resulting in a higher PCO2.
Endocrine function also varies with sleep. Slow-wave 
sleep is associated with secretion of growth hormone 
in men, while sleep in general is associated with aug-
mented secretion of prolactin in both men and women. 
Sleep has a complex effect on the secretion of lutein-
izing hormone (LH): during puberty, sleep is associated 
with increased LH secretion, whereas sleep in the post-
pubertal female inhibits LH secretion in the early fol-
licular phase of the menstrual cycle. Sleep onset (and 
probably slow-wave sleep) is associated with inhibition 
of thyroid-stimulating hormone and of the adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone–cortisol axis, an effect that is super-
imposed on the prominent circadian rhythms in the two 
systems.
The pineal hormone melatonin is secreted pre-
dominantly at night in both day- and night-active spe-
cies, reﬂecting the direct modulation of pineal activity 
by the circadian pacemaker through a circuitous neu-
ral pathway from the SCN to the pineal gland. Mela-
tonin secretion is not dependent upon the occurrence 
of sleep, persisting in individuals kept awake at night. 
Secretion is inhibited by ambient light, an effect medi-
ated by a neural connection from the retina via the 
SCN. The role of endogenous melatonin in normal 
sleep-wake regulation is unclear, but administration of 
exogenous melatonin can potentiate sleepiness and facil-
itate sleep onset when administered in the afternoon or 
evening, at a time when endogenous melatonin levels 
are low. The efﬁcacy of melatonin as a sleep-promot-
ing therapy for patients with insomnia is currently not 
known.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
162
Sleep is also accompanied by alterations of thermo-
regulatory function. NREM sleep is associated with 
an attenuation of thermoregulatory responses to either 
heat or cold stress, and animal studies of thermosensitive 
neurons in the hypothalamus document an NREM-
sleep-dependent reduction of the thermoregulatory set-
point. REM sleep is associated with complete absence 
of thermoregulatory responsiveness, resulting in func-
tional poikilothermy. However, the potential adverse 
impact of this failure of thermoregulation is blunted 
by inhibition of REM sleep by extreme ambient 
temperatures.
DISORDERS OF SLEEP AND 
WAKEFULNESS
Patients with excessive sleepiness should be advised 
to avoid all driving until effective therapy has been 
achieved.
Completion by the patient of a day-by-day sleep-
work-drug log for at least 2 weeks can help the physi-
cian better understand the nature of the complaint. 
Work times and sleep times (including daytime naps 
and nocturnal awakenings) as well as drug and alcohol 
use, including caffeine and hypnotics, should be noted 
each day.
Polysomnography is necessary for the diagnosis of 
specific disorders such as narcolepsy and sleep apnea 
and may be of utility in other settings as well.
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Sleep Disorders
Patients may seek help from a physician because 
of one of several symptoms: (1) an acute or chronic 
inability to initiate or maintain sleep adequately at 
night (insomnia); (2) chronic fatigue, sleepiness, or 
tiredness during the day; or (3) a behavioral manifesta-
tion associated with sleep itself. The specific approach 
to an insomnia complaint will depend on the nature of 
comorbid medical or psychiatric disease, if present. In 
general, however, the insomnia complaint should be 
specifically addressed as soon as it is recognized. This 
more aggressive approach reflects growing evidence 
that chronic insomnia may contribute to comorbid 
disease processes. For example, specific management 
of symptomatic insomnia at the time of diagnosis of 
major depressive disorder (MDD) has been shown to 
positively impact the response to antidepressants. 
Evidence that insomnia and sleep loss affect the per-
ception of pain suggests that a similar approach is 
warranted in acute and chronic pain management. In 
general, at least for chronic insomnia, there is little evi-
dence justifying an expectant approach in which spe-
cific insomnia therapy is deferred while comorbid dis-
ease is first addressed.
Table 20-1 outlines the diagnostic and therapeutic 
approach to the patient with a complaint of excessive 
daytime sleepiness.
A careful history is essential. In particular, the dura-
tion, severity, and consistency of the symptoms are 
important, along with the patient’s estimate of the 
consequences of the sleep disorder on waking func-
tion. Information from a friend or family member can 
be invaluable; some patients may be unaware of, or will 
underreport, such potentially embarrassing symptoms 
as heavy snoring or falling asleep while driving.
EVALUATION OF INSOMNIA
Insomnia is the complaint of inadequate sleep; it can be 
classiﬁed according to the nature of sleep disruption and 
the duration of the complaint. Insomnia is subdivided 
into difﬁculty falling asleep (sleep onset insomnia), frequent 
or sustained awakenings (sleep maintenance insomnia), or 
early morning awakenings (sleep offset insomnia), though 
most insomnia patients present with two or more of 
these symptoms. Other insomnia patients present with 
persistent sleepiness/fatigue despite sleep of adequate 
duration (nonrestorative sleep). Similarly, the duration of 
the symptom inﬂuences diagnostic and therapeutic con-
siderations. An insomnia complaint lasting one to sev-
eral nights (within a single episode) is termed transient 
insomnia and is typically the result of situational stress or 
a change in sleep schedule or environment (e.g., jet lag 
disorder). Short-term insomnia lasts from a few days to 3 
weeks. Disruption of this duration is usually associated 
with more protracted stress, such as recovery from sur-
gery or short-term illness. Long-term insomnia, or chronic 
insomnia, lasts for months or years and, in contrast with 
short-term insomnia, requires a thorough evaluation of 
underlying causes (see later in this chapter). Chronic 
insomnia is often a waxing and waning disorder, with 
spontaneous or stressor-induced exacerbations.
An occasional night of poor sleep, typically in the 
setting of stress or excitement about external events, is 
both common and without lasting consequences. How-
ever, persistent insomnia can lead to impaired daytime 
function, injury due to accidents, and the develop-
ment of major depression. In addition, there is emerg-
ing evidence that individuals with chronic insomnia 
have increased utilization of health care resources, even 
after controlling for comorbid medical and psychiatric 
disorders.
All insomnias can be exacerbated and perpetuated 
by behaviors that are not conducive to initiating or 
maintaining sleep. Inadequate sleep hygiene is character-
ized by a behavior pattern prior to sleep or a bedroom 
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
163
environment that is not conducive to sleep, or irregu-
larity in the timing or duration of the nightly sleep epi-
sode. Noise, light, or technology (e.g., television, radio, 
cell phone, mobile email device or computer) in the 
bedroom can interfere with sleep, as can a bed partner 
with periodic limb movements during sleep or one who 
snores loudly. Clocks can heighten the anxiety about 
the time it has taken to fall asleep. Drugs that act on 
the central nervous system, large meals, vigorous exer-
cise, or hot showers just before sleep may all interfere 
with sleep onset. Many individuals participate in stress-
ful work-related activities in the evening, producing a 
state incompatible with sleep onset. In preference to 
hypnotic medications, patients should be counseled to 
avoid stressful activities before bed, develop a soporiﬁc 
bedtime ritual, and prepare and reserve the bedroom 
environment for sleeping. Consistent, regular bedtimes 
and rising times should be maintained daily, including 
weekends.
PRIMARY INSOMNIA
Many patients with chronic insomnia have no clear, 
single identiﬁable underlying cause for their difﬁcul-
ties with sleep. Rather, such patients often have mul-
tiple etiologies for their insomnia, which may evolve 
over the years. In addition, the chief sleep complaint 
may change over time, with initial insomnia predomi-
nating at one point, and multiple awakenings or non-
restorative sleep occurring at other times. Subsyndromal 
psychiatric disorders (e.g., anxiety and mood com-
plaints), negative conditioning to the sleep environment 
(psychophysiologic insomnia, see next), ampliﬁcation 
of the time spent awake (paradoxical insomnia), physi-
ologic hyperarousal, and poor sleep hygiene (see ear-
lier) may all be present. As these processes may be both 
causes and consequences of chronic insomnia, many 
individuals will have a progressive course to their symp-
toms in which the severity is proportional to the chro-
nicity, and much of the complaint may persist even after 
effective treatment of the initial inciting etiology. Treat-
ment of insomnia is often directed to each of the puta-
tive contributing factors: behavior therapies for anxiety 
and negative conditioning (see later), pharmacotherapy 
and/or psychotherapy for mood/anxiety disorders, and 
an emphasis on maintenance of good sleep hygiene.
If insomnia persists after treatment of these contrib-
uting factors, empirical pharmacotherapy is often used 
on a nightly or intermittent basis. A variety of sedative 
compounds are used for this purpose. Alcohol and anti-
histamines are the most commonly used nonprescrip-
tion sleep aids. The former may help with sleep onset 
but is associated with sleep disruption during the night 
and can escalate into abuse, dependence, and with-
drawal in the predisposed individual. Antihistamines, 
which are the primary active ingredient in most over-
the-counter sleep aids, may be of beneﬁt when used 
intermittently but often produce rapid tolerance and 
may have multiple side effects (especially anticholiner-
gic), which limit their use, particularly in the elderly. 
Benzodiazepine-receptor agonists are the most effec-
tive and well-tolerated class of medications for insom-
nia. The broad range of half-lives allows ﬂexibility in 
the duration of sedative action. The most commonly 
TABLE 20-1
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH THE COMPLAINT OF EXCESSIVE DAYTIME SOMNOLENCE
FINDINGS ON HISTORY AND 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
DIAGNOSIS
THERAPY
Obesity, snoring, hypertension
Polysomnography with 
respiratory monitoring
Obstructive 
sleep apnea
Continuous positive airway pressure; ENT 
surgery (e.g., uvulopalatopharyngoplasty); 
dental appliance; pharmacologic therapy 
(e.g., protriptyline); weight loss
Cataplexy, hypnogogic hal-
lucinations, sleep paralysis, 
family history
Polysomnography with 
multiple sleep latency 
testing
Narcolepsy- 
cataplexy  
syndrome
Stimulants (e.g., modaﬁnil, methylpheni-
date); REM-suppressant antidepressants 
(e.g., protriptyline); genetic counseling
Restless legs, disturbed sleep, 
predisposing medical condi-
tion (e.g., iron deﬁciency or 
renal failure)
Assessment for predispos-
ing medical conditions
Restless legs 
syndrome
Treatment of predisposing condition, if pos-
sible; dopamine agonists (e.g., pramipex-
ole, ropinirole)
Disturbed sleep, predispos-
ing medical conditions (e.g., 
asthma), and/or predisposing 
medical therapies (e.g., the-
ophylline)
Sleep-wake diary  
recording
Insomnias (see 
text)
Treatment of predisposing condition and/
or change in therapy, if possible; behav-
ioral therapy; short-acting benzodiazepine 
receptor agonist (e.g., zolpidem)
Abbreviations: EMG, electromyogram; ENT, ears, nose, throat; REM, rapid eye movement.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
164
prescribed agents in this family are zaleplon (5–20 mg), 
with a half-life of 1–2 h; zolpidem (5–10 mg) and tri-
azolam (0.125–0.25 mg), with half-lives of 2–3 h; 
eszopiclone (1–3 mg), with a half-life of 5.5–8 h; and 
temazepam (15–30 mg) and lorazepam (0.5–2 mg), 
with half-lives of 6–12 h. Generally, side effects are 
minimal when the dose is kept low and the serum con-
centration is minimized during the waking hours (by 
using the shortest-acting effective agent). At least one 
benzodiazepine receptor agonist (eszopiclone) contin-
ues to be effective for 6 months of nightly use. How-
ever, longer durations of use have not been evaluated, 
and it is unclear whether this is true of other agents in 
this class. Moreover, with even brief continuous use 
of benzodiazepine receptor agonists, rebound insom-
nia can occur upon discontinuation. The likelihood of 
rebound insomnia and tolerance can be minimized by 
short durations of treatment, intermittent use, or grad-
ual tapering of the dose. For acute insomnia, nightly use 
of a benzodiazepine receptor agonist for a maximum 
of 2–4 weeks is advisable. For chronic insomnia, inter-
mittent use is recommended, unless the consequences 
of untreated insomnia outweigh concerns regarding 
chronic use. Benzodiazepine receptor agonists should 
be avoided, or used very judiciously, in patients with 
a history of substance or alcohol abuse. The heterocy-
clic antidepressants (trazodone, amitriptyline, and dox-
epin) are the most commonly prescribed alternatives to 
benzodiazepine receptor agonists due to their lack of 
abuse potential and lower cost. Trazodone (25–100 mg) 
is used more commonly than the tricyclic antidepres-
sants as it has a much shorter half-life (5–9 h), has much 
less anticholinergic activity (sparing patients, particularly 
the elderly, constipation, urinary retention, and tachy-
cardia), is associated with less weight gain, and is much 
safer in overdose. The risk of priapism is small (~1 in 
10,000).
Psychophysiologic insomnia
Persistent psychophysiologic insomnia is a behavioral dis-
order in which patients are preoccupied with a per-
ceived inability to sleep adequately at night. This sleep 
disorder begins like any other acute insomnia; how-
ever, the poor sleep habits and sleep-related anxiety 
(“insomnia phobia”) persist long after the initial inci-
dent. Such patients become hyperaroused by their 
own efforts to sleep or by the sleep environment, 
and the insomnia becomes a conditioned or learned 
response. Patients may be able to fall asleep more eas-
ily at unscheduled times (when not trying) or outside 
the home environment. Polysomnographic recording 
in patients with psychophysiologic insomnia reveals an 
objective sleep disturbance, often with an abnormally 
long sleep latency; frequent nocturnal awakenings; and 
an increased amount of stage N1 transitional sleep. 
Rigorous attention should be paid to improving sleep 
hygiene, correction of counterproductive, arousing 
behaviors before bedtime, and minimizing exaggerated 
beliefs regarding the negative consequences of insom-
nia. Behavioral therapies are the treatment modality of 
choice, with intermittent use of medications. When 
patients are awake for >20 min, they should read or 
perform other relaxing activities to distract themselves 
from insomnia-related anxiety. In addition, bedtime and 
wake time should be scheduled to restrict time in bed 
to be equal to their perceived total sleep time. This will 
generally produce sleep deprivation, greater sleep drive, 
and, eventually, better sleep. Time in bed can then be 
gradually expanded. In addition, methods directed 
toward producing relaxation in the sleep setting (e.g., 
meditation, muscle relaxation) are encouraged.
Adjustment insomnia (acute insomnia)
This typically develops after a change in the sleep-
ing environment (e.g., in an unfamiliar hotel or hospi-
tal bed) or before or after a signiﬁcant life event, such 
as a change of occupation, loss of a loved one, illness, 
or anxiety over a deadline or examination. Increased 
sleep latency, frequent awakenings from sleep, and early 
morning awakening can all occur. Recovery is generally 
rapid, usually within a few weeks. Treatment is symp-
tomatic, with intermittent use of hypnotics and resolu-
tion of the underlying stress. Altitude insomnia describes 
a sleep disturbance that is a common consequence of 
exposure to high altitude. Periodic breathing of the 
Cheyne-Stokes type occurs during NREM sleep about 
half the time at high altitude, with restoration of a regu-
lar breathing pattern during REM sleep. Both hypoxia 
and hypocapnia are thought to be involved in the 
development of periodic breathing. Frequent awaken-
ings and poor quality sleep characterize altitude insom-
nia, which is generally worse on the ﬁrst few nights at 
high altitude but may persist. Treatment with acetazol-
amide can decrease time spent in periodic breathing and 
substantially reduce hypoxia during sleep.
COMORBID INSOMNIA
Insomnia associated with mental disorders
Approximately 80% of patients with psychiatric disor-
ders describe sleep complaints. There is considerable 
heterogeneity, however, in the nature of the sleep dis-
turbance both between conditions and among patients 
with the same condition. Depression can be associated 
with sleep onset insomnia, sleep maintenance insomnia, 
or early morning wakefulness. However, hypersom-
nia occurs in some depressed patients, especially ado-
lescents and those with either bipolar or seasonal (fall/
winter) depression (Chap. 54). Indeed, sleep disturbance 
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
165
is an important vegetative sign of depression and may 
commence before any mood changes are perceived 
by the patient. Consistent polysomnographic ﬁndings 
in depression include decreased REM sleep latency, 
lengthened ﬁrst REM sleep episode, and shortened ﬁrst 
NREM sleep episode; however, these ﬁndings are not 
speciﬁc for depression, and the extent of these changes 
varies with age and symptomatology. Depressed patients 
also show decreased slow-wave sleep and reduced sleep 
continuity.
In mania and hypomania, sleep latency is increased 
and total sleep time can be reduced. Patients with anxi-
ety disorders tend not to show the changes in REM sleep 
and slow-wave sleep seen in endogenously depressed 
patients. Chronic alcoholics lack slow-wave sleep, have 
decreased amounts of REM sleep (as an acute response 
to alcohol), and have frequent arousals throughout the 
night. This is associated with impaired daytime alert-
ness. The sleep of chronic alcoholics may remain dis-
turbed for years after discontinuance of alcohol usage. 
Sleep architecture and physiology are disturbed in 
schizophrenia, with a decreased amount of slow-wave 
sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep) and a lack of augmenta-
tion of REM sleep following REM sleep deprivation; 
chronic schizophrenics often show day-night reversal, 
sleep fragmentation, and insomnia.
Insomnia associated with neurologic disorders
A variety of neurologic diseases result in sleep disrup-
tion through both indirect, nonspeciﬁc mechanisms 
(e.g., pain in cervical spondylosis or low back pain) or 
by impairment of central neural structures involved in 
the generation and control of sleep itself. For exam-
ple, dementia from any cause has long been associ-
ated with disturbances in the timing of the sleep-wake 
cycle, often characterized by nocturnal wandering and 
an exacerbation of symptomatology at night (so-called 
sundowning).
Epilepsy may rarely present as a sleep complaint 
(Chap. 26). Often the history is of abnormal behavior, 
at times with convulsive movements during sleep. The 
differential diagnosis includes REM sleep behavior dis-
order, sleep apnea syndrome, and periodic movements 
of sleep (see earlier in this chapter). Diagnosis requires 
nocturnal polysomnography with a full EEG montage. 
Other neurologic diseases associated with abnormal 
movements, such as Parkinson’s disease, hemiballismus, 
Huntington’s chorea, and Tourette’s syndrome (Chap. 30), 
are also associated with disrupted sleep, presumably 
through secondary mechanisms. However, the abnor-
mal movements themselves are greatly reduced during 
sleep. Headache syndromes (migraine or cluster headache) 
may show sleep-associated exacerbations (Chap. 8) by 
unknown mechanisms.
Fatal familial insomnia is a rare hereditary disorder 
caused by degeneration of anterior and dorsomedial 
nuclei of the thalamus. Insomnia is a prominent early 
symptom. Patients develop progressive autonomic dys-
function, followed by dysarthria, myoclonus, coma, and 
death. The pathogenesis is a mutation in the prion gene 
(Chap. 43).
Insomnia associated with other medical 
disorders
A number of medical conditions are associated with 
disruptions of sleep. The association is frequently non-
speciﬁc, e.g., sleep disruption due to chronic pain from 
rheumatologic disorders. Attention to this association is 
important in that sleep-associated symptoms are often 
the presenting or most bothersome complaint. Treat-
ment of the underlying medical problem is the most 
useful approach. Sleep disruption can also result from 
the use of medications such as glucocorticoids (see 
later).
One prominent association is between sleep disrup-
tion and asthma. In many asthmatics there is a promi-
nent daily variation in airway resistance that results in 
marked increases in asthmatic symptoms at night, espe-
cially during sleep. In addition, treatment of asthma 
with theophylline-based compounds, adrenergic ago-
nists, or glucocorticoids can independently disrupt 
sleep. When sleep disruption is a side effect of asthma 
treatment, inhaled glucocorticoids (e.g., beclometha-
sone) that do not disrupt sleep may provide a useful 
alternative.
Cardiac ischemia may also be associated with sleep dis-
ruption. The ischemia itself may result from increases in 
sympathetic tone as a result of sleep apnea. Patients may 
present with complaints of nightmares or vivid, dis-
turbing dreams, with or without awareness of the more 
classic symptoms of angina or of the sleep-disordered 
breathing. Treatment of the sleep apnea may substan-
tially improve the angina and the nocturnal sleep qual-
ity. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea can also occur as a con-
sequence of sleep-associated cardiac ischemia that causes 
pulmonary congestion exacerbated by the recumbent 
posture.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is also associated 
with sleep disruption, as are cystic ﬁbrosis, menopause, 
hyperthyroidism, gastroesophageal reﬂux, chronic renal failure, 
and liver failure.
MEDICATION-, DRUG-, OR ALCOHOL-
DEPENDENT INSOMNIA
Disturbed sleep can result from ingestion of a wide 
variety of agents. Caffeine is perhaps the most com-
mon pharmacologic cause of insomnia. It produces 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
166
increased latency to sleep onset, more frequent arousals 
during sleep, and a reduction in total sleep time for up 
to 8–14 h after ingestion. Even small amounts of coffee 
can signiﬁcantly disturb sleep in some patients; there-
fore, a 1- to 2-month trial without caffeine should be 
attempted in patients with these symptoms. Similarly, 
alcohol and nicotine can interfere with sleep, despite 
the fact that many patients use them to relax and pro-
mote sleep. Although alcohol can increase drowsiness 
and shorten sleep latency, even moderate amounts of 
alcohol increase awakenings in the second half of the 
night. In addition, alcohol ingestion prior to sleep is 
contraindicated in patients with sleep apnea because of 
the inhibitory effects of alcohol on upper airway mus-
cle tone. Acutely, amphetamines and cocaine suppress 
both REM sleep and total sleep time, which return to 
normal with chronic use. Withdrawal leads to an REM 
sleep rebound. A number of prescribed medications can 
produce insomnia. Antidepressants, sympathomimet-
ics, and glucocorticoids are common causes. In addi-
tion, severe rebound insomnia can result from the acute 
withdrawal of hypnotics, especially following the use of 
high doses of benzodiazepines with a short half-life. For 
this reason, hypnotic doses should be low to moderate, 
and prolonged drug tapering is encouraged.
RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME (RLS)
Patients with this sensorimotor disorder report an irre-
sistible urge to move the legs, or sometimes the upper 
extremities, that is often associated with creepy-crawl-
ing or aching dysesthesias deep within the affected 
limbs. For most patients with RLS, the dysesthe-
sias and restlessness are much worse in the evening or 
night compared to the daytime and frequently interfere 
with the ability to fall asleep. The symptoms appear 
with inactivity and are temporarily relieved by move-
ment. In contrast, paresthesias secondary to peripheral 
neuropathy persist with activity. The severity of this 
chronic disorder may wax and wane over time and 
can be exacerbated by sleep deprivation, caffeine, alco-
hol, serotonergic antidepressants, and pregnancy. The 
prevalence is 1–5% of young to middle-age adults and 
10–20% of those aged >60 years. There appear to be 
important differences in RLS prevalence among racial 
groups, with higher prevalence in those of North-
ern European ancestry. Roughly one-third of patients 
(particularly those with an early age of onset) will have 
multiple affected family members. At least three sepa-
rate chromosomal loci have been identiﬁed in familial 
RLS, though no gene has been identiﬁed to date. Iron 
deﬁciency and renal failure may cause RLS, which is 
then considered secondary RLS. The symptoms of RLS 
are exquisitely sensitive to dopaminergic drugs (e.g., 
pramipexole 0.25–0.5 mg q8PM or ropinirole 0.5–4 mg 
q8PM), which are the treatments of choice. Opioids, 
benzodiazepines, and gabapentin may also be of thera-
peutic value. Most patients with restless legs also expe-
rience periodic limb movements of sleep, although the 
reverse is not the case.
PERIODIC LIMB MOVEMENT DISORDER 
(PLMD)
Periodic limb movements of sleep (PLMS), previously 
known as nocturnal myoclonus, consists of stereotyped, 
0.5- to 5.0-s extensions of the great toe and dorsi-
ﬂexion of the foot, which recur every 20–40 s dur-
ing NREM sleep, in episodes lasting from minutes 
to hours, as documented by bilateral surface EMG 
recordings of the anterior tibialis on polysomnography. 
PLMS is the principal objective polysomnographic 
ﬁnding in 17% of patients with insomnia and 11% of 
those with excessive daytime somnolence (Fig. 20-3). 
It is often unclear whether it is an incidental ﬁnding 
or the cause of disturbed sleep. When deemed to be 
the latter, PLMS is called PLMD. PLMS occurs in a 
wide variety of sleep disorders (including narcolepsy, 
sleep apnea, REM sleep behavior disorder, and vari-
ous forms of insomnia) and may be associated with fre-
quent arousals and an increased number of sleep-stage 
transitions. The pathophysiology is not well under-
stood, though individuals with high spinal transec-
tions can exhibit periodic leg movements during sleep, 
suggesting the existence of a spinal generator. Treat-
ment options include dopaminergic medications or 
benzodiazepines.
EVALUATION OF DAYTIME SLEEPINESS
Daytime impairment due to sleep loss may be difﬁcult 
to quantify for several reasons. First, patients may be 
unaware of the extent of sleep deprivation. In obstruc-
tive sleep apnea, for example, the brief arousals from 
sleep associated with respiratory recovery after each 
apneic episode results in daytime sleepiness, despite 
the fact that the patient may be unaware of the sleep 
fragmentation. Second, subjective descriptions of wak-
ing impairment vary from patient to patient. Patients 
may describe themselves as “sleepy,” “fatigued,” or 
“tired” and may have a clear sense of the meaning of 
those terms, while others may use the same terms to 
describe a completely different condition. Third, sleepi-
ness, particularly when profound, may affect judgment 
in a manner analogous to ethanol, such that subjective 
awareness of the condition and the consequent cogni-
tive and motor impairment is reduced. Finally, patients 
may be reluctant to admit that sleepiness is a problem, 
both because they are generally unaware of what consti-
tutes normal alertness and because sleepiness is generally 
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
167
viewed pejoratively, ascribed more often to a deﬁcit 
in motivation than to an inadequately addressed physi-
ologic sleep need.
Speciﬁc questioning about the occurrence of sleep 
episodes during normal waking hours, both intentional 
and unintentional, is necessary to determine the extent 
of the adverse effects of sleepiness on a patient’s day-
time function. Speciﬁc areas to be addressed include the 
occurrence of inadvertent sleep episodes while driving or 
in other safety-related settings, sleepiness while at work 
or school (and the relationship of sleepiness to work 
and school performance), and the effect of sleepiness on 
social and family life. Standardized questionnaires, e.g., 
the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, are now commonly used 
in clinical and research settings to quantify daytime sleep 
tendency and screen for excessive sleepiness.
Driving is particularly hazardous for patients with 
increased sleepiness. Reaction time is equally impaired 
by 24 h of sleep loss as by a blood alcohol level of 
0.10 g/dL. More than half of Americans admit to having 
fallen asleep while driving. An estimated 250,000 motor 
vehicle crashes per year are due to drowsy drivers, caus-
ing about 20% of all serious crash injuries and deaths. 
Drowsy driving legislation, aimed at improving educa-
tion of all drivers about the hazards of driving drowsy 
and establishing sanctions comparable to those for drunk 
driving, has been enacted in New Jersey and is pending 
in several other states. Screening for sleep disorders, pro-
vision of an adequate number of safe highway rest areas, 
maintenance of unobstructed shoulder rumble strips, and 
strict enforcement and compliance monitoring of hours-
of-service policies are needed to reduce the risk of sleep-
related transportation crashes. Evidence for signiﬁcant 
daytime impairment in association either with the diag-
nosis of a primary sleep disorder, such as narcolepsy or 
sleep apnea, or with imposed or self-selected sleep-wake 
schedules (see “Shift-Work Disorder”) raises the issue 
of the physician’s responsibility to notify motor vehicle 
licensing authorities of the increased risk of sleepiness-
related motor vehicle crashes. As with epilepsy, legal 
requirements vary from state to state, and existing legal 
precedents do not provide a consistent interpretation of 
the balance between the physician’s responsibility and 
the patient’s right to privacy. At a minimum, physicians 
should inform patients who report a history of nodding 
off or falling asleep at the wheel or who have excessive 
daytime sleepiness about the increased risk of operat-
ing a motor vehicle, advise such patients not to drive a 
motor vehicle until the cause of the excessive sleepiness 
has been diagnosed and successful treatment has been 
implemented, and reevaluate the patient to determine 
when it is safe for the patient to resume driving. Each of 
those steps should be documented in the patient’s medi-
cal record.
EEG
30 s
94 93
90 89
95
98 97 96 95 93 91 92
97
97 95 94 92 90 92
97 98 98 98
95 93
90 88 86
90
98
A
30 s
B
Snoring sounds
Chin EMG
Heart Rate
RAT EMG
LAT EMG
Nasal/oral airflow
Respiratory effort
Arterial O2 saturation
FIGURE 20-3 
Polysomnographic recordings of (A) obstructive sleep 
apnea and (B) periodic limb movement of sleep. Note the 
snoring and reduction in air ﬂow in the presence of continued 
respiratory effort, associated with the subsequent oxygen 
desaturation (upper panel). Periodic limb movements occur 
with a relatively constant intermovement interval and are 
associated with changes in the EEG and heart rate accelera-
tion (lower panel). RAT, right anterior tibialis; LAT, left anterior 
tibialis. (From the Division of Sleep Medicine, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital.)
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
168
The distinction between fatigue and sleepiness can be 
useful in the differentiation of patients with complaints 
of fatigue or tiredness in the setting of disorders such as 
ﬁbromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome (Chap. 52), or 
endocrine deﬁciencies such as hypothyroidism or Addi-
son’s disease. While patients with these disorders can 
typically distinguish their daytime symptoms from the 
sleepiness that occurs with sleep deprivation, substan-
tial overlap can occur. This is particularly true when the 
primary disorder also results in chronic sleep disruption 
(e.g., sleep apnea in hypothyroidism) or in abnormal 
sleep (e.g., ﬁbromyalgia).
While clinical evaluation of the complaint of exces-
sive sleepiness is usually adequate, objective quantiﬁ-
cation is sometimes necessary. Assessment of daytime 
functioning as an index of the adequacy of sleep can 
be made with the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), 
which utilizes repeated measurement of sleep latency 
(time to onset of sleep) under standardized conditions 
during a day following quantiﬁed nocturnal sleep. The 
average latency across four to six tests (administered 
every 2 h across the waking day) provides an objec-
tive measure of daytime sleep tendency. Disorders of 
sleep that result in pathologic daytime somnolence can 
be reliably distinguished with the MSLT. In addition, 
the multiple measurements of sleep onset may identify 
direct transitions from wakefulness to REM sleep that 
are suggestive of speciﬁc pathologic conditions (e.g., 
narcolepsy).
NARCOLEPSY
Narcolepsy is both a disorder of the ability to sus-
tain wakefulness voluntarily and a disorder of REM 
sleep regulation (Table 20-2). The classic “nar-
colepsy tetrad” consists of excessive daytime som-
nolence plus three speciﬁc symptoms related to an 
intrusion of REM sleep characteristics (e.g., mus-
cle atonia, vivid dream imagery) into the transition 
between wakefulness and sleep: (1) sudden weakness or 
loss of muscle tone without loss of consciousness, often 
elicited by emotion (cataplexy); (2) hallucinations at 
sleep onset (hypnagogic hallucinations) or upon awak-
ening (hypnopompic hallucinations); and (3) muscle 
paralysis upon awakening (sleep paralysis). The sever-
ity of cataplexy varies, as patients may have two to 
three attacks per day or per decade. Some patients with 
objectively conﬁrmed narcolepsy (see later) may show 
no evidence of cataplexy. In those with cataplexy, the 
extent and duration of an attack may also vary, from 
a transient sagging of the jaw lasting a few seconds to 
rare cases of ﬂaccid paralysis of the entire voluntary 
musculature for up to 20–30 min. Symptoms of narco-
lepsy typically begin in the second decade, although the 
onset ranges from ages 5–50 years. Once established, 
the disease is chronic without remissions. Secondary 
forms of narcolepsy have been described (e.g., after 
head trauma).
Narcolepsy affects about 1 in 4000 people in the 
United States and appears to have a genetic basis. 
Recently, several convergent lines of evidence sug-
gest that the hypothalamic neuropeptide hypocretin 
(orexin) is involved in the pathogenesis of narcolepsy: 
(1) a mutation in the hypocretin receptor 2 gene has 
been associated with canine narcolepsy; (2) hypocretin 
“knockout” mice that are genetically unable to produce 
this neuropeptide exhibit behavioral and electrophysi-
ologic features resembling human narcolepsy; and (3) 
cerebrospinal ﬂuid levels of hypocretin are reduced in 
most patients who have narcolepsy with cataplexy. The 
inheritance pattern of narcolepsy in humans is more 
complex than in the canine model. However, almost 
all narcoleptics with cataplexy are positive for HLA 
DQB1*0602, suggesting that an autoimmune process 
may be responsible.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic criteria continue to be a matter of 
debate. Certainly, objective veriﬁcation of exces-
sive daytime somnolence, typically with MSLT mean 
sleep latencies <8 min, is an essential if nonspeciﬁc 
diagnostic feature. Other conditions that cause exces-
sive sleepiness, such as sleep apnea or chronic sleep 
deprivation, must be rigorously excluded. The other 
objective diagnostic feature of narcolepsy is the pres-
ence of REM sleep in at least two of the naps during 
the MSLT. Abnormal regulation of REM sleep is also 
manifested by the appearance of REM sleep imme-
diately or within minutes after sleep onset in 50% of 
narcoleptic patients, a rarity in unaffected individuals 
maintaining a conventional sleep-wake schedule. The 
REM-related symptoms of the classic narcolepsy tetrad 
are variably present. There is increasing evidence that 
TABLE 20-2
PREVALENCE OF SYMPTOMS IN NARCOLEPSY
SYMPTOM
PREVALENCE, %
Excessive daytime somnolence
100
Disturbed sleep
 87
Cataplexy
 76
Hypnagogic hallucinations
 68
Sleep paralysis
 64
Memory problems
 50
Source: Modiﬁed from TA Roth, L Merlotti, in SA Burton et al (eds): 
Narcolepsy 3rd International Symposium: Selected Symposium Pro-
ceedings. Chicago, Matrix Communications, 1989.
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
169
narcoleptics with cataplexy (one-half to two-thirds of 
patients) may represent a more homogeneous group 
than those without this symptom. However, a history 
of cataplexy can be difﬁcult to establish reliably. Hyp-
nagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations and sleep 
paralysis are often found in nonnarcoleptic individuals 
and may be present in only one-half of narcoleptics. 
Nocturnal sleep disruption is commonly observed in 
narcolepsy but is also a nonspeciﬁc symptom. Simi-
larly, a history of “automatic behavior” during wake-
fulness (a trancelike state during which simple motor 
behaviors persist) is not speciﬁc for narcolepsy and 
serves principally to corroborate the presence of day-
time somnolence.
TREATMENT 
Narcolepsy
The treatment of narcolepsy is symptomatic. Somno-
lence is treated with wake-promoting therapeutics. 
Modafinil is now the drug of choice, principally because 
it is associated with fewer side effects than older stimu-
lants and has a long half-life; 200–400 mg is given as a 
single daily dose. Older drugs such as methylphenidate 
(10 mg bid to 20 mg qid) or dextroamphetamine (10 mg 
bid) are still used as alternatives, particularly in refrac-
tory patients.
These latter medications are now available in slow-
release formulations, extending their duration of action 
and allowing once-daily dosing.
Treatment of the REM-related phenomena of cata-
plexy, hypnagogic hallucinations, and sleep paralysis 
requires the potent REM sleep suppression produced 
by antidepressant medications. The tricyclic antide-
pressants (e.g., protriptyline [10–40 mg/d] and clomip-
ramine [25–50 mg/d]) and the selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g., fluoxetine [10–20 mg/d]) are 
commonly used for this purpose. Efficacy of the anti-
depressants is limited largely by anticholinergic side 
effects (tricyclics) and by sleep disturbance and sexual 
dysfunction (SSRIs). Alternately, gamma hydroxybutyr-
ate (GHB), given at bedtime, and 4 h later, is effective in 
reducing daytime cataplectic episodes. Adequate noc-
turnal sleep time and planned daytime naps (when pos-
sible) are important preventive measures.
SLEEP APNEA SYNDROMES
Respiratory dysfunction during sleep is a common, 
serious cause of excessive daytime somnolence as well 
as of disturbed nocturnal sleep. An estimated 2–5 
million individuals in the United States have a reduc-
tion or cessation of breathing for 10–150 s from 30 to 
several hundred times every night during sleep. These 
episodes may be due to either an occlusion of the air-
way (obstructive sleep apnea), absence of respiratory effort 
(central sleep apnea), or a combination of these factors 
(mixed sleep apnea) (Fig.  20-3). Failure to recognize and 
treat these conditions appropriately may lead to impair-
ment of daytime alertness, increased risk of sleep-
related motor vehicle accidents, hypertension and other 
serious cardiovascular complications, and increased 
mortality. Sleep apnea is particularly prevalent in over-
weight men and in the elderly, yet it is estimated to 
remain undiagnosed in 80–90% of affected individu-
als. This is unfortunate since effective treatments are 
available. 
PARASOMNIAS
The term parasomnia refers to abnormal behaviors or 
experiences that arise from or occur during sleep. A 
continuum of parasomnias arise from NREM sleep, 
from brief confusional arousals to sleepwalking and 
night terrors. The presenting complaint is usually 
related to the behavior itself, but the parasomnias can 
disturb sleep continuity or lead to mild impairments 
in daytime alertness. Two main parasomnias occur in 
REM sleep: REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), 
which will be described later in this chapter, and 
nightmare disorder.
Sleepwalking (somnambulism)
Patients affected by this disorder carry out automatic 
motor activities that range from simple to complex. 
Individuals may walk, urinate inappropriately, eat, 
or exit from the house while remaining only partially 
aware. Full arousal may be difﬁcult, and individuals may 
rarely respond to attempted awakening with agitation 
or even violence. Sleepwalking arises from slow-wave 
sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep), usually in the ﬁrst 2 h of 
the night, and is most common in children and adoles-
cents, when these sleep stages are most robust. Episodes 
are usually isolated but may be recurrent in 1–6% of 
patients. The cause is unknown, though it has a familial 
basis in roughly one-third of cases.
Sleep terrors
This disorder, also called pavor nocturnus, occurs pri-
marily in young children during the ﬁrst several hours 
after sleep onset, in slow-wave sleep (NREM stage N3 
sleep). The child suddenly screams, exhibiting auto-
nomic arousal with sweating, tachycardia, and hyper-
ventilation. The individual may be difﬁcult to arouse 
and rarely recalls the episode on awakening in the 
morning. Parents are usually reassured to learn that the 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
170
condition is self-limited and benign and that no speciﬁc 
therapy is indicated. Both sleep terrors and sleepwalking 
represent abnormalities of arousal. In contrast, nightmares 
occur during REM sleep and cause full arousal, with 
intact memory for the unpleasant episode.
Sleep bruxism
Bruxism is an involuntary, forceful grinding of teeth 
during sleep that affects 10–20% of the population. The 
patient is usually unaware of the problem. The typical 
age of onset is 17–20 years, and spontaneous remission 
usually occurs by age 40. Sex distribution appears to be 
equal. In many cases, the diagnosis is made during den-
tal examination, damage is minor, and no treatment is 
indicated. In more severe cases, treatment with a rub-
ber tooth guard is necessary to prevent disﬁguring tooth 
injury. Stress management or, in some cases, biofeed-
back can be useful when bruxism is a manifestation of 
psychological stress. There are anecdotal reports of ben-
eﬁt using benzodiazepines.
Sleep enuresis
Bedwetting, like sleepwalking and night terrors, is 
another parasomnia that occurs during sleep in the 
young. Before age 5 or 6 years, nocturnal enure-
sis should probably be considered a normal feature of 
development. The condition usually improves sponta-
neously by puberty, has a prevalence in late adolescence 
of 1–3%, and is rare in adulthood. In older patients with 
enuresis, a distinction must be made between primary 
and secondary enuresis, the latter being deﬁned as bed-
wetting in patients who have previously been fully con-
tinent for 6–12 months. Treatment of primary enuresis 
is reserved for patients of appropriate age (>5 or 6 years) 
and consists of bladder training exercises and behav-
ioral therapy. Urologic abnormalities are more common 
in primary enuresis and must be assessed by urologic 
examination. Important causes of secondary enuresis 
include emotional disturbances, urinary tract infections 
or malformations, cauda equina lesions, epilepsy, sleep 
apnea, and certain medications. Symptomatic pharma-
cotherapy is usually accomplished with desmopressin 
(0.2 mg qhs), oxybutynin chloride (5–10 mg qhs), or 
imipramine (10–50 mg qhs).
Miscellaneous parasomnias
Other clinical entities may be characterized as a para-
somnia or a sleep-related movement disorder in that 
they occur selectively during sleep and are associated 
with some degree of sleep disruption. Examples include 
jactatio capitis nocturna (nocturnal headbanging, rhythmic 
movement disorder), confusional arousals, sleep-related 
eating disorder, and nocturnal leg cramps.
REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD)
RBD is a rare condition that is distinct from other para-
somnias in that it occurs during REM sleep. It primarily 
afﬂicts men of middle age or older, many of whom have 
an existing, or developing, neurologic disease. Approxi-
mately one-half of patients with RBD will develop 
Parkinson’s disease (Chap. 30) within 10–20 years. Pre-
senting symptoms consist of agitated or violent behav-
ior during sleep, as reported by a bed partner. In con-
trast to typical somnambulism, injury to the patient or 
bed partner is not uncommon, and, upon awakening, 
the patient reports vivid, often unpleasant, dream imag-
ery. The principal differential diagnosis is nocturnal sei-
zures, which can be excluded with polysomnography. 
In RBD, seizure activity is absent on the EEG, and dis-
inhibition of the usual motor atonia is observed in the 
EMG during REM sleep, at times associated with com-
plex motor behaviors. The pathogenesis is unclear, but 
damage to brainstem areas mediating descending motor 
inhibition during REM sleep may be responsible. In 
support of this hypothesis are the remarkable similarities 
between RBD and the sleep of animals with bilateral 
lesions of the pontine tegmentum in areas controlling 
REM sleep motor inhibition. Treatment with clonaz-
epam (0.5–1.0 mg qhs) provides sustained improvement 
in almost all reported cases.
CIRCADIAN RHYTHM SLEEP 
DISORDERS
A subset of patients presenting with either insomnia or 
hypersomnia may have a disorder of sleep timing rather 
than sleep generation. Disorders of sleep timing can be 
either organic (i.e., due to an abnormality of circadian 
pacemaker[s] or its input from entraining stimuli) or 
environmental (i.e., due to a disruption of exposure to 
entraining stimuli from the environment). Regardless 
of etiology, the symptoms reﬂect the inﬂuence of the 
underlying circadian pacemaker on sleep-wake func-
tion. Thus, effective therapeutic approaches should aim 
to entrain the oscillator at an appropriate phase.
Jet lag disorder
More than 60 million persons experience transmeridian 
air travel annually, which is often associated with exces-
sive daytime sleepiness, sleep onset insomnia, and fre-
quent arousals from sleep, particularly in the latter half of 
the night. Gastrointestinal discomfort is common. The 
syndrome is transient, typically lasting 2–14 d depend-
ing on the number of time zones crossed, the direction 
of travel, and the traveler’s age and phase-shifting capac-
ity. Travelers who spend more time outdoors report-
edly adapt more quickly than those who remain in hotel 
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
171
rooms, presumably due to brighter (outdoor) light expo-
sure. Avoidance of antecedent sleep loss and obtain-
ing nap sleep on the afternoon prior to overnight travel 
greatly reduce the difﬁculty of extended wakefulness. 
Laboratory studies suggest that sub milligram doses of the 
pineal hormone melatonin can enhance sleep efﬁciency, 
but only if taken when endogenous melatonin concen-
trations are low (i.e., during biologic daytime), and that 
melatonin may induce phase shifts in human rhythms. A 
large-scale clinical trial evaluating the safety and efﬁcacy 
of melatonin as a treatment for jet lag disorder and other 
circadian sleep disorders is needed.
In addition to jet lag associated with travel across 
time zones, many patients report a behavioral pattern 
that has been termed social jet lag, in which their bed-
times and wake times on weekends or days off occur 
4–8 h later than they do during the week. This recur-
rent displacement of the timing of the sleep-wake cycle 
is common in adolescents and young adults and is asso-
ciated with sleep onset insomnia, poorer academic per-
formance, increased risk of depressive symptoms, and 
excessive daytime sleepiness.
Shift-work disorder
More than 7 million workers in the United States regu-
larly work at night, either on a permanent or rotating 
schedule. Many more begin work between 4 A.M. and 
7 A.M., requiring them to commute and then work dur-
ing the time of day that they would otherwise be asleep. 
In addition, each week millions more elect to remain 
awake at night to meet deadlines, drive long distances, 
or participate in recreational activities. This results 
in both sleep loss and misalignment of the circadian 
rhythm with respect to the sleep-wake cycle.
Studies of regular night-shift workers indicate that 
the circadian timing system usually fails to adapt suc-
cessfully to such inverted schedules. This leads to a mis-
alignment between the desired work-rest schedule and 
the output of the pacemaker and in disturbed daytime 
sleep in most individuals. Sleep deprivation, increased 
length of time awake prior to work, and misalignment 
of circadian phase produce decreased alertness and per-
formance, increased reaction time, and increased risk of 
performance lapses, thereby resulting in greater safety 
hazards among night workers and other sleep-deprived 
individuals. Sleep disturbance nearly doubles the risk 
of a fatal work accident. Additional problems include 
higher rates of breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer 
and of cardiac, gastrointestinal, and reproductive dis-
orders in long-term night-shift workers. Recently, the 
World Health Organization has added night-shift work 
to its list of probable carcinogens.
Sleep onset is associated with marked attenuation 
in perception of both auditory and visual stimuli and 
lapses of consciousness. The sleepy individual may thus 
attempt to perform routine and familiar motor tasks 
during the transition state between wakefulness and 
sleep (stage N1 sleep) in the absence of adequate pro-
cessing of sensory input from the environment. Motor 
vehicle operators are especially vulnerable to sleep-
related accidents since the sleep-deprived driver or 
operator often fails to heed the warning signs of fatigue. 
Such attempts to override the powerful biologic drive 
for sleep by the sheer force of will can yield a cata-
strophic outcome when sleep processes intrude involun-
tarily upon the waking brain. Such sleep-related atten-
tional failures typically last only seconds but are known 
on occasion to persist for longer durations. These fre-
quent brief intrusions of stage N1 sleep into behavioral 
wakefulness are a major component of the impaired 
psychomotor performance seen with sleepiness. There is 
a signiﬁcant increase in the risk of sleep-related, fatal-
to-the-driver highway crashes in the early morning and 
late afternoon hours, coincident with bimodal peaks in 
the daily rhythm of sleep tendency.
Resident physicians constitute another group of 
workers at risk for accidents and other adverse conse-
quences of lack of sleep and misalignment of the circa-
dian rhythm. Recurrent scheduling of resident physi-
cians to work shifts of 24 h or more consecutive hours 
impairs psychomotor performance to a degree that is 
comparable to alcohol intoxication, doubles the risk of 
attentional failures among intensive care unit interns 
working at night, and signiﬁcantly increases the risk of 
serious medical errors in intensive care units, includ-
ing a ﬁvefold increase in the risk of serious diagnostic 
mistakes. Some 20% of hospital interns report making 
a fatigue-related mistake that injured a patient, and 5% 
admit making a fatigue-related mistake that results in 
the death of a patient. Moreover, working for >24 h 
consecutively increases the risk of percutaneous inju-
ries and more than doubles the risk of motor vehicle 
crashes on the commute home. For these reasons, in 
2008 the Institute of Medicine concluded that the 
practice of scheduling resident physicians to work for 
more than 16 consecutive hours without sleep is haz-
ardous for both resident physicians and their patients.
From 5 to 10% of individuals scheduled to work at 
night or in the early morning hours have much greater 
than average difﬁculties remaining awake during night 
work and sleeping during the day; these individuals are 
diagnosed with chronic and severe shift-work disor-
der (SWD). Patients with this disorder have a level of 
excessive sleepiness during night work and insomnia 
during day sleep that the physician judges to be clini-
cally signiﬁcant; the condition is associated with an 
increased risk of sleep-related accidents and with some 
of the illnesses associated with night-shift work. Patients 
with chronic and severe SWD are profoundly sleepy at 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
172
night. In fact, their sleep latencies during night work 
average just 2 min, comparable to mean sleep latency 
durations of patients with narcolepsy or severe daytime 
sleep apnea.
TREATMENT 
Shift-Work Disorder
Caffeine is frequently used to promote wakefulness. 
However, it cannot forestall sleep indefinitely, and it 
does not shield users from sleep-related performance 
lapses. Postural changes, exercise, and strategic place-
ment of nap opportunities can sometimes temporarily 
reduce the risk of fatigue-related performance lapses. 
Properly timed exposure to bright light can facilitate 
rapid adaptation to night-shift work.
While many techniques (e.g., light treatment) used 
to facilitate adaptation to night-shift work may help 
patients with this disorder, modafinil is the only thera-
peutic intervention that has ever been evaluated as a 
treatment for this specific patient population. Modafinil 
(200 mg, taken 30–60 min before the start of each night 
shift) is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion as a treatment for the excessive sleepiness during 
night work in patients with SWD. Although treatment 
with modafinil significantly increases sleep latency 
and reduces the risk of lapses of attention during night 
work, SWD patients remain excessively sleepy at night, 
even while being treated with modafinil.
Safety programs should promote education about 
sleep and increase awareness of the hazards associ-
ated with night work. The goal should be to minimize 
both sleep deprivation and circadian disruption. Work 
schedules should be designed to minimize (1) exposure 
to night work, (2) the frequency of shift rotation so that 
shifts do not rotate more than once every 2–3 weeks, 
(3) the number of consecutive night shifts, and (4) the 
duration of night shifts. Shift durations of >16 h should 
be universally recognized as increasing the risk of sleep-
related errors and performance lapses to a level that is 
unacceptable in nonemergency circumstances. At least 
11 h off duty should be provided between work shifts, 
with at least 1 day off every week and 2 consecutive 
days off every month. Additional off duty time should 
be allocated after night work, since sleep efficiency is 
much lower during daytime hours.
Delayed sleep phase disorder
Delayed sleep phase disorder is characterized by (1) 
reported sleep onset and wake times intractably later 
than desired, (2) actual sleep times at nearly the same 
clock hours daily, and (3) essentially normal all-night 
polysomnography except for delayed sleep onset. 
Patients exhibit an abnormally delayed endogenous 
circadian phase, with the temperature minimum dur-
ing the constant routine occurring later than normal. 
This delayed phase could be due to (1) an abnormally 
long, genetically determined intrinsic period of the 
endogenous circadian pacemaker; (2) an abnormally 
reduced phase-advancing capacity of the pacemaker; 
(3) a slower rate of buildup of homeostatic sleep drive 
during wakefulness; or (4) an irregular prior sleep-wake 
schedule, characterized by frequent nights when the 
patient chooses to remain awake well past midnight (for 
social, school, or work reasons). In most cases, it is dif-
ﬁcult to distinguish among these factors, since patients 
with an abnormally long intrinsic period are more likely 
to “choose” such late-night activities because they are 
unable to sleep at that time. Patients tend to be young 
adults. This self-perpetuating condition can persist for 
years and does not usually respond to attempts to rees-
tablish normal bedtime hours. Treatment methods 
involving bright-light phototherapy during the morning 
hours or melatonin administration in the evening hours 
show promise in these patients, although the relapse rate 
is high.
Advanced sleep phase disorder
Advanced sleep phase disorder (ASPD) is the converse 
of the delayed sleep phase syndrome. Most commonly, 
this syndrome occurs in older people, 15% of whom 
report that they cannot sleep past 5 A.M., with twice 
that number complaining that they wake up too early at 
least several times per week. Patients with ASPD expe-
rience excessive daytime sleepiness during the evening 
hours, when they have great difﬁculty remaining awake, 
even in social settings. Typically, patients awaken from 
3 to 5 A.M. each day, often several hours before their 
desired wake times. In addition to age-related ASPD, 
an early-onset familial variant of this condition has also 
been reported. In one such family, autosomal dominant 
ASPD was due to a missense mutation in a circadian 
clock component (PER2, as shown in Fig. 20-2) that 
altered the circadian period. Patients with ASPD may 
beneﬁt from bright-light phototherapy during the eve-
ning hours, designed to reset the circadian pacemaker to 
a later hour.
Non-24-h sleep-wake disorder
This condition can occur when the synchronizing input 
(i.e., the light-dark cycle) from the environment to the 
circadian pacemaker is compromised (as in many blind 
people with no light perception) or when the maximal 
phase-advancing capacity of the circadian pacemaker is 
not adequate to accommodate the difference between 
the 24-h geophysical day and the intrinsic period of 
the pacemaker in the patient. Alternatively, patients’ 
self-selected exposure to artiﬁcial light may drive the 
 
CHAPTER 20
Sleep Disorders
173
circadian pacemaker to a >24-h schedule. Affected 
patients are not able to maintain a stable phase rela-
tionship between the output of the pacemaker and the 
24-h day. Such patients typically present with an incre-
mental pattern of successive delays in sleep propensity, 
progressing in and out of phase with local time. When 
the patient’s endogenous circadian rhythms are out of 
phase with the local environment, insomnia coexists 
with excessive daytime sleepiness. Conversely, when 
the endogenous circadian rhythms are in phase with 
the local environment, symptoms remit. The inter-
vals between symptomatic periods may last several 
weeks to several months. Blind individuals unable to 
perceive light are particularly susceptible to this disor-
der, although it can occur in sighted patients. Nightly 
low-dose (0.5 mg) melatonin administration has been 
reported to improve sleep and, in some cases, to induce 
synchronization of the circadian pacemaker.
MEDICAL IMPLICATIONS OF CIRCADIAN 
RHYTHMICITY
Prominent circadian variations have been reported in 
the incidence of acute myocardial infarction, sudden 
cardiac death, and stroke, the leading causes of death 
in the United States. Platelet aggregability is increased 
in the early morning hours, coincident with the peak 
incidence of these cardiovascular events. Misalign-
ment of circadian phase, such as occurs during night-
shift work, induces insulin resistance and higher glucose 
levels in response to a standard meal. Blood pressure of 
night workers with sleep apnea is higher than that of 
day workers. A better understanding of the possible role 
of circadian rhythmicity in the acute destabilization of a 
chronic condition such as atherosclerotic disease could 
improve the understanding of its pathophysiology.
Diagnostic and therapeutic procedures may also be 
affected by the time of day at which data are collected. 
Examples include blood pressure, body temperature, 
the dexamethasone suppression test, and plasma corti-
sol levels. The timing of chemotherapy administration 
has been reported to have an effect on the outcome of 
treatment. In addition, both the toxicity and effective-
ness of drugs can vary during the day. For example, 
more than a ﬁvefold difference has been observed in 
mortality rates following administration of toxic agents 
to experimental animals at different times of day. Anes-
thetic agents are particularly sensitive to time-of-day 
effects. Finally, the physician must be increasingly aware 
of the public health risks associated with the ever-
increasing demands made by the duty-rest-recreation 
schedules in our round-the-clock society.
 Jonathan C. Horton 
174
 THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM 
 The visual system provides a supremely efﬁ cient means 
for the rapid assimilation of information from the 
environment to aid in the guidance of behavior. The 
act of seeing begins with the capture of images focused 
by the cornea and lens on a light-sensitive membrane 
in the back of the eye called the  retina . The retina is 
actually part of the brain, banished to the periphery to 
serve as a transducer for the conversion of patterns of 
light energy into neuronal signals. Light is absorbed 
by photopigment in two types of receptors: rods and 
cones. In the human retina there are 100 million rods 
and 5 million cones. The rods operate in dim (scoto-
pic) illumination. The cones function under daylight 
(photopic) conditions. The cone system is specialized 
for color perception and high spatial resolution. The 
majority of cones are within the macula, the portion 
of the retina that serves the central 10° of vision. In 
the middle of the macula a small pit termed the  fovea , 
packed exclusively with cones, provides the best visual 
acuity. 
 Photoreceptors hyperpolarize in response to light, 
activating bipolar, amacrine, and horizontal cells in the 
inner nuclear layer. After processing of photorecep-
tor responses by this complex retinal circuit, the ﬂ ow 
of sensory information ultimately converges on a ﬁ nal 
common pathway: the ganglion cells. These cells trans-
late the visual image impinging on the retina into a 
continuously varying barrage of action potentials that 
propagates along the primary optic pathway to visual 
centers within the brain. There are a million ganglion 
cells in each retina and hence a million ﬁ bers in each 
optic nerve. 
 Ganglion cell axons sweep along the inner surface 
of the retina in the nerve ﬁ ber layer, exit the eye at 
the optic disc, and travel through the optic nerve, 
optic chiasm, and optic tract to reach targets in the 
brain. The majority of ﬁ bers synapse on cells in the 
lateral geniculate body, a thalamic relay station. Cells 
in the lateral geniculate body project in turn to the 
primary visual cortex. This massive afferent retino-
geniculocortical sensory pathway provides the neural 
substrate for visual perception. Although the lat-
eral geniculate body is the main target of the retina, 
separate classes of ganglion cells project to other sub-
cortical visual nuclei involved in different functions. 
Ganglion cells that mediate pupillary constriction and 
circadian rhythms are light sensitive owing to a novel 
visual pigment, melanopsin. Pupil responses are medi-
ated by input to the pretectal olivary nuclei in the 
midbrain. The pretectal nuclei send their output to 
the Edinger-Westphal nuclei, which in turn provide 
parasympathetic innervation to the iris sphincter via an 
interneuron in the ciliary ganglion. Circadian rhythms 
are timed by a retinal projection to the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus. Visual orientation and eye movements are 
served by retinal input to the superior colliculus. Gaze 
stabilization and optokinetic reﬂ exes are governed by a 
group of small retinal targets known collectively as the 
brainstem accessory optic system . 
 The eyes must be rotated constantly within their 
orbits to place and maintain targets of visual interest on 
the fovea. This activity, called  foveation , or looking, is 
governed by an elaborate efferent motor system. Each 
eye is moved by six extraocular muscles that are sup-
plied by cranial nerves from the oculomotor (III), 
trochlear (IV), and abducens (VI) nuclei. Activity in 
these ocular motor nuclei is coordinated by pontine and 
midbrain mechanisms for smooth pursuit, saccades, and 
gaze stabilization during head and body movements. 
Large regions of the frontal and parietooccipital cortex 
control these brainstem eye movement centers by pro-
viding descending supranuclear input. 
 DISORDERS OF VISION 
 CHAPTER 21 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
175
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF VISUAL 
FUNCTION
REFRACTIVE STATE
In approaching a patient with reduced vision, the ﬁrst 
step is to decide whether refractive error is responsible. 
In emmetropia, parallel rays from inﬁnity are focused per-
fectly on the retina. Sadly, this condition is enjoyed by 
only a minority of the population. In myopia, the globe 
is too long, and light rays come to a focal point in front 
of the retina. Near objects can be seen clearly, but dis-
tant objects require a diverging lens in front of the eye. 
In hyperopia, the globe is too short, and hence a con-
verging lens is used to supplement the refractive power 
of the eye. In astigmatism, the corneal surface is not per-
fectly spherical, necessitating a cylindrical corrective 
lens. In recent years it has become possible to correct 
refractive error with the excimer laser by performing 
LASIK (laser in situ keratomileusis) to alter the curva-
ture of the cornea.
With the onset of middle age, presbyopia develops as 
the lens within the eye becomes unable to increase its 
refractive power to accommodate on near objects. To 
compensate for presbyopia, an emmetropic patient must 
use reading glasses. A patient already wearing glasses 
for distance correction usually switches to bifocals. The 
only exception is a myopic patient, who may achieve 
clear vision at near simply by removing glasses contain-
ing the distance prescription.
Refractive errors usually develop slowly and remain 
stable after adolescence, except in unusual circum-
stances. For example, the acute onset of diabetes mel-
litus can produce sudden myopia because of lens edema 
induced by hyperglycemia. Testing vision through a 
pinhole aperture is a useful way to screen quickly for 
refractive error. If visual acuity is better through a pin-
hole than it is with the unaided eye, the patient needs 
refraction to obtain best corrected visual acuity.
VISUAL ACUITY
The Snellen chart is used to test acuity at a distance of 
6 m (20 ft). For convenience, a scale version of the Snel-
len chart called the Rosenbaum card is held at 36 cm 
(14 in.) from the patient (Fig. 21-1). All subjects should 
be able to read the 6/6 m (20/20 ft) line with each eye 
using their refractive correction, if any. Patients who need 
reading glasses because of presbyopia must wear them for 
accurate testing with the Rosenbaum card. If 6/6 (20/20) 
acuity is not present in each eye, the deﬁciency in vision 
must be explained. If it is worse than 6/240 (20/800), acu-
ity should be recorded in terms of counting ﬁngers, hand 
motions, light perception, or no light perception. Legal 
blindness is deﬁned by the Internal Revenue Service as a 
FIGURE 21-1 
The Rosenbaum card is a miniature, scale version of the 
Snellen chart for testing visual acuity at near. When the 
visual acuity is recorded, the Snellen distance equivalent 
should bear a notation indicating that vision was tested at 
near, not at 6 m (20 ft), or else the Jaeger number system 
should be used to report the acuity.
best corrected acuity of 6/60 (20/200) or less in the bet-
ter eye or a binocular visual ﬁeld subtending 20° or less. 
For driving the laws vary by state, but most states require 
a corrected acuity of 6/12 (20/40) in at least one eye for 
unrestricted privileges. Patients with a homonymous hemi-
anopia should not drive.
PUPILS
The pupils should be tested individually in dim light 
with the patient ﬁxating on a distant target. If the pupils 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
176
respond briskly to light, there is no need to check the 
near response, because isolated loss of constriction 
(miosis) to accommodation does not occur. For this 
reason, the ubiquitous abbreviation PERRLA (pupils 
equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation) 
implies a wasted effort with the last step. However, it is 
important to test the near response if the light response 
is poor or absent. Light-near dissociation occurs with 
neurosyphilis (Argyll Robertson pupil), with lesions of 
the dorsal midbrain (obstructive hydrocephalus, pineal 
region tumors), and after aberrant regeneration (oculo-
motor nerve palsy, Adie’s tonic pupil).
An eye with no light perception has no pupillary 
response to direct light stimulation. If the retina or 
optic nerve is only partially injured, the direct pupillary 
response will be weaker than the consensual pupillary 
response evoked by shining a light into the other eye. 
This relative afferent pupillary defect (Marcus Gunn pupil) 
can be elicited with the swinging ﬂashlight test (Fig. 
21-2). It is an extremely useful sign in retrobulbar optic 
neuritis and other optic nerve diseases, in which it may 
be the sole objective evidence for disease.
Subtle inequality in pupil size, up to 0.5 mm, is a 
fairly common ﬁnding in normal persons. The diagnosis 
of essential or physiologic anisocoria is secure as long as 
the relative pupil asymmetry remains constant as ambi-
ent lighting varies. Anisocoria that increases in dim light 
indicates a sympathetic paresis of the iris dilator muscle. 
The triad of miosis with ipsilateral ptosis and anhidro-
sis constitutes Horner’s syndrome, although anhidrosis is 
an inconstant feature. Brainstem stroke, carotid dissec-
tion, and neoplasm impinging on the sympathetic chain 
occasionally are identiﬁed as the cause of Horner’s syn-
drome, but most cases are idiopathic.
Anisocoria that increases in bright light suggests a 
parasympathetic palsy. The ﬁrst concern is an oculo-
motor nerve paresis. This possibility is excluded if the 
eye movements are full and the patient has no ptosis or 
diplopia. Acute pupillary dilation (mydriasis) can result 
from damage to the ciliary ganglion in the orbit. Com-
mon mechanisms are infection (herpes zoster, inﬂu-
enza), trauma (blunt, penetrating, surgical), and isch-
emia (diabetes, temporal arteritis). After denervation 
of the iris sphincter the pupil does not respond well to 
light, but the response to near is often relatively intact. 
When the near stimulus is removed, the pupil redilates 
very slowly compared with the normal pupil, hence the 
term tonic pupil. In Adie’s syndrome, a tonic pupil occurs 
in conjunction with weak or absent tendon reﬂexes 
in the lower extremities. This benign disorder, which 
occurs predominantly in healthy young women, is 
assumed to represent a mild dysautonomia. Tonic pupils 
are also associated with Shy-Drager syndrome, seg-
mental hypohidrosis, diabetes, and amyloidosis. Occa-
sionally, a tonic pupil is discovered incidentally in an 
otherwise completely normal, asymptomatic individual. 
The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by placing a drop of dilute 
(0.125%) pilocarpine into each eye. Denervation hyper-
sensitivity produces pupillary constriction in a tonic 
pupil, whereas the normal pupil shows no response. 
Pharmacologic dilatation from accidental or deliber-
ate instillation of anticholinergic agents (atropine, sco-
polamine drops) into the eye also can produce pupillary 
mydriasis. In this situation, normal strength (1%) pilo-
carpine causes no constriction.
FIGURE 21-2 
Demonstration of a relative afferent pupil defect (Marcus 
Gunn pupil) in the left eye, done with the patient ﬁxating on 
a distant target. A. With dim background lighting, the pupils 
are equal and relatively large. B. Shining a ﬂashlight into the 
right eye evokes equal, strong constriction of both pupils. C. 
Swinging the ﬂashlight over to the damaged left eye causes 
dilation of both pupils, although they remain smaller than in 
A. Swinging the ﬂashlight back over to the healthy right eye 
would result in symmetric constriction back to the appear-
ance shown in B. Note that the pupils always remain equal; 
the damage to the left retina/optic nerve is revealed by 
weaker bilateral pupil constriction to a ﬂashlight in the left 
eye compared with the right eye. (From P Levatin: Arch Oph-
thalmol 62:768, 1959. vghghg © 1959 American Medical 
Association. All rights reserved.)
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
177
Both pupils are affected equally by systemic medi-
cations. They are small with narcotic use (morphine, 
heroin) and large with anticholinergics (scopolamine). 
Parasympathetic agents (pilocarpine, demecarium bro-
mide) used to treat glaucoma produce miosis. In any 
patient with an unexplained pupillary abnormality, 
a slit-lamp examination is helpful to exclude surgical 
trauma to the iris, an occult foreign body, perforating 
injury, intraocular inﬂammation, adhesions (synechia), 
angle-closure glaucoma, and iris sphincter rupture from 
blunt trauma.
EYE MOVEMENTS AND ALIGNMENT
Eye movements are tested by asking the patient, with 
both eyes open, to pursue a small target such as a penlight 
into the cardinal ﬁelds of gaze. Normal ocular versions 
are smooth, symmetric, full, and maintained in all direc-
tions without nystagmus. Saccades, or quick reﬁxation 
eye movements, are assessed by having the patient look 
back and forth between two stationary targets. The eyes 
should move rapidly and accurately in a single jump to 
their target. Ocular alignment can be judged by holding 
a penlight directly in front of the patient at about 1 m. 
If the eyes are straight, the corneal light reﬂex will be 
centered in the middle of each pupil. To test eye align-
ment more precisely, the cover test is useful. The patient 
is instructed to gaze upon a small ﬁxation target in the 
distance. One eye is covered suddenly while the second 
eye is observed. If the second eye shifts to ﬁxate on the 
target, it was misaligned. If it does not move, the ﬁrst eye 
is uncovered and the test is repeated on the second eye. 
If neither eye moves, the eyes are aligned orthotropically. 
If the eyes are orthotropic in primary gaze but the patient 
complains of diplopia, the cover test should be performed 
with the head tilted or turned in whatever direction elic-
its diplopia. With practice the examiner can detect an 
ocular deviation (heterotropia) as small as 1–2° with the 
cover test. Deviations can be measured by placing prisms 
in front of the misaligned eye to determine the power 
required to neutralize the ﬁxation shift evoked by cover-
ing the other eye.
STEREOPSIS
Stereoacuity is determined by presenting targets with 
retinal disparity separately to each eye by using polar-
ized images. The most popular ofﬁce tests measure a 
range of thresholds from 800–40  s of arc. Normal ste-
reoacuity is 40  s of arc. If a patient achieves this level 
of stereoacuity, one is assured that the eyes are aligned 
orthotropically and that vision is intact in each eye. 
Random dot stereograms have no monocular depth 
cues and provide an excellent screening test for strabis-
mus and amblyopia in children.
COLOR VISION
The retina contains three classes of cones, with visual 
pigments of differing peak spectral sensitivity: red 
(560 nm), green (530 nm), and blue (430 nm). The 
red and green cone pigments are encoded on the X 
chromosome, and the blue cone pigment on chro-
mosome 7. Mutations of the blue cone pigment are 
exceedingly rare. Mutations of the red and green pig-
ments cause congenital X-linked color blindness in 
8% of males. Affected individuals are not truly color 
blind; rather, they differ from normal subjects in the 
way they perceive color and the way they combine 
primary monochromatic lights to match a particular 
color. Anomalous trichromats have three cone types, 
but a mutation in one cone pigment (usually red or 
green) causes a shift in peak spectral sensitivity, altering 
the proportion of primary colors required to achieve a 
color match. Dichromats have only two cone types and 
therefore will accept a color match based on only two 
primary colors. Anomalous trichromats and dichromats 
have 6/6 (20/20) visual acuity, but their hue discrimi-
nation is impaired. Ishihara color plates can be used to 
detect red-green color blindness. The test plates con-
tain a hidden number that is visible only to subjects 
with color confusion from red-green color blindness. 
Because color blindness is almost exclusively X-linked, 
it is worth screening only male children.
The Ishihara plates often are used to detect acquired 
defects in color vision, although they are intended as a 
screening test for congenital color blindness. Acquired 
defects in color vision frequently result from disease 
of the macula or optic nerve. For example, patients 
with a history of optic neuritis often complain of color 
desaturation long after their visual acuity has returned 
to normal. Color blindness also can result from bilat-
eral strokes involving the ventral portion of the occipital 
lobe (cerebral achromatopsia). Such patients can per-
ceive only shades of gray and also may have difﬁculty 
recognizing faces (prosopagnosia). Infarcts of the domi-
nant occipital lobe sometimes give rise to color anomia. 
Affected patients can discriminate colors but cannot 
name them.
VISUAL FIELDS
Vision can be impaired by damage to the visual system 
anywhere from the eyes to the occipital lobes. One can 
localize the site of the lesion with considerable accuracy 
by mapping the visual ﬁeld deﬁcit by ﬁnger confronta-
tion and then correlating it with the topographic anat-
omy of the visual pathway (Fig. 21-3). Quantitative 
visual ﬁeld mapping is performed by computer-driven 
perimeters (Humphrey, Octopus) that present a target 
of variable intensity at ﬁxed positions in the visual ﬁeld 
(Fig. 21-3A). By generating an automated printout of 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
178
light thresholds, these static perimeters provide a sen-
sitive means of detecting scotomas in the visual ﬁeld. 
They are exceedingly useful for serial assessment of 
visual function in chronic diseases such as glaucoma and 
pseudotumor cerebri.
The crux of visual ﬁeld analysis is to decide whether 
a lesion is before, at, or behind the optic chiasm. If a 
scotoma is conﬁned to one eye, it must be due to a 
lesion anterior to the chiasm, involving either the optic 
nerve or the retina. Retinal lesions produce scotomas 
that correspond optically to their location in the fundus. 
For example, a superior-nasal retinal detachment results 
in an inferior-temporal ﬁeld cut. Damage to the macula 
causes a central scotoma (Fig. 21-3B).
Optic nerve disease produces characteristic patterns 
of visual ﬁeld loss. Glaucoma selectively destroys axons 
that enter the superotemporal or inferotemporal poles 
of the optic disc, resulting in arcuate scotomas shaped 
like a Turkish scimitar, which emanate from the blind 
spot and curve around ﬁxation to end ﬂat against the 
horizontal meridian (Fig. 21-3C). This type of ﬁeld 
defect mirrors the arrangement of the nerve ﬁber layer 
in the temporal retina. Arcuate or nerve ﬁber layer sco-
tomas also result from optic neuritis, ischemic optic 
FIGURE 21-3 
Ventral view of the brain, correlating patterns of visual 
ﬁeld loss with the sites of lesions in the visual pathway. 
The visual ﬁelds overlap partially, creating 120° of central bin-
ocular ﬁeld ﬂanked by a 40° monocular crescent on either 
side. The visual ﬁeld maps in this ﬁgure were done with a 
computer-driven perimeter (Humphrey Instruments, Carl 
Zeiss, Inc.). It plots the retinal sensitivity to light in the central 
30° by using a gray scale format. Areas of visual ﬁeld loss 
are shown in black. The examples of common monocular, 
prechiasmal ﬁeld defects are all shown for the right eye. By 
convention, the visual ﬁelds are always recorded with the left 
eye’s ﬁeld on the left and the right eye’s ﬁeld on the right, just 
as the patient sees the world.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
179
neuropathy, optic disc drusen, and branch retinal artery 
or vein occlusion.
Damage to the entire upper or lower pole of the 
optic disc causes an altitudinal ﬁeld cut that follows the 
horizontal meridian (Fig. 21-3D). This pattern of visual 
ﬁeld loss is typical of ischemic optic neuropathy but also 
results from retinal vascular occlusion, advanced glau-
coma, and optic neuritis.
About half the ﬁbers in the optic nerve originate 
from ganglion cells serving the macula. Damage to 
papillomacular ﬁbers causes a cecocentral scotoma that 
encompasses the blind spot and macula (Fig. 21-3E). If 
the damage is irreversible, pallor eventually appears in 
the temporal portion of the optic disc. Temporal pallor 
from a cecocentral scotoma may develop in optic neu-
ritis, nutritional optic neuropathy, toxic optic neuropa-
thy, Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy, and compres-
sive optic neuropathy. It is worth mentioning that the 
temporal side of the optic disc is slightly more pale than 
the nasal side in most normal individuals. Therefore, it 
sometimes can be difﬁcult to decide whether the tem-
poral pallor visible on fundus examination represents a 
pathologic change. Pallor of the nasal rim of the optic 
disc is a less equivocal sign of optic atrophy.
At the optic chiasm, ﬁbers from nasal ganglion cells 
decussate into the contralateral optic tract. Crossed 
ﬁbers are damaged more by compression than are 
uncrossed ﬁbers. As a result, mass lesions of the sel-
lar region cause a temporal hemianopia in each eye. 
Tumors anterior to the optic chiasm, such as meningio-
mas of the tuberculum sella, produce a junctional sco-
toma characterized by an optic neuropathy in one eye 
and a superior-temporal ﬁeld cut in the other eye (Fig. 
21-3G). More symmetric compression of the optic chi-
asm by a pituitary adenoma (Fig.  38-4), meningioma, 
craniopharyngioma, glioma, or aneurysm results in a 
bitemporal hemianopia (Fig. 21-3H). The insidious 
development of a bitemporal hemianopia often goes 
unnoticed by the patient and will escape detection by 
the physician unless each eye is tested separately.
It is difﬁcult to localize a postchiasmal lesion accu-
rately, because injury anywhere in the optic tract, lat-
eral geniculate body, optic radiations, or visual cortex 
can produce a homonymous hemianopia (i.e., a tem-
poral hemiﬁeld defect in the contralateral eye and a 
matching nasal hemiﬁeld defect in the ipsilateral eye) 
(Fig. 21-3I). A unilateral postchiasmal lesion leaves 
the visual acuity in each eye unaffected, although the 
patient may read the letters on only the left or right half 
of the eye chart. Lesions of the optic radiations tend to 
cause poorly matched or incongruous ﬁeld defects in 
each eye. Damage to the optic radiations in the tempo-
ral lobe (Meyer’s loop) produces a superior quadrantic 
homonymous hemianopia (Fig. 21-3J), whereas injury 
to the optic radiations in the parietal lobe results in an 
inferior quadrantic homonymous hemianopia (Fig. 
21-3K). Lesions of the primary visual cortex give rise to 
dense, congruous hemianopic ﬁeld defects. Occlusion 
of the posterior cerebral artery supplying the occipital 
lobe is a common cause of total homonymous hemi-
anopia. Some patients with hemianopia after occipital 
stroke have macular sparing, because the macular rep-
resentation at the tip of the occipital lobe is supplied by 
collaterals from the middle cerebral artery (Fig. 21-3L). 
Destruction of both occipital lobes produces corti-
cal blindness. This condition can be distinguished from 
bilateral prechiasmal visual loss by noting that the pupil 
responses and optic fundi remain normal.
DISORDERS
RED OR PAINFUL EYE
Corneal abrasions
Corneal abrasions are seen best by placing a drop of ﬂuo-
rescein in the eye and looking with the slit lamp, using a 
cobalt-blue light. A penlight with a blue ﬁlter will suf-
ﬁce if a slit lamp is not available. Damage to the corneal 
epithelium is revealed by yellow ﬂuorescence of the 
exposed basement membrane underlying the epithelium. 
It is important to check for foreign bodies. To search 
the conjunctival fornices, the lower lid should be pulled 
down and the upper lid everted. A foreign body can be 
removed with a moistened cotton-tipped applicator after 
a drop of a topical anesthetic such as proparacaine has 
been placed in the eye. Alternatively, it may be possible 
to ﬂush the foreign body from the eye by irrigating copi-
ously with saline or artiﬁcial tears. If the corneal epithe-
lium has been abraded, antibiotic ointment and a patch 
should be applied to the eye. A drop of an intermediate-
acting cycloplegic such as cyclopentolate hydrochloride 
1% helps reduce pain by relaxing the ciliary body. The 
eye should be reexamined the next day. Minor abrasions 
may not require patching and cycloplegia.
Subconjunctival hemorrhage
This results from rupture of small vessels bridging the 
potential space between the episclera and the con-
junctiva. Blood dissecting into this space can produce 
a spectacular red eye, but vision is not affected and the 
hemorrhage resolves without treatment. Subconjunctival 
hemorrhage is usually spontaneous but can result from 
blunt trauma, eye rubbing, or vigorous coughing. Occa-
sionally it is a clue to an underlying bleeding disorder.
Pinguecula
Pinguecula is a small, raised conjunctival nodule at 
the temporal or nasal limbus. In adults such lesions are 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
180
extremely common and have little signiﬁcance unless 
they become inﬂamed (pingueculitis). A pterygium resem-
bles a pinguecula but has crossed the limbus to encroach 
on the corneal surface. Removal is justiﬁed when symp-
toms of irritation or blurring develop, but recurrence is a 
common problem.
Blepharitis
This refers to inﬂammation of the eyelids. The most 
common form occurs in association with acne rosa-
cea or seborrheic dermatitis. The eyelid margins usu-
ally are colonized heavily by staphylococci. Upon close 
inspection, they appear greasy, ulcerated, and crusted 
with scaling debris that clings to the lashes. Treatment 
consists of warm compresses, strict eyelid hygiene, and 
topical antibiotics such as bacitracin/polymyxin B oph-
thalmic ointment. An external hordeolum (sty) is caused 
by staphylococcal infection of the superﬁcial accessory 
glands of Zeis or Moll located in the eyelid margins. An 
internal hordeolum occurs after suppurative infection 
of the oil-secreting meibomian glands within the tarsal 
plate of the eyelid. Systemic antibiotics, usually tetra-
cyclines or azithromycin, sometimes are necessary for 
treatment of meibomian gland inﬂammation (meibomi-
tis) or chronic, severe blepharitis. A chalazion is a pain-
less, granulomatous inﬂammation of a meibomian gland 
that produces a pealike nodule within the eyelid. It can 
be incised and drained or injected with glucocorticoids. 
Basal cell, squamous cell, or meibomian gland carci-
noma should be suspected with any nonhealing ulcer-
ative lesion of the eyelids.
Dacryocystitis
An inﬂammation of the lacrimal drainage system, dac-
ryocystitis can produce epiphora (tearing) and ocular 
injection. Gentle pressure over the lacrimal sac evokes 
pain and reﬂux of mucus or pus from the tear puncta. 
Dacryocystitis usually occurs after obstruction of the 
lacrimal system. It is treated with topical and systemic 
antibiotics, followed by probing or surgery to reestab-
lish patency. Entropion (inversion of the eyelid) or ectro-
pion (sagging or eversion of the eyelid) can also lead to 
epiphora and ocular irritation.
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis is the most common cause of a red, irri-
tated eye. Pain is minimal, and visual acuity is reduced 
only slightly. The most common viral etiology is ade-
novirus infection. It causes a watery discharge, a mild 
foreign-body sensation, and photophobia. Bacterial 
infection tends to produce a more mucopurulent exu-
date. Mild cases of infectious conjunctivitis usually are 
treated empirically with broad-spectrum topical ocular 
antibiotics such as sulfacetamide 10%, polymyxin-
bacitracin, or a trimethoprim-polymyxin combination. 
Smears and cultures usually are reserved for severe, 
resistant, or recurrent cases of conjunctivitis. To prevent 
contagion, patients should be admonished to wash their 
hands frequently, not to touch their eyes, and to avoid 
direct contact with others.
Allergic conjunctivitis
This condition is extremely common and often is mis-
taken for infectious conjunctivitis. Itching, redness, and 
epiphora are typical. The palpebral conjunctiva may 
become hypertropic with giant excrescences called 
cobblestone papillae. Irritation from contact lenses or 
any chronic foreign body also can induce formation of 
cobblestone papillae. Atopic conjunctivitis occurs in sub-
jects with atopic dermatitis or asthma. Symptoms caused 
by allergic conjunctivitis can be alleviated with cold 
compresses, topical vasoconstrictors, antihistamines, and 
mast cell stabilizers such as cromolyn sodium. Topi-
cal glucocorticoid solutions provide dramatic relief of 
immune-mediated forms of conjunctivitis, but their 
long-term use is ill advised because of the complications 
of glaucoma, cataract, and secondary infection. Topical 
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., 
ketorolac tromethamine) are better alternatives.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Also known as dry eye, this produces a burning foreign-
body sensation, injection, and photophobia. In mild 
cases the eye appears surprisingly normal, but tear pro-
duction measured by wetting of a ﬁlter paper (Schirmer 
strip) is deﬁcient. A variety of systemic drugs, including 
antihistaminic, anticholinergic, and psychotropic medi-
cations, result in dry eye by reducing lacrimal secre-
tion. Disorders that involve the lacrimal gland directly, 
such as sarcoidosis and Sjögren’s syndrome, also cause 
dry eye. Patients may develop dry eye after radiation 
therapy if the treatment ﬁeld includes the orbits. Prob-
lems with ocular drying are also common after lesions 
affecting cranial nerve V or VII. Corneal anesthesia is 
particularly dangerous, because the absence of a normal 
blink reﬂex exposes the cornea to injury without pain 
to warn the patient. Dry eye is managed by frequent 
and liberal application of artiﬁcial tears and ocular lubri-
cants. In severe cases the tear puncta can be plugged or 
cauterized to reduce lacrimal outﬂow.
Keratitis
Keratitis is a threat to vision because of the risk of cor-
neal clouding, scarring, and perforation. Worldwide, 
the two leading causes of blindness from keratitis are 
trachoma from chlamydial infection and vitamin A 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
181
deﬁciency related to malnutrition. In the United States, 
contact lenses play a major role in corneal infection and 
ulceration. They should not be worn by anyone with 
an active eye infection. In evaluating the cornea, it is 
important to differentiate between a superﬁcial infection 
(keratoconjunctivitis) and a deeper, more serious ulcerative 
process. The latter is accompanied by greater visual loss, 
pain, photophobia, redness, and discharge. Slit-lamp 
examination shows disruption of the corneal epithe-
lium, a cloudy inﬁltrate or abscess in the stroma, and an 
inﬂammatory cellular reaction in the anterior chamber. 
In severe cases, pus settles at the bottom of the anterior 
chamber, giving rise to a hypopyon. Immediate empiri-
cal antibiotic therapy should be initiated after corneal 
scrapings are obtained for Gram’s stain, Giemsa stain, 
and cultures. Fortiﬁed topical antibiotics are most effec-
tive, supplemented with subconjunctival antibiotics as 
required. A fungal etiology should always be considered 
in a patient with keratitis. Fungal infection is common 
in warm humid climates, especially after penetration of 
the cornea by plant or vegetable material.
Herpes simplex
The herpesviruses are a major cause of blindness from 
keratitis. Most adults in the United States have serum 
antibodies to herpes simplex, indicating prior viral 
infection. Primary ocular infection generally is caused 
by herpes simplex type 1 rather than type 2. It mani-
fests as a unilateral follicular blepharoconjunctivitis that 
is easily confused with adenoviral conjunctivitis unless 
telltale vesicles appear on the periocular skin or con-
junctiva. A dendritic pattern of corneal epithelial ulcer-
ation revealed by ﬂuorescein staining is pathognomonic 
for herpes infection but is seen in only a minority of 
primary infections. Recurrent ocular infection arises 
from reactivation of the latent herpesvirus. Viral erup-
tion in the corneal epithelium may result in the char-
acteristic herpes dendrite. Involvement of the corneal 
stroma produces edema, vascularization, and iridocy-
clitis. Herpes keratitis is treated with topical antiviral 
agents, cycloplegics, and oral acyclovir. Topical gluco-
corticoids are effective in mitigating corneal scarring but 
must be used with extreme caution because of the dan-
ger of corneal melting and perforation. Topical gluco-
corticoids also carry the risk of prolonging infection and 
inducing glaucoma.
Herpes zoster
Herpes zoster from reactivation of latent varicella 
(chickenpox) virus causes a dermatomal pattern of pain-
ful vesicular dermatitis. Ocular symptoms can occur 
after zoster eruption in any branch of the trigemi-
nal nerve but are particularly common when vesicles 
form on the nose, reﬂecting nasociliary (V1) nerve 
involvement (Hutchinson’s sign). Herpes zoster oph-
thalmicus produces corneal dendrites, which can be 
difﬁcult to distinguish from those seen in herpes sim-
plex. Stromal keratitis, anterior uveitis, raised intraocu-
lar pressure, ocular motor nerve palsies, acute retinal 
necrosis, and postherpetic scarring and neuralgia are 
other common sequelae. Herpes zoster ophthalmicus is 
treated with antiviral agents and cycloplegics. In severe 
cases, glucocorticoids may be added to prevent perma-
nent visual loss from corneal scarring.
Episcleritis
This is an inﬂammation of the episclera, a thin layer 
of connective tissue between the conjunctiva and the 
sclera. Episcleritis resembles conjunctivitis, but it is a 
more localized process and discharge is absent. Most 
cases of episcleritis are idiopathic, but some occur in 
the setting of an autoimmune disease. Scleritis refers 
to a deeper, more severe inﬂammatory process that 
frequently is associated with a connective tissue dis-
ease such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus erythematosus, 
polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s) or relapsing polychondritis. The inﬂam-
mation and thickening of the sclera can be diffuse or 
nodular. In anterior forms of scleritis, the globe assumes 
a violet hue and the patient complains of severe ocu-
lar tenderness and pain. With posterior scleritis the pain 
and redness may be less marked, but there is often pro-
ptosis, choroidal effusion, reduced motility, and visual 
loss. Episcleritis and scleritis should be treated with 
NSAIDs. If these agents fail, topical or even systemic 
glucocorticoid therapy may be necessary, especially if an 
underlying autoimmune process is active.
Uveitis
Involving the anterior structures of the eye, uveitis also 
is called iritis or iridocyclitis. The diagnosis requires slit-
lamp examination to identify inﬂammatory cells ﬂoat-
ing in the aqueous humor or deposited on the corneal 
endothelium (keratic precipitates). Anterior uveitis 
develops in sarcoidosis, ankylosing spondylitis, juve-
nile rheumatoid arthritis, inﬂammatory bowel disease, 
psoriasis, reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter’s 
syndrome), and Behçet’s disease. It also is associated 
with herpes infections, syphilis, Lyme disease, oncho-
cerciasis, tuberculosis, and leprosy. Although anterior 
uveitis can occur in conjunction with many diseases, 
no cause is found to explain the majority of cases. For 
this reason, laboratory evaluation usually is reserved for 
patients with recurrent or severe anterior uveitis. Treat-
ment is aimed at reducing inﬂammation and scarring 
by judicious use of topical glucocorticoids. Dilatation 
of the pupil reduces pain and prevents the formation of 
synechiae.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
182
Posterior uveitis
This is diagnosed by observing inﬂammation of the 
vitreous, retina, or choroid on fundus examination. 
It is more likely than anterior uveitis to be associated 
with an identiﬁable systemic disease. Some patients 
have panuveitis, or inﬂammation of both the anterior 
and posterior segments of the eye. Posterior uveitis 
is a manifestation of autoimmune diseases such as sar-
coidosis, Behçet’s disease, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syn-
drome, and inﬂammatory bowel disease (Fig. 21-4). It 
also accompanies diseases such as toxoplasmosis, oncho-
cerciasis, cysticercosis, coccidioidomycosis, toxocariasis, 
and histoplasmosis; infections caused by organisms such 
as Candida, Pneumocystis carinii, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, 
herpes, and cytomegalovirus; and other diseases, such as 
syphilis, Lyme disease, tuberculosis, cat-scratch disease, 
Whipple’s disease, and brucellosis. In multiple sclero-
sis, chronic inﬂammatory changes can develop in the 
extreme periphery of the retina (pars planitis or inter-
mediate uveitis).
Acute angle-closure glaucoma
This is a rare and frequently misdiagnosed cause of a 
red, painful eye. Susceptible eyes have a shallow ante-
rior chamber because the eye has either a short axial 
length (hyperopia) or a lens enlarged by the gradual 
development of cataract. When the pupil becomes mid-
dilated, the peripheral iris blocks aqueous outﬂow via 
the anterior chamber angle and the intraocular pressure 
rises abruptly, producing pain, injection, corneal edema, 
obscurations, and blurred vision. In some patients, ocu-
lar symptoms are overshadowed by nausea, vomiting, or 
headache, prompting a fruitless workup for abdominal 
or neurologic disease. The diagnosis is made by mea-
suring the intraocular pressure during an acute attack 
or by observing a narrow chamber angle by means of 
a specially mirrored contact lens. Acute angle closure 
is treated with acetazolamide (PO or IV), topical beta 
blockers, prostaglandin analogues, α2-adrenergic ago-
nists, and pilocarpine to induce miosis. If these measures 
fail, a laser can be used to create a hole in the periph-
eral iris to relieve pupillary block. Many physicians are 
reluctant to dilate patients routinely for fundus exami-
nation because they fear precipitating an angle-closure 
glaucoma. The risk is actually remote and more than 
outweighed by the potential beneﬁt to patients of dis-
covering a hidden fundus lesion visible only through a 
fully dilated pupil. Moreover, a single attack of angle 
closure after pharmacologic dilatation rarely causes any 
permanent damage to the eye and serves as an inad-
vertent provocative test to identify patients with nar-
row angles who would beneﬁt from prophylactic laser 
iridectomy.
Endophthalmitis
This results from bacterial, viral, fungal, or parasitic 
infection of the internal structures of the eye. It usu-
ally is acquired by hematogenous seeding from a remote 
site. Chronically ill, diabetic, or immunosuppressed 
patients, especially those with a history of indwelling 
IV catheters or positive blood cultures, are at great-
est risk for endogenous endophthalmitis. Although 
most patients have ocular pain and injection, visual loss 
is sometimes the only symptom. Septic emboli from 
a diseased heart valve or a dental abscess that lodge in 
the retinal circulation can give rise to endophthalmitis. 
White-centered retinal hemorrhages (Roth’s spots) are 
considered pathognomonic for subacute bacterial endo-
carditis, but they also appear in leukemia, diabetes, and 
many other conditions. Endophthalmitis also occurs as 
a complication of ocular surgery, occasionally months 
or even years after the operation. An occult penetrat-
ing foreign body or unrecognized trauma to the globe 
should be considered in any patient with unexplained 
intraocular infection or inﬂammation.
TRANSIENT OR SUDDEN VISUAL LOSS
Amaurosis fugax
This term refers to a transient ischemic attack of the 
retina (Chap. 27). Because neural tissue has a high rate 
of metabolism, interruption of blood ﬂow to the retina 
for more than a few seconds results in transient monocu-
lar blindness, a term used interchangeably with amaurosis 
fugax. Patients describe a rapid fading of vision like a 
curtain descending, sometimes affecting only a portion 
of the visual ﬁeld. Amaurosis fugax usually results from 
FIGURE 21-4 
Retinal vasculitis, uveitis, and hemorrhage in a 32-year-
old woman with Crohn’s disease. Note that the veins are 
frosted with a white exudate. Visual acuity improved from 
20/400 to 20/20 after treatment with intravenous methylpred-
nisolone.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
183
an embolus that becomes stuck within a retinal arte-
riole (Fig. 21-5). If the embolus breaks up or passes, 
ﬂow is restored and vision returns quickly to normal 
without permanent damage. With prolonged interrup-
tion of blood ﬂow, the inner retina suffers infarction. 
Ophthalmoscopy reveals zones of whitened, edematous 
retina following the distribution of branch retinal arte-
rioles. Complete occlusion of the central retinal artery 
produces arrest of blood ﬂow and a milky retina with 
a cherry-red fovea (Fig. 21-6). Emboli are composed 
of cholesterol (Hollenhorst plaque), calcium, or platelet-
ﬁbrin debris. The most common source is an athero-
sclerotic plaque in the carotid artery or aorta, although 
emboli also can arise from the heart, especially in 
patients with diseased valves, atrial ﬁbrillation, or wall 
motion abnormalities.
In rare instances, amaurosis fugax results from low 
central retinal artery perfusion pressure in a patient 
with a critical stenosis of the ipsilateral carotid artery 
and poor collateral ﬂow via the circle of Willis. In this 
situation, amaurosis fugax develops when there is a dip 
in systemic blood pressure or a slight worsening of the 
carotid stenosis. Sometimes there is contralateral motor 
or sensory loss, indicating concomitant hemispheric 
cerebral ischemia.
Retinal arterial occlusion also occurs rarely in 
association with retinal migraine, lupus erythemato-
sus, anticardiolipin antibodies (Fig.  21-6), anticoagulant 
deﬁciency states (protein S, protein C, and antithrom-
bin deﬁciency), pregnancy, IV drug abuse, blood dys-
crasias, dysproteinemias, and temporal arteritis.
Marked systemic hypertension causes sclerosis of reti-
nal arterioles, splinter hemorrhages, focal infarcts of 
the nerve ﬁber layer (cotton-wool spots), and leak-
age of lipid and ﬂuid (hard exudate) into the macula 
(Fig. 21-7). In hypertensive crisis, sudden visual loss 
can result from vasospasm of retinal arterioles and reti-
nal ischemia. In addition, acute hypertension may pro-
duce visual loss from ischemic swelling of the optic disc. 
Patients with acute hypertensive retinopathy should be 
treated by lowering the blood pressure. However, the 
blood pressure should not be reduced precipitously, 
because there is a danger of optic disc infarction from 
sudden hypoperfusion.
Impending branch or central retinal vein occlusion can 
produce prolonged visual obscurations that resemble 
those described by patients with amaurosis fugax. The 
veins appear engorged and phlebitic, with numer-
ous retinal hemorrhages (Fig. 21-8). In some patients 
venous blood ﬂow recovers spontaneously, whereas 
FIGURE 21-5 
Hollenhorst plaque lodged at the bifurcation of a retinal 
arteriole proves that a patient is shedding emboli from the 
carotid artery, great vessels, or heart.
FIGURE 21-6 
Central retinal artery occlusion combined with ischemic 
optic neuropathy in a 19-year-old woman with an elevated 
titer of anticardiolipin antibodies. Note the orange dot (rather 
than cherry red) corresponding to the fovea and the spared 
patch of retina just temporal to the optic disc.
FIGURE 21-7 
Hypertensive retinopathy with scattered ﬂame (splinter) 
hemorrhages and cotton-wool spots (nerve ﬁber layer 
infarcts) in a patient with headache and a blood pressure of 
234/120.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
184
others evolve a frank obstruction with extensive retinal 
bleeding (“blood and thunder” appearance), infarction, 
and visual loss. Venous occlusion of the retina is often 
idiopathic, but hypertension, diabetes, and glaucoma 
are prominent risk factors. Polycythemia, thrombocy-
themia, or other factors leading to an underlying hyper-
coagulable state should be corrected; aspirin treatment 
may be beneﬁcial.
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION)
This is caused by insufﬁcient blood ﬂow through the 
posterior ciliary arteries that supply the optic disc. It 
produces painless, monocular visual loss that is usually 
sudden, although some patients have progressive wors-
ening. The optic disc appears swollen and surrounded 
by nerve ﬁber layer splinter hemorrhages (Fig. 21-9). 
AION is divided into two forms: arteritic and nonar-
teritic. The nonarteritic form is most common. No 
speciﬁc cause can be identiﬁed, although diabetes and 
hypertension are common risk factors. No treatment is 
available. About 5% of patients, especially those >age 
60, develop the arteritic form of AION in conjunction 
with giant cell (temporal) arteritis. It is urgent to rec-
ognize arteritic AION so that high doses of glucocorti-
coids can be instituted immediately to prevent blindness 
in the second eye. Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumat-
ica may be present; the sedimentation rate and C-reac-
tive protein level are usually elevated. In a patient with 
visual loss from suspected arteritic AION, temporal 
artery biopsy is mandatory to conﬁrm the diagnosis. 
Glucocorticoids should be started immediately, without 
waiting for the biopsy to be completed. The diagnosis 
of arteritic AION is difﬁcult to sustain in the face of a 
negative temporal artery biopsy, but such cases do occur 
rarely.
Posterior ischemic optic neuropathy
This is an uncommon cause of acute visual loss, induced 
by the combination of severe anemia and hypotension. 
Cases have been reported after major blood loss during 
surgery, exsanguinating trauma, gastrointestinal bleed-
ing, and renal dialysis. The fundus usually appears nor-
mal, although optic disc swelling develops if the process 
extends far enough anteriorly. Vision can be salvaged in 
some patients by prompt blood transfusion and reversal 
of hypotension.
Optic neuritis
This is a common inﬂammatory disease of the optic 
nerve. In the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT), 
the mean age of patients was 32 years, 77% were 
female, 92% had ocular pain (especially with eye move-
ments), and 35% had optic disc swelling. In most 
patients, the demyelinating event was retrobulbar and 
the ocular fundus appeared normal on initial exami-
nation (Fig. 21-10), although optic disc pallor slowly 
developed over subsequent months.
Virtually all patients experience a gradual recovery 
of vision after a single episode of optic neuritis, even 
without treatment. This rule is so reliable that failure 
of vision to improve after a ﬁrst attack of optic neuri-
tis casts doubt on the original diagnosis. Treatment with 
high-dose IV methylprednisolone (250 mg every 6 h for 
3 days) followed by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg per day 
for 11 days) makes no difference in ﬁnal acuity (mea-
sured 6 months after the attack), but the recovery of 
visual function occurs more rapidly.
For some patients, optic neuritis remains an isolated 
event. However, the ONTT showed that the 15-year 
cumulative probability of developing clinically deﬁnite 
FIGURE 21-8 
Central retinal vein occlusion can produce massive retinal 
hemorrhage (“blood and thunder”), ischemia, and vision loss.
FIGURE 21-9 
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy from temporal arteri-
tis in a 78-year-old woman with pallid disc swelling, hemor-
rhage, visual loss, myalgia, and an erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate of 86 mm/h.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
185
multiple sclerosis after optic neuritis is 50%. In patients 
with two or more demyelinating plaques on brain mag-
netic resonance (MR) imaging, treatment with inter-
feron β-1a can retard the development of more lesions. 
In summary, an MR scan is recommended in every 
patient with a ﬁrst attack of optic neuritis. When visual 
loss is severe (worse than 20/100), treatment with IV 
followed by oral glucocorticoids hastens recovery. If 
multiple lesions are present on the MR scan, treatment 
with interferon β-1a should be considered.
Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy
This disease usually affects young men, causing grad-
ual, painless, severe central visual loss in one eye, fol-
lowed weeks or months later by the same process in the 
other eye. Acutely, the optic disc appears mildly ple-
thoric with surface capillary telangiectases but no vas-
cular leakage on ﬂuorescein angiography. Eventually 
optic atrophy ensues. Leber’s optic neuropathy is caused 
by a point mutation at codon 11778 in the mitochon-
drial gene encoding nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
dehydrogenase (NADH) subunit 4. Additional muta-
tions responsible for the disease have been identi-
ﬁed, most in mitochondrial genes that encode proteins 
involved in electron transport. Mitochondrial muta-
tions that cause Leber’s neuropathy are inherited from 
the mother by all her children, but usually only sons 
develop symptoms.
Toxic optic neuropathy
This can result in acute visual loss with bilateral optic 
disc swelling and central or cecocentral scotomas. Such 
cases have been reported to result from exposure to eth-
ambutol, methyl alcohol (moonshine), ethylene gly-
col (antifreeze), or carbon monoxide. In toxic optic 
neuropathy, visual loss also can develop gradually and 
produce optic atrophy (Fig. 21-11) without a phase of 
acute optic disc edema. Many agents have been impli-
cated as a cause of toxic optic neuropathy, but the evi-
dence supporting the association for many is weak. The 
following is a partial list of potential offending drugs 
or toxins: disulﬁram, ethchlorvynol, chloramphenicol, 
amiodarone, monoclonal anti-CD3 antibody, cipro-
ﬂoxacin, digitalis, streptomycin, lead, arsenic, thallium, 
d-penicillamine, isoniazid, emetine, and sulfonamides. 
Deﬁciency states induced by starvation, malabsorption, 
or alcoholism can lead to insidious visual loss. Thia-
mine, vitamin B12, and folate levels should be checked 
in any patient with unexplained bilateral central scoto-
mas and optic pallor.
Papilledema
This connotes bilateral optic disc swelling from raised 
intracranial pressure (Fig. 21-12). Headache is a com-
mon but not invariable accompaniment. All other 
forms of optic disc swelling (e.g., from optic neuritis 
or ischemic optic neuropathy) should be called “optic 
disc edema.” This convention is arbitrary but serves to 
avoid confusion. Often it is difﬁcult to differentiate pap-
illedema from other forms of optic disc edema by fun-
dus examination alone. Transient visual obscurations 
are a classic symptom of papilledema. They can occur 
in only one eye or simultaneously in both eyes. They 
usually last seconds but can persist longer. Obscurations 
follow abrupt shifts in posture or happen spontaneously. 
When obscurations are prolonged or spontaneous, the 
papilledema is more threatening. Visual acuity is not 
affected by papilledema unless the papilledema is severe, 
long-standing, or accompanied by macular edema and 
FIGURE 21-10 
Retrobulbar optic neuritis is characterized by a normal fun-
dus examination initially, hence the rubric “the doctor sees 
nothing, and the patient sees nothing.” Optic atrophy devel-
ops after severe or repeated attacks.
FIGURE 21-11 
Optic atrophy is not a speciﬁc diagnosis but refers to the 
combination of optic disc pallor, arteriolar narrowing, and 
nerve ﬁber layer destruction produced by a host of eye dis-
eases, especially optic neuropathies.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
186
hemorrhage. Visual ﬁeld testing shows enlarged blind 
spots and peripheral constriction (Fig. 21-3F). With 
unremitting papilledema, peripheral visual ﬁeld loss 
progresses in an insidious fashion while the optic nerve 
develops atrophy. In this setting, reduction of optic disc 
swelling is an ominous sign of a dying nerve rather than 
an encouraging indication of resolving papilledema.
Evaluation of papilledema requires neuroimaging to 
exclude an intracranial lesion. MR angiography is appro-
priate in selected cases to search for a dural venous sinus 
occlusion or an arteriovenous shunt. If neuroradiologic 
studies are negative, the subarachnoid opening pressure 
should be measured by lumbar puncture. An elevated 
pressure, with normal cerebrospinal ﬂuid, points by exclu-
sion to the diagnosis of pseudotumor cerebri (idiopathic intra-
cranial hypertension). The majority of patients are young, 
female, and obese. Treatment with a carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor such as acetazolamide lowers intracranial pressure 
by reducing the production of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Weight 
reduction is vital but often unsuccessful. If acetazolamide 
and weight loss fail and visual ﬁeld loss is progressive, a 
shunt should be performed without delay to prevent blind-
ness. Occasionally, emergency surgery is required for sud-
den blindness caused by fulminant papilledema.
Optic disc drusen
These are refractile deposits within the substance of the 
optic nerve head (Fig. 21-13). They are unrelated to 
drusen of the retina, which occur in age-related macu-
lar degeneration. Optic disc drusen are most common in 
people of northern European descent. Their diagnosis is 
obvious when they are visible as glittering particles on the 
surface of the optic disc. However, in many patients they 
are hidden beneath the surface, producing pseudopapill-
edema. It is important to recognize optic disc drusen to 
avoid an unnecessary evaluation for papilledema. Ultra-
sound or CT scanning is sensitive for detection of bur-
ied optic disc drusen because they contain calcium. In 
most patients, optic disc drusen are an incidental, innoc-
uous ﬁnding, but they can produce visual obscurations. 
On perimetry they give rise to enlarged blind spots and 
arcuate scotomas from damage to the optic disc. With 
increasing age, drusen tend to become more exposed on 
the disc surface as optic atrophy develops. Hemorrhage, 
choroidal neovascular membrane, and AION are more 
likely to occur in patients with optic disc drusen. No 
treatment is available.
Vitreous degeneration
This occurs in all individuals with advancing age, lead-
ing to visual symptoms. Opacities develop in the vitre-
ous, casting annoying shadows on the retina. As the eye 
moves, these distracting “ﬂoaters” move synchronously, 
with a slight lag caused by inertia of the vitreous gel. Vit-
reous traction on the retina causes mechanical stimula-
tion, resulting in perception of ﬂashing lights. This pho-
topsia is brief and is conﬁned to one eye, in contrast to 
the bilateral, prolonged scintillations of cortical migraine. 
Contraction of the vitreous can result in sudden separa-
tion from the retina, heralded by an alarming shower of 
ﬂoaters and photopsia. This process, known as vitreous 
detachment, is a common involutional event in the elderly. 
It is not harmful unless it damages the retina. A careful 
examination of the dilated fundus is important in any 
patient complaining of ﬂoaters or photopsia to search for 
peripheral tears or holes. If such a lesion is found, laser 
application can forestall a retinal detachment. Occasion-
ally a tear ruptures a retinal blood vessel, causing vitre-
ous hemorrhage and sudden loss of vision. On attempted 
ophthalmoscopy the fundus is hidden by a dark red 
FIGURE 21-12 
Papilledema means optic disc edema from raised intra-
cranial pressure. This obese young woman with pseudotu-
mor cerebri was misdiagnosed as a migraineur until fundus 
examination was performed, showing optic disc elevation, 
hemorrhages, and cotton-wool spots.
FIGURE 21-13 
Optic disc drusen are calciﬁed deposits of unknown etiol-
ogy within the optic disc. They sometimes are confused with 
papilledema.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
187
haze of blood. Ultrasound is required to examine the 
interior of the eye for a retinal tear or detachment. If the 
hemorrhage does not resolve spontaneously, the vitre-
ous can be removed surgically. Vitreous hemorrhage also 
results from the fragile neovascular vessels that proliferate 
on the surface of the retina in diabetes, sickle cell anemia, 
and other ischemic ocular diseases.
Retinal detachment
This produces symptoms of ﬂoaters, ﬂashing lights, and 
a scotoma in the peripheral visual ﬁeld corresponding to 
the detachment (Fig. 21-14). If the detachment includes 
the fovea, there is an afferent pupil defect and the visual 
acuity is reduced. In most eyes, retinal detachment starts 
with a hole, ﬂap, or tear in the peripheral retina (rheg-
matogenous retinal detachment). Patients with peripheral 
retinal thinning (lattice degeneration) are particularly vul-
nerable to this process. Once a break has developed in 
the retina, liqueﬁed vitreous is free to enter the subretinal 
space, separating the retina from the pigment epithelium. 
The combination of vitreous traction on the retinal sur-
face and passage of ﬂuid behind the retina leads inexo-
rably to detachment. Patients with a history of myopia, 
trauma, or prior cataract extraction are at greatest risk for 
retinal detachment. The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by oph-
thalmoscopic examination of the dilated eye.
Classic migraine
(See also Chap. 8) This usually occurs with a visual aura 
lasting about 20 min. In a typical attack, a small central 
disturbance in the ﬁeld of vision marches toward the 
periphery, leaving a transient scotoma in its wake. The 
expanding border of migraine scotoma has a scintillat-
ing, dancing, or zigzag edge, resembling the bastions of 
a fortiﬁed city, hence the term fortiﬁcation spectra. Patients’ 
descriptions of fortiﬁcation spectra vary widely and can 
be confused with amaurosis fugax. Migraine patterns usu-
ally last longer and are perceived in both eyes, whereas 
amaurosis fugax is briefer and occurs in only one eye. 
Migraine phenomena also remain visible in the dark 
or with the eyes closed. Generally they are conﬁned to 
either the right or the left visual hemiﬁeld, but sometimes 
both ﬁelds are involved simultaneously. Patients often 
have a long history of stereotypic attacks. After the visual 
symptoms recede, headache develops in most patients.
Transient ischemic attacks
Vertebrobasilar insufﬁciency may result in acute hom-
onymous visual symptoms. Many patients mistakenly 
describe symptoms in the left or right eye when in fact 
the symptoms are occurring in the left or right hemi-
ﬁeld of both eyes. Interruption of blood supply to the 
visual cortex causes a sudden fogging or graying of 
vision, occasionally with ﬂashing lights or other posi-
tive phenomena that mimic migraine. Cortical ischemic 
attacks are briefer in duration than migraine, occur in 
older patients, and are not followed by headache. There 
may be associated signs of brainstem ischemia, such as 
diplopia, vertigo, numbness, weakness, and dysarthria.
Stroke
Stroke occurs when interruption of blood supply from 
the posterior cerebral artery to the visual cortex is pro-
longed. The only ﬁnding on examination is a hom-
onymous visual ﬁeld defect that stops abruptly at the 
vertical meridian. Occipital lobe stroke usually is due 
to thrombotic occlusion of the vertebrobasilar system, 
embolus, or dissection. Lobar hemorrhage, tumor, 
abscess, and arteriovenous malformation are other com-
mon causes of hemianopic cortical visual loss.
Factitious (functional, nonorganic) visual loss
This is claimed by hysterics or malingerers. The latter 
account for the vast majority, seeking sympathy, special 
treatment, or ﬁnancial gain by feigning loss of sight. The 
diagnosis is suspected when the history is atypical, physi-
cal ﬁndings are lacking or contradictory, inconsistencies 
emerge on testing, and a secondary motive can be identi-
ﬁed. In our litigious society, the fraudulent pursuit of rec-
ompense has spawned an epidemic of factitious visual loss.
CHRONIC VISUAL LOSS
Cataract
Cataract is a clouding of the lens sufﬁcient to reduce 
vision. Most cataracts develop slowly as a result of 
FIGURE 21-14 
Retinal detachment appears as an elevated sheet of reti-
nal tissue with folds. In this patient the fovea was spared, so 
acuity was normal, but a superior detachment produced an 
inferior scotoma.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
188
aging, leading to gradual impairment of vision. The for-
mation of cataract occurs more rapidly in patients with 
a history of ocular trauma, uveitis, or diabetes mellitus. 
Cataracts are acquired in a variety of genetic diseases, 
such as myotonic dystrophy, neuroﬁbromatosis type 2, 
and galactosemia. Radiation therapy and glucocorticoid 
treatment can induce cataract as a side effect. The cata-
racts associated with radiation or glucocorticoids have a 
typical posterior subcapsular location. Cataract can be 
detected by noting an impaired red reﬂex when view-
ing light reﬂected from the fundus with an ophthal-
moscope or by examining the dilated eye with the slit 
lamp.
The only treatment for cataract is surgical extraction 
of the opaciﬁed lens. Over a million cataract opera-
tions are performed each year in the United States. The 
operation generally is done under local anesthesia on an 
outpatient basis. A plastic or silicone intraocular lens is 
placed within the empty lens capsule in the posterior 
chamber, substituting for the natural lens and leading to 
rapid recovery of sight. More than 95% of patients who 
undergo cataract extraction can expect an improvement 
in vision. In some patients, the lens capsule remain-
ing in the eye after cataract extraction eventually turns 
cloudy, causing secondary loss of vision. A small open-
ing is made in the lens capsule with a laser to restore 
clarity.
Glaucoma
Glaucoma is a slowly progressive, insidious optic neu-
ropathy that usually is associated with chronic elevation 
of intraocular pressure. In African Americans it is the 
leading cause of blindness. The mechanism by which 
raised intraocular pressure injures the optic nerve is not 
understood. Axons entering the inferotemporal and 
superotemporal aspects of the optic disc are damaged 
ﬁrst, producing typical nerve ﬁber bundle or arcuate 
scotomas on perimetric testing. As ﬁbers are destroyed, 
the neural rim of the optic disc shrinks and the physi-
ologic cup within the optic disc enlarges (Fig. 21-15). 
This process is referred to as pathologic “cupping.” The 
cup-to-disc diameter is expressed as a ratio (e.g., 0.2/1). 
The cup-to-disc ratio ranges widely in normal individu-
als, making it difﬁcult to diagnose glaucoma reliably 
simply by observing an unusually large or deep optic 
cup. Careful documentation of serial examinations is 
helpful. In a patient with physiologic cupping the large 
cup remains stable, whereas in a patient with glaucoma 
it expands relentlessly over the years. Detection of visual 
ﬁeld loss by computerized perimetry also contributes to 
the diagnosis. Finally, most patients with glaucoma have 
raised intraocular pressure. However, many patients 
with typical glaucomatous cupping and visual ﬁeld loss 
have intraocular pressures that apparently never exceed 
the normal limit of 20 mmHg (so-called low-tension 
glaucoma).
In acute angle-closure glaucoma, the eye is red and 
painful due to abrupt, severe elevation of intraocu-
lar pressure. Such cases account for only a minority 
of glaucoma cases: most patients have open, anterior 
chamber angles. The cause of raised intraocular pressure 
in open angle glaucoma is unknown, but it is associated 
with gene mutations in the heritable forms.
Glaucoma is usually painless (except in angle-closure 
glaucoma). Foveal acuity is spared until end-stage dis-
ease is reached. For these reasons, severe and irrevers-
ible damage can occur before either the patient or the 
physician recognizes the diagnosis. Screening of patients 
for glaucoma by noting the cup-to-disc ratio on oph-
thalmoscopy and by measuring intraocular pressure is 
vital. Glaucoma is treated with topical adrenergic ago-
nists, cholinergic agonists, beta blockers, and prostaglan-
din analogues. Occasionally, systemic absorption of beta 
blocker from eyedrops can be sufﬁcient to cause side 
effects of bradycardia, hypotension, heart block, bron-
chospasm, or depression. Topical or oral carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors are used to lower intraocular pressure 
by reducing aqueous production. Laser treatment of 
the trabecular meshwork in the anterior chamber angle 
improves aqueous outﬂow from the eye. If medical or 
laser treatments fail to halt optic nerve damage from 
glaucoma, a ﬁlter must be constructed surgically (trab-
eculectomy) or a valve placed to release aqueous from 
the eye in a controlled fashion.
Macular degeneration
This is a major cause of gradual, painless, bilateral cen-
tral visual loss in the elderly. The old term, “senile mac-
ular degeneration,” misinterpreted by many patients 
as an unﬂattering reference, has been replaced with 
“age-related macular degeneration.” It occurs in a 
FIGURE 21-15 
Glaucoma results in “cupping” as the neural rim is 
destroyed and the central cup becomes enlarged and exca-
vated. The cup-to-disc ratio is about 0.7/1.0 in this patient.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
189
nonexudative (dry) form and an exudative (wet) form. 
Inﬂammation may be important in both forms of macu-
lar degeneration; recent genetic data indicate that sus-
ceptibility is associated with variants in the gene for 
complement factor H, an inhibitor of the alternative 
complement pathway. The nonexudative process begins 
with the accumulation of extracellular deposits called 
drusen underneath the retinal pigment epithelium. On 
ophthalmoscopy, they are pleomorphic but generally 
appear as small discrete yellow lesions clustered in the 
macula (Fig. 21-16). With time they become larger, 
more numerous, and conﬂuent. The retinal pigment 
epithelium becomes focally detached and atrophic, 
causing visual loss by interfering with photoreceptor 
function. Treatment with vitamins C and E, beta-caro-
tene, and zinc may retard dry macular degeneration.
Exudative macular degeneration, which develops 
in only a minority of patients, occurs when neovascu-
lar vessels from the choroid grow through defects in 
Bruch’s membrane and proliferate underneath the reti-
nal pigment epithelium or the retina. Leakage from 
these vessels produces elevation of the retina, with 
distortion (metamorphopsia) and blurring of vision. 
Although the onset of these symptoms is usually grad-
ual, bleeding from a subretinal choroidal neovascular 
membrane sometimes causes acute visual loss. Neo-
vascular membranes can be difﬁcult to see on fun-
dus examination because they are located beneath the 
retina. Fluorescein angiography and optical coherence 
tomography, a new technique for acquiring images of 
the retina in cross-section, are extremely useful for their 
detection. Major or repeated hemorrhage under the 
retina from neovascular membranes results in ﬁbrosis, 
development of a round (disciform) macular scar, and 
permanent loss of central vision.
A major therapeutic advance has occurred recently 
with the discovery that exudative macular degenera-
tion can be treated with intraocular injection of a vas-
cular endothelial growth factor antagonist. Either bev-
acizumab or ranibizumab is administered by direct 
injection into the vitreous cavity, beginning on a 
monthly basis. These antibodies cause the regression of 
neovascular membranes by blocking the action of vas-
cular endothelial growth factor, thereby improving 
visual acuity.
Central serous chorioretinopathy
This primarily affects males between the ages of 20 and 
50. Leakage of serous ﬂuid from the choroid causes 
small, localized detachment of the retinal pigment epi-
thelium and the neurosensory retina. These detach-
ments produce acute or chronic symptoms of metamor-
phopsia and blurred vision when the macula is involved. 
They are difﬁcult to visualize with a direct ophthalmo-
scope because the detached retina is transparent and 
only slightly elevated. Diagnosis of central serous cho-
rioretinopathy is made easily by ﬂuorescein angiogra-
phy, which shows dye streaming into the subretinal 
space. The cause of central serous chorioretinopathy is 
unknown. Symptoms may resolve spontaneously if the 
retina reattaches, but recurrent detachment is common. 
Laser photocoagulation has beneﬁted some patients 
with this condition.
Diabetic retinopathy
A rare disease until 1921, when the discovery of insulin 
resulted in a dramatic improvement in life expectancy 
for patients with diabetes mellitus, diabetic retinopathy 
is now a leading cause of blindness in the United States. 
The retinopathy takes years to develop but eventually 
appears in nearly all cases. Regular surveillance of the 
dilated fundus is crucial for any patient with diabetes. 
In advanced diabetic retinopathy, the proliferation of 
neovascular vessels leads to blindness from vitreous 
hemorrhage, retinal detachment, and glaucoma. These 
complications can be avoided in most patients by 
administration of panretinal laser photocoagulation at 
the appropriate point in the evolution of the disease. 
Retinitis pigmentosa
This is a general term for a disparate group of rod-cone 
dystrophies characterized by progressive night blind-
ness, visual ﬁeld constriction with a ring scotoma, loss 
of acuity, and an abnormal electroretinogram (ERG). It 
occurs sporadically or in an autosomal recessive, domi-
nant, or X-linked pattern. Irregular black deposits of 
clumped pigment in the peripheral retina, called bone 
FIGURE 21-16 
Age-related macular degeneration begins with the accu-
mulation of drusen within the macula. They appear as scat-
tered yellow subretinal deposits.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
190
spicules because of their vague resemblance to the spic-
ules of cancellous bone, give the disease its name (Fig. 
21-17). The name is actually a misnomer because reti-
nitis pigmentosa is not an inﬂammatory process. Most 
cases are due to a mutation in the gene for rhodopsin, 
the rod photopigment, or in the gene for peripherin, a 
glycoprotein located in photoreceptor outer segments. 
Vitamin A (15,000 IU/d) slightly retards the deteriora-
tion of the ERG in patients with retinitis pigmentosa 
but has no beneﬁcial effect on visual acuity or ﬁelds.
Leber’s congenital amaurosis, a rare cone dystrophy, 
has been treated by replacement of the missing RPE65 
protein through gene therapy, resulting in modest 
improvement in visual function. Some forms of retini-
tis pigmentosa occur in association with rare, hereditary 
systemic diseases (olivopontocerebellar degeneration, 
Bassen-Kornzweig disease, Kearns-Sayre syndrome, 
Refsum’s disease). Chronic treatment with chloroquine, 
hydroxychloroquine, and phenothiazines (especially thi-
oridazine) can produce visual loss from a toxic retinopa-
thy that resembles retinitis pigmentosa.
Epiretinal membrane
This is a ﬁbrocellular tissue that grows across the inner 
surface of the retina, causing metamorphopsia and 
reduced visual acuity from distortion of the macula. A 
crinkled, cellophane-like membrane is visible on the 
retinal examination. Epiretinal membrane is most com-
mon in patients over 50 years of age and is usually uni-
lateral. Most cases are idiopathic, but some occur as a 
result of hypertensive retinopathy, diabetes, retinal 
detachment, or trauma. When visual acuity is reduced 
to the level of about 6/24 (20/80), vitrectomy and sur-
gical peeling of the membrane to relieve macular puck-
ering are recommended. Contraction of an epiretinal 
membrane sometimes gives rise to a macular hole. Most 
macular holes, however, are caused by local vitreous 
traction within the fovea. Vitrectomy can improve acu-
ity in selected cases.
Melanoma and other tumors
Melanoma is the most common primary tumor of the 
eye (Fig. 21-18). It causes photopsia, an enlarging sco-
toma, and loss of vision. A small melanoma is often difﬁ-
cult to differentiate from a benign choroidal nevus. Serial 
examinations are required to document a malignant pat-
tern of growth. Treatment of melanoma is controversial. 
Options include enucleation, local resection, and irra-
diation. Metastatic tumors to the eye outnumber primary 
tumors. Breast and lung carcinomas have a special pro-
pensity to spread to the choroid or iris. Leukemia and 
lymphoma also commonly invade ocular tissues. Some-
times their only sign on eye examination is cellular debris 
in the vitreous, which can masquerade as a chronic pos-
terior uveitis. Retrobulbar tumor of the optic nerve (menin-
gioma, glioma) or chiasmal tumor (pituitary adenoma, 
meningioma) produces gradual visual loss with few 
objective ﬁndings except for optic disc pallor. Rarely, 
sudden expansion of a pituitary adenoma from infarction 
and bleeding (pituitary apoplexy) causes acute retrobul-
bar visual loss, with headache, nausea, and ocular motor 
nerve palsies. In any patient with visual ﬁeld loss or optic 
atrophy, CT or MR scanning should be considered if the 
cause remains unknown after careful review of the his-
tory and thorough examination of the eye.
PROPTOSIS
When the globes appear asymmetric, the clinician must 
ﬁrst decide which eye is abnormal. Is one eye recessed 
within the orbit (enophthalmos), or is the other eye pro-
tuberant (exophthalmos, or proptosis)? A small globe or a 
FIGURE 21-18 
Melanoma of the choroid, appearing as an elevated dark 
mass in the inferior temporal fundus, just encroaching upon 
the fovea.
FIGURE 21-17 
Retinitis pigmentosa with black clumps of pigment in the 
retinal periphery known as “bone spicules.” There is also 
atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, making the vascu-
lature of the choroid easily visible.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
191
Horner’s syndrome can give the appearance of enoph-
thalmos. True enophthalmos occurs commonly after 
trauma, from atrophy of retrobulbar fat, or from fracture 
of the orbital ﬂoor. The position of the eyes within the 
orbits is measured by using a Hertel exophthalmometer, 
a handheld instrument that records the position of the 
anterior corneal surface relative to the lateral orbital rim. 
If this instrument is not available, relative eye position 
can be judged by bending the patient’s head forward and 
looking down upon the orbits. A proptosis of only 2 mm 
in one eye is detectable from this perspective. The devel-
opment of proptosis implies a space-occupying lesion in 
the orbit and usually warrants CT or MR imaging.
Graves’ ophthalmopathy
This is the leading cause of proptosis in adults. The pro-
ptosis is often asymmetric and can even appear to be 
unilateral. Orbital inﬂammation and engorgement of 
the extraocular muscles, particularly the medial rectus 
and the inferior rectus, account for the protrusion of 
the globe. Corneal exposure, lid retraction, conjuncti-
val injection, restriction of gaze, diplopia, and visual loss 
from optic nerve compression are cardinal symptoms. 
Graves’ ophthalmopathy is treated with oral prednisone 
(60 mg/d) for 1 month, followed by a taper over several 
months, topical lubricants, eyelid surgery, eye muscle 
surgery, or orbital decompression. Radiation therapy is 
not effective.
Orbital pseudotumor
This is an idiopathic, inﬂammatory orbital syndrome 
that frequently is confused with Graves’ ophthalmopa-
thy. Symptoms are pain, limited eye movements, 
proptosis, and congestion. Evaluation for sarcoidosis, 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), and other 
types of orbital vasculitis or collagen-vascular disease 
is negative. Imaging often shows swollen eye muscles 
(orbital myositis) with enlarged tendons. By contrast, in 
Graves’ ophthalmopathy the tendons of the eye muscles 
usually are spared. The Tolosa-Hunt syndrome may 
be regarded as an extension of orbital pseudotumor 
through the superior orbital ﬁssure into the cavern-
ous sinus. The diagnosis of orbital pseudotumor is dif-
ﬁcult. Biopsy of the orbit frequently yields nonspeciﬁc 
evidence of fat inﬁltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells, 
and eosinophils. A dramatic response to a therapeutic 
trial of systemic glucocorticoids indirectly provides the 
best conﬁrmation of the diagnosis.
Orbital cellulitis
This causes pain, lid erythema, proptosis, conjunctival che-
mosis, restricted motility, decreased acuity, afferent pupil-
lary defect, fever, and leukocytosis. It often arises from the 
paranasal sinuses, especially by contiguous spread of infec-
tion from the ethmoid sinus through the lamina papyracea 
of the medial orbit. A history of recent upper respiratory 
tract infection, chronic sinusitis, thick mucus secretions, or 
dental disease is signiﬁcant in any patient with suspected 
orbital cellulitis. Blood cultures should be obtained, but 
they are usually negative. Most patients respond to empiri-
cal therapy with broad-spectrum IV antibiotics. Occasion-
ally, orbital cellulitis follows an overwhelming course, with 
massive proptosis, blindness, septic cavernous sinus throm-
bosis, and meningitis. To avert this disaster, orbital celluli-
tis should be managed aggressively in the early stages, with 
immediate imaging of the orbits and antibiotic therapy 
that includes coverage of methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus (MRSA). Prompt surgical drainage of an orbital 
abscess or paranasal sinusitis is indicated if optic nerve func-
tion deteriorates despite antibiotics.
Tumors
Tumors of the orbit cause painless, progressive proptosis. 
The most common primary tumors are hemangioma, 
lymphangioma, neuroﬁbroma, dermoid cyst, adenoid 
cystic carcinoma, optic nerve glioma, optic nerve menin-
gioma, and benign mixed tumor of the lacrimal gland. 
Metastatic tumor to the orbit occurs frequently in breast 
carcinoma, lung carcinoma, and lymphoma. Diagnosis by 
ﬁne-needle aspiration followed by urgent radiation ther-
apy sometimes can preserve vision.
Carotid cavernous ﬁstulas
With anterior drainage through the orbit these ﬁstulas 
produce proptosis, diplopia, glaucoma, and corkscrew, 
arterialized conjunctival vessels. Direct ﬁstulas usually 
result from trauma. They are easily diagnosed because of 
the prominent signs produced by high-ﬂow, high-pres-
sure shunting. Indirect ﬁstulas, or dural arteriovenous 
malformations, are more likely to occur spontaneously, 
especially in older women. The signs are more subtle, 
and the diagnosis frequently is missed. The combina-
tion of slight proptosis, diplopia, enlarged muscles, and 
an injected eye often is mistaken for thyroid ophthal-
mopathy. A bruit heard upon auscultation of the head 
or reported by the patient is a valuable diagnostic clue. 
Imaging shows an enlarged superior ophthalmic vein in 
the orbits. Carotid cavernous shunts can be eliminated 
by intravascular embolization.
PTOSIS
Blepharoptosis
This is an abnormal drooping of the eyelid. Unilateral 
or bilateral ptosis can be congenital, from dysgenesis 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
192
of the levator palpebrae superioris, or from abnormal 
insertion of its aponeurosis into the eyelid. Acquired 
ptosis can develop so gradually that the patient is 
unaware of the problem. Inspection of old photographs 
is helpful in dating the onset. A history of prior trauma, 
eye surgery, contact lens use, diplopia, systemic symp-
toms (e.g., dysphagia or peripheral muscle weakness), or 
a family history of ptosis should be sought. Fluctuating 
ptosis that worsens late in the day is typical of myasthe-
nia gravis. Examination should focus on evidence for 
proptosis, eyelid masses or deformities, inﬂammation, 
pupil inequality, or limitation of motility. The width 
of the palpebral ﬁssures is measured in primary gaze 
to quantitate the degree of ptosis. The ptosis will be 
underestimated if the patient compensates by lifting the 
brow with the frontalis muscle.
Mechanical ptosis
This occurs in many elderly patients from stretching 
and redundancy of eyelid skin and subcutaneous fat 
(dermatochalasis). The extra weight of these sagging 
tissues causes the lid to droop. Enlargement or defor-
mation of the eyelid from infection, tumor, trauma, or 
inﬂammation also results in ptosis on a purely mechan-
ical basis.
Aponeurotic ptosis
This is an acquired dehiscence or stretching of the apo-
neurotic tendon, which connects the levator muscle 
to the tarsal plate of the eyelid. It occurs commonly in 
older patients, presumably from loss of connective tissue 
elasticity. Aponeurotic ptosis is also a common sequela 
of eyelid swelling from infection or blunt trauma to the 
orbit, cataract surgery, or hard contact lens use.
Myogenic ptosis
The causes of myogenic ptosis include myasthenia gra-
vis (Chap. 47) and a number of rare myopathies that 
manifest with ptosis. The term chronic progressive exter-
nal ophthalmoplegia refers to a spectrum of systemic dis-
eases caused by mutations of mitochondrial DNA. 
As the name implies, the most prominent ﬁndings are 
symmetric, slowly progressive ptosis and limitation of 
eye movements. In general, diplopia is a late symptom 
because all eye movements are reduced equally. In the 
Kearns-Sayre variant, retinal pigmentary changes and 
abnormalities of cardiac conduction develop. Peripheral 
muscle biopsy shows characteristic “ragged-red ﬁbers.” 
Oculopharyngeal dystrophy is a distinct autosomal domi-
nant disease with onset in middle age, characterized by 
ptosis, limited eye movements, and trouble swallowing. 
Myotonic dystrophy, another autosomal dominant dis-
order, causes ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, cataract, and 
pigmentary retinopathy. Patients have muscle wasting, 
myotonia, frontal balding, and cardiac abnormalities.
Neurogenic ptosis
This results from a lesion affecting the innervation to 
either of the two muscles that open the eyelid: Müller’s 
muscle or the levator palpebrae superioris. Examination 
of the pupil helps distinguish between these two pos-
sibilities. In Horner’s syndrome, the eye with ptosis has 
a smaller pupil and the eye movements are full. In an 
oculomotor nerve palsy, the eye with the ptosis has a 
larger or a normal pupil. If the pupil is normal but there 
is limitation of adduction, elevation, and depression, a 
pupil-sparing oculomotor nerve palsy is likely (see next 
section). Rarely, a lesion affecting the small, central sub-
nucleus of the oculomotor complex will cause bilateral 
ptosis with normal eye movements and pupils.
DOUBLE VISION (DIPLOPIA)
The ﬁrst point to clarify is whether diplopia persists in 
either eye after the opposite eye is covered. If it does, 
the diagnosis is monocular diplopia. The cause is usually 
intrinsic to the eye and therefore has no dire implica-
tions for the patient. Corneal aberrations (e.g., kerato-
conus, pterygium), uncorrected refractive error, cataract, 
or foveal traction may give rise to monocular diplopia. 
Occasionally it is a symptom of malingering or psychi-
atric disease. Diplopia alleviated by covering one eye is 
binocular diplopia and is caused by disruption of ocular 
alignment. Inquiry should be made into the nature of 
the double vision (purely side-by-side versus partial ver-
tical displacement of images), mode of onset, duration, 
intermittency, diurnal variation, and associated neuro-
logic or systemic symptoms. If the patient has diplopia 
while being examined, motility testing should reveal 
a deﬁciency corresponding to the patient’s symptoms. 
However, subtle limitation of ocular excursions is often 
difﬁcult to detect. For example, a patient with a slight 
left abducens nerve paresis may appear to have full eye 
movements despite a complaint of horizontal diplopia 
upon looking to the left. In this situation, the cover test 
provides a more sensitive method for demonstrating the 
ocular misalignment. It should be conducted in primary 
gaze and then with the head turned and tilted in each 
direction. In the above example, a cover test with the 
head turned to the right will maximize the ﬁxation shift 
evoked by the cover test.
Occasionally, a cover test performed in an asymp-
tomatic patient during a routine examination will reveal 
an ocular deviation. If the eye movements are full and 
the ocular misalignment is equal in all directions of gaze 
(concomitant deviation), the diagnosis is strabismus. 
In this condition, which affects about 1% of the 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
193
population, fusion is disrupted in infancy or early child-
hood. To avoid diplopia, vision is suppressed from the 
nonﬁxating eye. In some children, this leads to impaired 
vision (amblyopia, or “lazy” eye) in the deviated eye.
Binocular diplopia results from a wide range of pro-
cesses: infectious, neoplastic, metabolic, degenerative, 
inﬂammatory, and vascular. One must decide whether 
the diplopia is neurogenic in origin or is due to restric-
tion of globe rotation by local disease in the orbit. 
Orbital pseudotumor, myositis, infection, tumor, thy-
roid disease, and muscle entrapment (e.g., from a blow-
out fracture) cause restrictive diplopia. The diagnosis of 
restriction is usually made by recognizing other associ-
ated signs and symptoms of local orbital disease in con-
junction with imaging.
Myasthenia gravis
(See also Chap. 47) This is a major cause of diplopia. 
The diplopia is often intermittent, variable, and not 
conﬁned to any single ocular motor nerve distribution. 
The pupils are always normal. Fluctuating ptosis may be 
present. Many patients have a purely ocular form of the 
disease, with no evidence of systemic muscular weak-
ness. The diagnosis can be conﬁrmed by an IV edro-
phonium injection or by an assay for antiacetylcholine 
receptor antibodies. Negative results from these tests do 
not exclude the diagnosis. Botulism from food or wound 
poisoning can mimic ocular myasthenia.
After restrictive orbital disease and myasthenia gra-
vis are excluded, a lesion of a cranial nerve supplying 
innervation to the extraocular muscles is the most likely 
cause of binocular diplopia.
Oculomotor nerve
The third cranial nerve innervates the medial, inferior, 
and superior recti; inferior oblique; levator palpebrae 
superioris; and the iris sphincter. Total palsy of the ocu-
lomotor nerve causes ptosis, results in a dilated pupil, and 
leaves the eye “down and out” because of the unop-
posed action of the lateral rectus and superior oblique. 
This combination of ﬁndings is obvious. More challeng-
ing is the diagnosis of early or partial oculomotor nerve 
palsy. In this setting, any combination of ptosis, pupil 
dilation, and weakness of the eye muscles supplied by the 
oculomotor nerve may be encountered. Frequent serial 
examinations during the evolving phase of the palsy help 
ensure that the diagnosis is not missed. The advent of an 
oculomotor nerve palsy with a pupil involvement, espe-
cially when accompanied by pain, suggests a compressive 
lesion, such as a tumor or circle of Willis aneurysm. Neu-
roimaging should be obtained, along with a CT or MR 
angiogram. Occasionally, a catheter arteriogram must be 
done to exclude an aneurysm.
A lesion of the oculomotor nucleus in the rostral 
midbrain produces signs that differ from those caused 
by a lesion of the nerve itself. There is bilateral pto-
sis because the levator muscle is innervated by a single 
central subnucleus. There is also weakness of the con-
tralateral superior rectus, because it is supplied by the 
oculomotor nucleus on the other side. Occasionally 
both superior recti are weak. Isolated nuclear oculomo-
tor palsy is rare. Usually neurologic examination reveals 
additional signs that suggest brainstem damage from 
infarction, hemorrhage, tumor, or infection.
Injury to structures surrounding fascicles of the ocu-
lomotor nerve descending through the midbrain has 
given rise to a number of classic eponymic designations. 
In Nothnagel’s syndrome, injury to the superior cerebellar 
peduncle causes ipsilateral oculomotor palsy and con-
tralateral cerebellar ataxia. In Benedikt’s syndrome, injury 
to the red nucleus results in ipsilateral oculomotor palsy 
and contralateral tremor, chorea, and athetosis. Claude’s 
syndrome incorporates features of both of these syn-
dromes, by injury to both the red nucleus and the supe-
rior cerebellar peduncle. Finally, in Weber’s syndrome, 
injury to the cerebral peduncle causes ipsilateral oculo-
motor palsy with contralateral hemiparesis.
In the subarachnoid space the oculomotor nerve 
is vulnerable to aneurysm, meningitis, tumor, infarc-
tion, and compression. In cerebral herniation the nerve 
becomes trapped between the edge of the tentorium 
and the uncus of the temporal lobe. Oculomotor palsy 
also can result from midbrain torsion and hemorrhages 
during herniation. In the cavernous sinus, oculomo-
tor palsy arises from carotid aneurysm, carotid cavern-
ous ﬁstula, cavernous sinus thrombosis, tumor (pituitary 
adenoma, meningioma, metastasis), herpes zoster infec-
tion, and the Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.
The etiology of an isolated, pupil-sparing oculomo-
tor palsy often remains an enigma even after neuroim-
aging and extensive laboratory testing. Most cases are 
thought to result from microvascular infarction of the 
nerve somewhere along its course from the brainstem 
to the orbit. Usually the patient complains of pain. 
Diabetes, hypertension, and vascular disease are major 
risk factors. Spontaneous recovery over a period of 
months is the rule. If this fails to occur or if new ﬁnd-
ings develop, the diagnosis of microvascular oculomotor 
nerve palsy should be reconsidered. Aberrant regenera-
tion is common when the oculomotor nerve is injured 
by trauma or compression (tumor, aneurysm). Miswir-
ing of sprouting ﬁbers to the levator muscle and the 
rectus muscles results in elevation of the eyelid upon 
downgaze or adduction. The pupil also constricts upon 
attempted adduction, elevation, or depression of the 
globe. Aberrant regeneration is not seen after oculomo-
tor palsy from microvascular infarct and hence vitiates 
that diagnosis.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
194
Trochlear nerve
The fourth cranial nerve originates in the midbrain, 
just caudal to the oculomotor nerve complex. Fibers 
exit the brainstem dorsally and cross to innervate the 
contralateral superior oblique. The principal actions of 
this muscle are to depress and intort the globe. A palsy 
therefore results in hypertropia and excyclotorsion. The 
cyclotorsion seldom is noticed by patients. Instead, they 
complain of vertical diplopia, especially upon reading 
or looking down. The vertical diplopia also is exacer-
bated by tilting the head toward the side with the mus-
cle palsy and alleviated by tilting it away. This “head tilt 
test” is a cardinal diagnostic feature.
Isolated trochlear nerve palsy results from all the 
causes listed earlier for the oculomotor nerve except 
aneurysm. The trochlear nerve is particularly apt to suf-
fer injury after closed head trauma. The free edge of the 
tentorium is thought to impinge on the nerve during 
a concussive blow. Most isolated trochlear nerve pal-
sies are idiopathic and hence are diagnosed by exclusion 
as “microvascular.” Spontaneous improvement occurs 
over a period of months in most patients. A base-down 
prism (conveniently applied to the patient’s glasses as a 
stick-on Fresnel lens) may serve as a temporary measure 
to alleviate diplopia. If the palsy does not resolve, the 
eyes can be realigned by weakening the inferior oblique 
muscle.
Abducens nerve
The sixth cranial nerve innervates the lateral rectus 
muscle. A palsy produces horizontal diplopia, worse 
on gaze to the side of the lesion. A nuclear lesion has 
different consequences, because the abducens nucleus 
contains interneurons that project via the medial lon-
gitudinal fasciculus to the medial rectus subnucleus of 
the contralateral oculomotor complex. Therefore, an 
abducens nuclear lesion produces a complete lateral 
gaze palsy from weakness of both the ipsilateral lateral 
rectus and the contralateral medial rectus. Foville’s syn-
drome after dorsal pontine injury includes lateral gaze 
palsy, ipsilateral facial palsy, and contralateral hemi-
paresis incurred by damage to descending corticospi-
nal ﬁbers. Millard-Gubler syndrome from ventral pontine 
injury is similar except for the eye ﬁndings. There is lat-
eral rectus weakness only, instead of gaze palsy, because 
the abducens fascicle is injured rather than the nucleus. 
Infarct, tumor, hemorrhage, vascular malformation, and 
multiple sclerosis are the most common etiologies of 
brainstem abducens palsy.
After leaving the ventral pons, the abducens nerve 
runs forward along the clivus to pierce the dura at 
the petrous apex, where it enters the cavernous sinus. 
Along its subarachnoid course it is susceptible to men-
ingitis, tumor (meningioma, chordoma, carcinomatous 
meningitis), subarachnoid hemorrhage, trauma, and 
compression by aneurysm or dolichoectatic vessels. At 
the petrous apex, mastoiditis can produce deafness, pain, 
and ipsilateral abducens palsy (Gradenigo’s syndrome). In 
the cavernous sinus, the nerve can be affected by carotid 
aneurysm, carotid cavernous ﬁstula, tumor (pituitary 
adenoma, meningioma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma), herpes 
infection, and Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.
Unilateral or bilateral abducens palsy is a classic sign 
of raised intracranial pressure. The diagnosis can be con-
ﬁrmed if papilledema is observed on fundus examina-
tion. The mechanism is still debated but probably is 
related to rostral-caudal displacement of the brainstem. 
The same phenomenon accounts for abducens palsy 
from low intracranial pressure (e.g., after lumbar punc-
ture, spinal anesthesia, or spontaneous dural cerebrospi-
nal ﬂuid leak).
Treatment of abducens palsy is aimed at prompt cor-
rection of the underlying cause. However, the cause 
remains obscure in many instances despite diligent eval-
uation. As was mentioned earlier for isolated trochlear 
or oculomotor palsy, most cases are assumed to repre-
sent microvascular infarcts because they often occur 
in the setting of diabetes or other vascular risk factors. 
Some cases may develop as a postinfectious mononeu-
ritis (e.g., after a viral ﬂu). Patching one eye or applying 
a temporary prism will provide relief of diplopia until 
the palsy resolves. If recovery is incomplete, eye mus-
cle surgery nearly always can realign the eyes, at least 
in primary position. A patient with an abducens palsy 
that fails to improve should be reevaluated for an occult 
etiology (e.g., chordoma, carcinomatous meningitis, 
carotid cavernous ﬁstula, myasthenia gravis). Skull base 
tumors are easily missed even on contrast-enhanced 
neuroimaging studies.
Multiple ocular motor nerve palsies
These should not be attributed to spontaneous micro-
vascular events affecting more than one cranial nerve at 
a time. This remarkable coincidence does occur, espe-
cially in diabetic patients, but the diagnosis is made 
only in retrospect after all other diagnostic alternatives 
have been exhausted. Neuroimaging should focus on 
the cavernous sinus, superior orbital ﬁssure, and orbital 
apex, where all three ocular motor nerves are in close 
proximity. In a diabetic or immunocompromised host, 
fungal infection (Aspergillus, Mucorales, Cryptococcus) is 
a common cause of multiple nerve palsies. In a patient 
with systemic malignancy, carcinomatous meningitis is 
a likely diagnosis. Cytologic examination may be nega-
tive despite repeated sampling of the cerebrospinal ﬂuid. 
The cancer-associated Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syn-
drome also can produce ophthalmoplegia. Giant cell 
(temporal) arteritis occasionally manifests as diplopia 
from ischemic palsies of extraocular muscles. Fisher’s 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
195
syndrome, an ocular variant of Guillain-Barré, produces 
ophthalmoplegia with areﬂexia and ataxia. Often the 
ataxia is mild, and the reﬂexes are normal. Antiganglio-
side antibodies (GQ1b) can be detected in about 50% of 
cases.
Supranuclear disorders of gaze
These are often mistaken for multiple ocular motor 
nerve palsies. For example, Wernicke’s encephalopathy 
can produce nystagmus and a partial deﬁcit of horizon-
tal and vertical gaze that mimics a combined abducens 
and oculomotor nerve palsy. The disorder occurs in 
malnourished or alcoholic patients and can be reversed 
by thiamine. Infarct, hemorrhage, tumor, multiple scle-
rosis, encephalitis, vasculitis, and Whipple’s disease are 
other important causes of supranuclear gaze palsy. Dis-
orders of vertical gaze, especially downward saccades, 
are an early feature of progressive supranuclear palsy. 
Smooth pursuit is affected later in the course of the 
disease. Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and 
olivopontocerebellar degeneration also can affect verti-
cal gaze.
The frontal eye ﬁeld of the cerebral cortex is involved 
in generation of saccades to the contralateral side. After 
hemispheric stroke, the eyes usually deviate toward the 
lesioned side because of the unopposed action of the 
frontal eye ﬁeld in the normal hemisphere. With time, 
this deﬁcit resolves. Seizures generally have the oppo-
site effect: the eyes deviate conjugately away from the 
irritative focus. Parietal lesions disrupt smooth pursuit 
of targets moving toward the side of the lesion. Bilat-
eral parietal lesions produce Bálint’s syndrome, which 
is characterized by impaired eye-hand coordination 
(optic ataxia), difﬁculty initiating voluntary eye move-
ments (ocular apraxia), and visuospatial disorientation 
(simultanagnosia).
Horizontal gaze
Descending cortical inputs mediating horizontal gaze 
ultimately converge at the level of the pons. Neu-
rons in the paramedian pontine reticular formation are 
responsible for controlling conjugate gaze toward the 
same side. They project directly to the ipsilateral abdu-
cens nucleus. A lesion of either the paramedian pon-
tine reticular formation or the abducens nucleus causes 
an ipsilateral conjugate gaze palsy. Lesions at either 
locus produce nearly identical clinical syndromes, with 
the following exception: vestibular stimulation (ocu-
locephalic maneuver or caloric irrigation) will succeed 
in driving the eyes conjugately to the side in a patient 
with a lesion of the paramedian pontine reticular forma-
tion but not in a patient with a lesion of the abducens 
nucleus.
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
This results from damage to the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus ascending from the abducens nucleus in the 
pons to the oculomotor nucleus in the midbrain (hence, 
“internuclear”). Damage to ﬁbers carrying the conju-
gate signal from abducens interneurons to the contra-
lateral medial rectus motoneurons results in a failure 
of adduction on attempted lateral gaze. For example, a 
patient with a left internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO) 
will have slowed or absent adducting movements of the 
left eye (Fig. 21-19). A patient with bilateral injury 
to the medial longitudinal fasciculus will have bilateral 
INO. Multiple sclerosis is the most common cause, 
although tumor, stroke, trauma, or any brainstem pro-
cess may be responsible. One-and-a-half syndrome is due 
to a combined lesion of the medial longitudinal fascic-
ulus and the abducens nucleus on the same side. The 
patient’s only horizontal eye movement is abduction of 
the eye on the other side.
Vertical gaze
This is controlled at the level of the midbrain. The neu-
ronal circuits affected in disorders of vertical gaze are 
not fully elucidated, but lesions of the rostral intersti-
tial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the 
interstitial nucleus of Cajal cause supranuclear paresis of 
upgaze, downgaze, or all vertical eye movements. Dis-
tal basilar artery ischemia is the most common etiology. 
Skew deviation refers to a vertical misalignment of the 
eyes, usually constant in all positions of gaze. The ﬁnd-
ing has poor localizing value because skew deviation has 
been reported after lesions in widespread regions of the 
brainstem and cerebellum.
Parinaud’s syndrome
Also known as dorsal midbrain syndrome, this is a dis-
tinct supranuclear vertical gaze disorder caused by dam-
age to the posterior commissure. It is a classic sign of 
hydrocephalus from aqueductal stenosis. Pineal region 
tumors, cysticercosis, and stroke also cause Parinaud’s 
syndrome. Features include loss of upgaze (and some-
times downgaze), convergence-retraction nystagmus on 
attempted upgaze, downward ocular deviation (“setting 
sun” sign), lid retraction (Collier’s sign), skew deviation, 
pseudoabducens palsy, and light-near dissociation of the 
pupils.
Nystagmus
This is a rhythmic oscillation of the eyes, occurring 
physiologically from vestibular and optokinetic stimu-
lation or pathologically in a wide variety of diseases 
(Chap. 11). Abnormalities of the eyes or optic nerves, 
present at birth or acquired in childhood, can produce 
a complex, searching nystagmus with irregular pendular 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
196
(sinusoidal) and jerk features. This nystagmus is com-
monly referred to as congenital sensory nystagmus. This 
is a poor term because even in children with congeni-
tal lesions, the nystagmus does not appear until several 
months of age. Congenital motor nystagmus, which looks 
similar to congenital sensory nystagmus, develops in the 
absence of any abnormality of the sensory visual system. 
Visual acuity also is reduced in congenital motor nys-
tagmus, probably by the nystagmus itself, but seldom 
below a level of 20/200.
Jerk nystagmus
This is characterized by a slow drift off the target, fol-
lowed by a fast corrective saccade. By convention, the 
nystagmus is named after the quick phase. Jerk nystag-
mus can be downbeat, upbeat, horizontal (left or right), 
and torsional. The pattern of nystagmus may vary with 
gaze position. Some patients will be oblivious to their 
nystagmus. Others will complain of blurred vision or 
a subjective to-and-fro movement of the environment 
(oscillopsia) corresponding to the nystagmus. Fine nys-
tagmus may be difﬁcult to see on gross examination 
of the eyes. Observation of nystagmoid movements of 
the optic disc on ophthalmoscopy is a sensitive way to 
detect subtle nystagmus.
Gaze-evoked nystagmus
This is the most common form of jerk nystagmus. 
When the eyes are held eccentrically in the orbits, 
they have a natural tendency to drift back to primary 
position. The subject compensates by making a cor-
rective saccade to maintain the deviated eye position. 
Many normal patients have mild gaze-evoked nys-
tagmus. Exaggerated gaze-evoked nystagmus can be 
induced by drugs (sedatives, anticonvulsants, alcohol); 
muscle paresis; myasthenia gravis; demyelinating dis-
ease; and cerebellopontine angle, brainstem, and cer-
ebellar lesions.
Vestibular nystagmus
Vestibular nystagmus results from dysfunction of the laby-
rinth (Ménière’s disease), vestibular nerve, or vestibular 
nucleus in the brainstem. Peripheral vestibular nystag-
mus often occurs in discrete attacks, with symptoms 
of nausea and vertigo. There may be associated tinni-
tus and hearing loss. Sudden shifts in head position may 
provoke or exacerbate symptoms.
Downbeat nystagmus
Downbeat nystagmus results from lesions near the 
craniocervical junction (Chiari malformation, basilar 
invagination). It also has been reported in brainstem or 
cerebellar stroke, lithium or anticonvulsant intoxication, 
alcoholism, and multiple sclerosis. Upbeat nystagmus is 
FIGURE 21-19 
Left internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO). A. In primary posi-
tion of gaze the eyes appear normal. B. Horizontal gaze to 
the left is intact. C. On attempted horizontal gaze to the right, 
the left eye fails to adduct. In mildly affected patients the eye 
may adduct partially or more slowly than normal. Nystagmus 
is usually present in the abducted eye. D. T2-weighted axial 
MRI image through the pons showing a demyelinating plaque 
in the left medial longitudinal fasciculus (arrow).
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Vision
197
associated with damage to the pontine tegmentum from 
stroke, demyelination, or tumor.
Opsoclonus
This rare, dramatic disorder of eye movements consists 
of bursts of consecutive saccades (saccadomania). When 
the saccades are conﬁned to the horizontal plane, the 
term ocular ﬂutter is preferred. It can result from viral 
encephalitis, trauma, or a paraneoplastic effect of neu-
roblastoma, breast carcinoma, and other malignancies. It 
has also been reported as a benign, transient phenom-
enon in otherwise healthy patients.
 Shirley H. Wray 
198
 The proper control of eye movements requires the 
coordinated activity of many different anatomic struc-
tures in the peripheral and central nervous system, and 
in turn manifestations of a diverse array of neurologi-
cal and medical disorders are revealed as disorders of 
eye movement. In this remarkable video collection, 
an introduction to distinctive eye movement disorders 
encountered in the context of neuromuscular, para-
neoplastic, demyelinating, neurovascular, and neurode-
generative disorders is presented. Videos for this chap-
ter can be accessed at the following link: http://www
.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/.
 VIDEO LIBRARY OF NEURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 CHAPTER 22 
 Richard L. Doty  ■  Steven M. Bromley 
199
 All environmental chemicals necessary for life enter 
the body by the nose and mouth. The senses of smell 
(olfaction) and taste (gustation) monitor those chemi-
cals, determine the ﬂ avor and palatability of foods and 
beverages, and warn of dangerous environmental condi-
tions, including ﬁ re, air pollution, leaking natural gas, 
and bacteria-laden foodstuffs. These senses contribute 
signiﬁ cantly to quality of life and, when dysfunctional, 
can have untoward physical and psychological conse-
quences. A basic understanding of these senses in health 
and disease is critical for the physician, since thousands 
of patients present to doctors’ ofﬁ ces each year with 
complaints of chemosensory dysfunction. Among the 
more important developments in neurology has been 
the discovery that decreased smell function is per-
haps the ﬁ rst sign of neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD), 
signifying their “presymptomatic” phase. 
 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 
 Olfactory system 
 Odorous chemicals enter the nose during inhalation and 
active snifﬁ ng as well as during deglutition. After reach-
ing the highest recesses of the nasal cavity, they dis-
solve in the olfactory mucus and diffuse or are actively 
transported to receptors on the cilia of olfactory recep-
tor cells. The cilia, dendrites, cell bodies, and proximal 
axonal segments of these bipolar cells are situated within 
a specialized neuroepithelium that covers the cribriform 
plate, the superior nasal septum, the superior turbinate, 
and sectors of the middle turbinate ( Fig. 23-1 ). Each of 
the ∼6 million bipolar receptor cells expresses only one 
of ∼450 receptor protein types, most of which respond 
to more than a single chemical. When damaged, the 
receptor cells can be replaced by stem cells near the 
basement membrane. Unfortunately, such replacement 
is often incomplete. 
 After coalescing into bundles surrounded by glia-like 
ensheathing cells (termed ﬁ la), the receptor cell axons 
pass through the cribriform plate to the olfactory bulbs, 
where they synapse with dendrites of other cell types 
within the glomeruli ( Fig. 23-2 ). These spherical struc-
tures, which make up a distinct layer of the olfactory 
bulb, are a site of convergence of information, since 
many more ﬁ bers enter than leave them. Receptor 
cells that express the same type of receptor project to 
the same glomeruli, effectively making each glomerulus 
a functional unit. The major projection neurons of the 
olfactory system—the mitral and tufted cells—send pri-
mary dendrites into the glomeruli, connecting not only 
with the incoming receptor cell axons but with den-
drites of periglomerular cells. The activity of the mitral/
tufted cells is modulated by the periglomerular cells, 
secondary dendrites from other mitral/tufted cells, and 
granule cells, the most numerous cells of the bulb. The 
latter cells, which are largely GABAergic, receive inputs 
from central brain structures and modulate the output 
of the mitral/tufted cells. Interestingly, like the olfac-
tory receptor cells, some cells within the bulb undergo 
replacement. Thus, neuroblasts formed within the ante-
rior subventricular zone of the brain migrate along the 
rostral migratory stream, ultimately becoming granule 
and periglomerular cells. 
 The axons of the mitral and tufted cells synapse 
within the primary olfactory cortex (POC) ( Fig. 23-3 ). 
The POC is deﬁ ned as the cortical structures that 
receive direct projections from the olfactory bulb, most 
notably the piriform and entorhinal cortices. Although 
olfaction is unique in that its initial afferent projec-
tions bypass the thalamus, persons with damage to the 
thalamus can exhibit olfactory deﬁ cits, particularly ones 
of odor identiﬁ cation. Those deﬁ cits probably reﬂ ect 
the involvement of thalamic connections between the 
primary olfactory cortex and the orbitofrontal cortex 
(OFC), where odor identiﬁ cation occurs. The close 
anatomic ties between the olfactory system and the 
 DISORDERS OF SMELL AND TASTE 
 CHAPTER 23 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
200
amygdala, hippocampus, and hypothalamus help explain 
the intimate associations between odor perception 
and cognitive functions such as memory, motivation, 
arousal, autonomic activity, digestion, and sex.
Taste system
Tastants are sensed by specialized receptor cells present 
within taste buds: small grapefruit-like segmented struc-
tures on the lateral margins and dorsum of the tongue, 
the roof of the mouth, the pharynx, the larynx, and the 
superior esophagus (Fig. 23-4). Lingual taste buds are 
embedded in well-deﬁned protuberances termed fungi-
form, foliate, and circumvallate papillae. After dissolving 
FIGURE 23-1 
Anatomy of the olfactory neural pathways, showing the 
distribution of olfactory receptors in the roof of the nasal 
cavity. (vghghg David Klemm, Faculty and Curriculum Sup-
Granule cell
Mitral/tufted cell
Lateral olfactory tract
Granule cell layer
Internal plexiform layer
Mitral cell layer
External plexiform layer
Glomerular layer
Nerve fiber layer
Olfactory neurons
Olfactory receptor cells
Olfactory cilia
Periglomerular
cell
Glomerulus
Sensory neuron
FIGURE 23-2 
Schematic of the layers and wiring of the olfactory bulb. 
Each receptor type (red, green, blue) projects to a common 
glomerulus. The neural activity within each glomerulus is 
modulated by periglomerular cells. The activity of the primary 
projection cells, the mitral and tufted cells, is modulated by 
granule cells, periglomerular cells, and secondary dendrites 
from other mitral and tufted cells. (From www.med.yale.edu/
neurosurg/treloar/index.html.)
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory tract
Lateral olfactory
stria
Amygdala
Pyriform
area
Entorhinal
area
Vagus
nerve
Spinal cord
Cerebellar
vermis
Cerebellum
Medial olfactory
stria
FIGURE 23-3 
Anatomy of the base of the brain showing the primary 
olfactory cortex.
port [FACS], Georgetown University Medical Center; used 
with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders of Smell and Taste
201
in a liquid, tastants enter the opening of the taste bud—
the taste pore—and bind to receptors on microvilli, 
small extensions of receptor cells within each taste bud. 
Such binding changes the electrical potential across the 
taste cell, resulting in neurotransmitter release onto the 
ﬁrst-order taste neurons. Although humans have ∼7500 
taste buds, not all harbor taste-sensitive cells; some con-
tain only one class of receptor (e.g., cells responsive 
only to sugars), whereas others contain cells sensitive 
to more than one class. The number of taste receptor 
cells per taste bud ranges from zero to well over 100. 
A small family of three G-protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs)—T1R1, T1R2, and T1R3—mediate sweet 
and umami taste sensations. Umami (“savory”) refers to 
the ﬂavors of meat, cheese, and broth due to glutamate 
and related compounds. Bitter sensations, in contrast, 
depend on T2R receptors, a family of ∼30 GPCRs 
expressed on cells different from those which express 
the sweet and umami receptors. T2Rs sense a wide 
range of bitter substances but do not distinguish among 
them. Sour tastants are sensed by the PKD2L1 recep-
tor, a member of the transient receptor potential protein 
(TRP) family. Perception of salty sensations, such as 
those induced by sodium chloride, arises from the entry 
of Na+ ions into the cells via specialized membrane 
channels such as the amiloride-sensitive Na+ channel.
Taste information is sent to the brain via three cra-
nial nerves (CNs): CN VII (the facial nerve, which 
involves the intermediate nerve with its branches, the 
greater petrosal and chorda tympani nerves); CN IX 
(the glossopharyngeal nerve); and CN X (the vagus nerve) 
(Fig. 23-5). CN VII innervates the anterior tongue and 
FIGURE 23-5 
Schematic of the cranial nerves that mediate taste func-
tion, including the chorda tympani nerve (CN VII), the glos-
sopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), and the vagus nerve (CN X). 
(vghghg David Klemm, Faculty and Curriculum Support 
[FACS], Georgetown University Medical Center; used with 
permission.)
Circumvallate
Foliate
Fungiform
Taste
bud
Taste pore
TRC
Taste
bud
Taste
bud
FIGURE 23-4 
Schematic of the taste bud and its opening (pore), as well as the location of buds on the three major 
types of papillae: fungiform (anterior), foliate (lateral), and circumvallate (posterior). TRC, taste receptor 
cell.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
202
all of the soft palate, CN IX innervates the posterior 
tongue, and CN X innervates the laryngeal surface of 
the epiglottis, the larynx, and the proximal portion of 
the esophagus. The mandibular branch of CN V (V3) 
conveys somatosensory information (e.g., touch, burn-
ing, cooling, irritation) to the brain. Although not tech-
nically a gustatory nerve, CN V shares primary nerve 
routes with many of the gustatory nerve ﬁbers and adds 
temperature, texture, pungency, and spiciness to the 
taste experience. The chorda tympani nerve is notable 
for taking a recurrent course through the facial canal 
in the petrosal portion of the temporal bone, passing 
through the middle ear, then exiting the skull via the 
petrotympanic ﬁssure, where it joins the lingual nerve 
(a division of CN V) near the tongue. This nerve also 
carries parasympathetic ﬁbers to the submandibular and 
sublingual glands, whereas the greater petrosal nerve 
supplies the palatine glands, thereby inﬂuencing saliva 
production.
The axons of the projection cells that synapse with 
taste buds enter the rostral portion of the nucleus of the 
solitary tract (NTS) within the medulla of the brainstem 
(Fig.  23-5). From the NTS, neurons then project to a 
division of the ventroposteromedial thalamic nucleus 
(VPM) via the medial lemniscus. From there projec-
tions are made to the rostral part of the frontal opercu-
lum and adjoining insula, a brain region considered the 
primary taste cortex (PTC). Projections from the primary 
taste cortex then go to the secondary taste cortex, namely, 
the caudolateral OFC. This brain region is involved in 
the conscious recognition of taste qualities. Moreover, 
since it contains cells that are activated by several sen-
sory modalities, it is probably a center for establishing 
“ﬂavor.”
DISORDERS OF OLFACTION
The ability to smell is inﬂuenced by factors such as age, 
sex, general health, nutrition, smoking, and reproduc-
tive state. Women typically outperform men on tests of 
olfactory function and retain normal smell function to a 
later age. Signiﬁcant decrements in the ability to smell 
are present in over 50% of the population between 65 
and 80 years of age and in 75% of those 80 years and 
older (Fig. 23-6). Such presbyosmia helps explain why 
many elderly persons report that food has little ﬂavor, 
a problem that can result in nutritional disturbances. It 
also helps explain why a disproportionate number of 
the elderly die in accidental gas poisonings. A relatively 
complete listing of conditions and disorders that have 
been associated with olfactory dysfunction is presented 
in Table 23-1.
Aside from aging, the three most common identiﬁable 
causes of long-lasting or permanent smell loss seen in the 
clinic are, in order of frequency, severe upper respiratory 
infections, head trauma, and chronic rhinosinusitis. The 
physiologic basis for most head trauma–related losses 
is the shearing and subsequent scarring of the olfactory 
ﬁla as they pass from the nasal cavity into the brain cav-
ity. The cribriform plate does not have to be fractured 
or show pathology for smell loss to be present. Severity 
of trauma, as indexed by a poor Glasgow Coma Rating 
on presentation and the length of posttraumatic amne-
sia, is associated with higher risk of olfactory impair-
ment. Fewer than 10% of posttraumatic anosmic patients 
recover age-related normal function over time. Upper 
respiratory infections, such as those associated with the 
common cold, inﬂuenza, pneumonia, or HIV, can 
directly and permanently harm the olfactory epithelium 
by decreasing receptor cell numbers, damaging cilia on 
remaining receptor cells, and inducing the replacement 
of sensory epithelium with respiratory epithelium. The 
smell loss associated with chronic rhinosinusitis is related 
to disease severity, with most loss occurring in cases in 
which rhinosinusitis and polyposis are both present. 
Although systemic glucocorticoid therapy usually can 
induce short-term functional improvement, it does not, 
on average, return smell test scores to normal, implying 
that chronic permanent neural loss is present and/or that 
short-term administration of systemic glucocorticoids 
does not mitigate the inﬂammation completely. It is well 
established that microinﬂammation in an otherwise seem-
ingly normal epithelium can inﬂuence smell function.
A number of neurodegenerative diseases are accom-
panied by olfactory impairment, including AD, PD, 
Huntington’s disease, Down syndrome, parkinsonism-
dementia complex of Guam, dementia with Lewy bodies 
40
35
30
25
20
15
Median UPSIT value (with interquartile range)
5-9
20-29
40-49
Age group
60-69
80-89
40
46
155
219
180
129
254
161
71
90
58
68
109
116
84
52
58
36
8
21
Females (n = 1158)
Males (n = 797)
Total group (N = 1955)
FIGURE 23-6 
Scores on the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identi-
ﬁcation Test (UPSIT) as a function of subject age and sex. 
Numbers by each data point indicate sample sizes. Note that 
women identify odorants better than men at all ages. (From 
Doty et al: Science 226:1421, 1984. vghghg 1984 Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science.)
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders of Smell and Taste
203
(DLB), multiple system atrophy, vascular parkinsonism, 
corticobasal syndrome, frontotemporal dementia, mul-
tiple sclerosis (MS), and idiopathic rapid eye movement 
(REM) behavioral sleep disorder (iRBD). The olfac-
tory disturbance of MS varies as a function of the plaque 
activity within the frontal and temporal lobes. In post-
mortem studies of patients with very mild “presymp-
tomatic” signs of AD, poorer smell function has been 
associated with higher levels of AD-related pathology 
even after controlling for apolipoprotein E4 alleles and 
the level of episodic memory function present at the time 
of olfactory testing. Olfactory impairment in PD often 
predates the clinical diagnosis by at least 4 years. Studies 
of the sequence of Lewy body and abnormal α-synuclein 
development in staged PD cases, along with evidence 
that the smell loss presents early, is stable over time, and is 
TABLE 23-1
DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH COMPROMISED OLFACTORY FUNCTION 
AS MEASURED BY OLFACTORY TESTING
22q11 deletion syndrome
Liver disease
AIDS/HIV infection
Lubag disease
Adenoid hypertrophy
Medications
Adrenal cortical insufﬁciency
Migraine
Age
Multiple sclerosis
Alcoholism
Multi-infarct dementia
Allergies
Narcolepsy with cataplexy
Alzheimer’s disease
Neoplasms, cranial/nasal
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Nutritional deﬁciencies
Anorexia nervosa
Obstructive pulmonary disease
Asperger’s syndrome
Obesity
Ataxias
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
Orthostatic tremor
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Panic disorder
Chemical exposure
Parkinson’s disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pick’s disease
Congenital
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Cushing’s syndrome
Pregnancy
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Degenerative ataxias
Psychopathy
Diabetes
Radiation (therapeutic, cranial)
Down syndrome
REM behavior disorder
Epilepsy
Refsum disease
Facial paralysis
Renal failure/end-stage kidney disease
Frontotemporal lobe degeneration
Restless leg syndrome
Gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome)
Rhinosinusitis/polyposis
Guamanian ALS/PD/dementia syndrome
Schizophrenia
Head trauma
Seasonal affective disorder
Herpes simplex encephalitis
Sjögren’s syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Stroke
Huntington’s disease
Tobacco smoking
Iatrogenesis
Toxic chemical exposure
Kallmann’s syndrome
Upper respiratory infections
Korsakoff’s psychosis
Usher syndrome
Leprosy
Vitamin B12 deﬁciency
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
204
not affected by PD medications, suggest that the olfactory 
bulbs may be, along with the dorsomotor nucleus of the 
vagus, the site of ﬁrst neural damage in PD. Smell loss is 
more marked in patients with early clinical manifestations 
of DLB than in those with mild AD. Interestingly, smell 
loss is minimal or nonexistent in progressive supranuclear 
palsy and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP)-induced parkinsonism.
The smell loss seen in iRBD is of the same magni-
tude as that found in PD. This is of particular inter-
est to clinicians since patients with iRBD frequently 
develop PD and hyposmia. iRBD may actually repre-
sent an early associated condition of PD. REM behavior 
disorder not only is seen in its idiopathic form but also 
can be associated with narcolepsy. This led to a study 
of narcoleptic patients with and without REM behav-
ior disorder that demonstrated that narcolepsy, inde-
pendent of REM behavior disorder, was associated with 
signiﬁcant impairments in olfactory function. Orexin A, 
also known as hypocretin-1, is dramatically diminished 
or undetectable in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid of patients 
with narcolepsy and cataplexy. The orexin-containing 
neurons in the hypothalamus project throughout the 
olfactory system (from the olfactory epithelium to the 
olfactory cortex), and damage to these orexin-contain-
ing projections may be one underlying mechanism for 
impaired olfactory performance in narcoleptic patients. 
The administration of intranasal orexin A (hypocre-
tin-1) appears to result in improved olfactory function 
relative to a placebo, supporting the notion that mild 
olfactory impairment is not only a primary feature of 
narcolepsy with cataplexies but that CNS orexin deﬁ-
ciency may be a fundamental part of the mechanism for 
this loss.
DISORDERS OF TASTE
The majority of patients who present with complaints 
of taste dysfunction exhibit olfactory, not taste, loss. 
This is the case because most ﬂavors attributed to taste 
actually depend on retronasal stimulation of the olfac-
tory receptors during deglutition. As noted earlier, 
taste buds only mediate basic tastes such as sweet, sour, 
bitter, salty, and umami. Signiﬁcant impairment of 
whole-mouth gustatory function is rare outside of gen-
eralized metabolic disturbances or systemic use of some 
medications, since taste bud regeneration occurs and 
peripheral damage alone would require the involve-
ment of multiple cranial nerve pathways. Nonetheless, 
taste can be inﬂuenced by (1) the release of foul-tasting 
materials from the oral cavity from oral medical con-
ditions and appliances (e.g., gingivitis, purulent sial-
adenitis), (2) transport problems of tastants to the taste 
buds (e.g., drying of the orolingual mucosa, infections, 
inﬂammatory conditions), (3) damage to the taste buds 
themselves (e.g., local trauma, invasive carcinomas), (4) 
damage to the neural pathways innervating the taste 
buds (e.g., middle ear infections), (5) damage to cen-
tral structures (e.g., multiple sclerosis, tumor, epilepsy, 
stroke), and (6) systemic disturbances of metabolism 
(e.g., diabetes, thyroid disease, medications). Bell’s palsy 
is among the most common causes of CN VII injury 
that results in taste disturbance. Unlike CN VII, CN 
IX is relatively protected along its path, although iat-
rogenic interventions such as tonsillectomy, bronchos-
copy, laryngoscopy, and radiation therapy can result in 
selective injury. Migraine is associated on rare occasions 
with a gustatory prodrome or aura, and certain tastes 
may trigger a migraine. Although a number of disorders 
can affect CN IX, including tumors, trauma, vascular 
lesions, and infection, it remains unclear if noticeable 
taste disturbance can result from such factors.
Although both taste and smell can be adversely inﬂu-
enced by pharmacologic agents, drug-related taste alter-
ations are more common. Indeed, over 250 medications 
have been reported to alter the ability to taste. Major 
offenders include antineoplastic agents, antirheumatic 
drugs, antibiotics, and blood pressure medications. Ter-
binaﬁne, a commonly used antifungal, has been linked 
to taste disturbance lasting up to 3 years. In a controlled 
trial, nearly two-thirds of individuals taking eszopiclone 
(Lunesta) experienced a bitter dysgeusia which was 
stronger in women, systematically related to the time 
since drug administration, and positively correlated with 
both blood and saliva levels of the drug. Intranasal use 
of nasal gels and sprays containing zinc—common over-
the-counter prophylactics for upper respiratory viral 
infections—has been implicated in loss of smell func-
tion. Whether their efﬁcacy in preventing such infec-
tions, which are the most common cause of anosmia 
and hyposmia, outweighs their potential detriment to 
smell function requires study.
As with olfaction, a number of systemic disorders 
can affect taste. They include chronic renal failure, end-
stage liver disease, vitamin and mineral deﬁciencies, 
diabetes, and hypothyroidism, to name a few. Psychi-
atric conditions can be associated with chemosensory 
alterations (e.g., depression, schizophrenia, bulimia). A 
review of tactile, gustatory, and olfactory hallucinations 
demonstrated that no one type of hallucinatory experi-
ence is pathognomonic to any speciﬁc diagnosis.
CLINICAL EVALUATION
In most cases, a careful clinical history will establish the 
probable etiology of a chemosensory problem, includ-
ing questions about its nature, onset, duration, and pattern 
of ﬂuctuations. Sudden loss suggests the possibility of head 
trauma, ischemia, infection, or a psychiatric condition. 
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders of Smell and Taste
205
Gradual loss can reﬂect the development of a progressive 
obstructive lesion. Intermittent loss suggests the likelihood 
of an inﬂammatory process. The patient should be asked 
about potential precipitating events, such as cold or ﬂu 
infections before symptom onset, as they often are under-
appreciated. Information regarding head trauma, smok-
ing habits, drug and alcohol abuse (e.g., intranasal cocaine, 
chronic alcoholism in the context of Wernicke’s and Kor-
sakoff’s syndromes), exposures to pesticides and other toxic 
agents, and medical interventions are also informative. A 
determination of all the medications the patient was tak-
ing before and at the time of symptom onset is important, 
since many can cause chemosensory disturbances. Comor-
bid medical conditions associated with smell impairment, 
such as renal failure, liver disease, hypothyroidism, diabe-
tes, and dementia, should be assessed. Delayed puberty in 
association with anosmia (with or without midline cranio-
facial abnormalities, deafness, and renal anomalies) suggests 
the possibility of Kallmann syndrome. Recollection of epi-
staxis, discharge (clear, purulent, or bloody), nasal obstruc-
tion, allergies, and somatic symptoms, including headache 
or irritation, may have localizing value. Questions related 
to memory, parkinsonian signs, and seizure activity (e.g., 
automatisms, occurrence of blackouts, auras, and déjàvu) 
should be posed. Pending litigation and the possibility of 
malingering should be considered.
Neurologic and otorhinolaryngologic (ORL) exami-
nations, along with appropriate brain and nasosinus 
imaging, aid in the evaluation of patients with olfac-
tory or gustatory complaints. The neural evaluation 
should focus on cranial nerve function, with particular 
attention to possible skull base and intracranial lesions. 
Visual acuity, ﬁeld, and optic disc examinations aid in 
the detection of intracranial mass lesions that induce 
elevations in intracranial pressure (papilledema) and 
optic atrophy, especially when one is considering Foster 
Kennedy syndrome (ipsilateral optic nerve atrophy and 
contralateral papilledema usually due to a meningioma 
near the olfactory bulb or tract). The ORL examina-
tion should thoroughly assess the intranasal architecture 
and mucosal surfaces. Polyps, masses, and adhesions of 
the turbinates to the septum may compromise the ﬂow 
of air to the olfactory receptors, since less than a ﬁfth of 
the inspired air traverses the olfactory cleft in the unob-
structed state. Blood serum tests may be helpful to iden-
tify conditions such as diabetes, infection, heavy metal 
exposure, nutritional deﬁciency (e.g., vitamins B6 and 
B12), allergy, and thyroid, liver, and kidney disease.
As with other sensory disorders, quantitative sen-
sory testing is advised. Self-reports of patients can be 
misleading, and a number who complain of chemosen-
sory dysfunction have normal function for their age and 
sex. Quantitative smell and taste testing provides valid 
information for worker’s compensation and other legal 
claims as well as a way to assess treatment interventions 
accurately. A number of standardized olfactory and taste 
tests are commercially available. Most evaluate the abil-
ity of patients to detect and identify odors or tastes. For 
example, the most widely used of these tests, the 40-item 
University of Pennsylvania Smell Identiﬁcation Test 
(UPSIT), employs norms based on nearly 4000 normal 
subjects. A determination is made of both absolute dys-
function (i.e., mild loss, moderate loss, severe loss, total 
loss, probable malingering) and relative dysfunction (per-
centile rank for age and sex). Although electrophysiologic 
testing is available at some smell and taste centers (e.g., 
odor event-related potentials), such tests require com-
plex stimulus presentation and recording equipment and 
rarely provide additional diagnostic information. In addi-
tion to electrogustometers, commercial chemical taste 
tests are now available. Most employ ﬁlter paper strips 
impregnated with tastants, so no stimulus preparation 
is required. Like the UPSIT, these tests have published 
norms for establishing the degree of dysfunction.
TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Because of the various mechanisms by which olfac-
tory and gustatory disturbance can occur, manage-
ment of patients tends to be condition-speciﬁc. For 
example, patients with hypothyroidism, diabetes, or 
infections need to be given speciﬁc treatments to cor-
rect the underlying process adversely inﬂuencing che-
moreception. For most patients who present primar-
ily with obstructive/transport loss affecting the nasal 
and paranasal regions (e.g., allergic rhinitis, polyposis, 
intranasal neoplasms, nasal deviations), medical and/
or surgical intervention is often beneﬁcial. Antifungal 
and antibiotic treatments may reverse taste problems 
secondary to candidiasis or other oral infections. Chlo-
rohexidine mouthwash mitigates some salty or bitter 
dysgeusias, conceivably as a result of its strong positive 
charge. Excessive dryness of the oral mucosa is a prob-
lem with many medications and conditions, and artiﬁ-
cial saliva (e.g., Xerolube) or oral pilocarpine treatments 
may prove beneﬁcial. Other methods to improve sali-
vary ﬂow include the use of mints, lozenges, or sugarless 
gum. Flavor enhancers may make food more palatable 
(e.g., monosodium glutamate), but caution is advised to 
avoid overusing ingredients containing sodium or sugar, 
particularly in circumstances in which a patient also has 
underlying hypertension or diabetes. Medications that 
induce distortions of taste often can be discontinued and 
replaced with other types of medications or modes of 
therapy. As mentioned earlier, pharmacologic agents 
result in taste disturbances much more frequently than 
smell disturbances, and over 250 medications have been 
reported to alter the sense of taste. Many drug-related 
effects are long-lasting and are not reversed by short-
term drug discontinuance.
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
206
A study of endoscopic sinus surgery in patients 
with chronic rhinosinusitis and hyposmia revealed that 
patients with severe olfactory dysfunction before the 
surgery had a more dramatic and sustained improve-
ment over time compared with patients with more mild 
olfactory dysfunction before intervention. In the case 
of intranasal and sinus-related inﬂammatory conditions 
such as those seen with allergy, viruses, and traumas, 
the use of intranasal or systemic glucocorticoids may be 
helpful. One common approach is a short course of oral 
prednisone, typically 60 mg daily for 4 days and then 
tapered by 10 mg daily. The utility of restoring olfac-
tion with either topical or systemic glucocorticoids has 
been studied. Topical intranasal glucocorticoids were 
less effective in general than systemic glucocorticoids; 
however, nasal steroid administration techniques were 
not analyzed. Intranasal glucocorticoids are more effec-
tive if administered in Moffett’s position (head in the 
inverted position such as over the edge of the bed with 
the bridge of the nose perpendicular to the ﬂoor). After 
head trauma, an initial trial of glucocorticoids may help 
reduce local edema and the potential deleterious deposi-
tion of scar tissue around olfactory ﬁla at the level of the 
cribriform plate.
Treatments are limited for patients with chemosen-
sory loss or primary injury to neural pathways. None-
theless, spontaneous recovery can occur. In a follow-up 
study of 542 patients presenting with smell loss from a 
variety of causes, modest improvement occurred over 
an average period of 4 years in about half the partici-
pants. However, only 11% of the anosmic and 23% 
of the hyposmic patients regained normal age-related 
function. Interestingly, the amount of dysfunction pres-
ent at the time of presentation, not etiology, was the 
best predictor of prognosis. Other predictors were the 
patient’s age and the time between the onset of dys-
function and initial testing.
A nonblinded study reported that patients with 
hyposmia may beneﬁt from smelling strong odors (e.g., 
eucalyptol, citronella, eugenol, and phenyl ethyl alco-
hol) before going to bed and immediately upon awak-
ing each day over the course of several months. The 
rationale for this approach comes from animal stud-
ies demonstrating that prolonged exposure to odorants 
can induce increased neural activity within the olfactory 
bulb. α-Lipoic acid (200 mg two or three times daily), 
an essential cofactor for many enzyme complexes with 
possible antioxidant effects, has been reported to be 
beneﬁcial in mitigating smell loss after viral infection of 
the upper respiratory tract, although double-blind stud-
ies are needed to conﬁrm this observation. This agent 
has also been suggested to be useful in some cases of 
hypogeusia and burning mouth syndrome.
The use of zinc and vitamin A in treating olfac-
tory disturbances is controversial; not much beneﬁt 
is obtained beyond replenishing established deﬁcien-
cies. However, zinc improves taste function secondary 
to hepatic deﬁciencies, and retinoids (bioactive vita-
min A derivatives) are known to play an essential role 
in the survival of olfactory neurons. One protocol in 
which zinc was infused with chemotherapy treatments 
suggested a possible protective effect against develop-
ing taste impairment. Diseases of the alimentary tract 
can not only inﬂuence chemoreceptive function but 
occasionally inﬂuence B12 absorption. This can result 
in a relative deﬁciency of B12, theoretically contribut-
ing to olfactory nerve disturbance. B2 (riboﬂavin) and 
magnesium supplements are reported in the alterna-
tive medicine literature to aid in the management of 
migraine headaches that may be associated with smell 
dysfunction.
A number of medicines have been reported to ame-
liorate olfactory symptoms, although strong scientiﬁc 
evidence for efﬁcacy is generally lacking. A report that 
theophylline improved smell function was not double-
blinded and lacked a control group, failing to take into 
account that some meaningful improvement occurs 
without treatment. Indeed, the percentage of patients 
reported to be responsive to the treatment was about 
the same as that noted by others to show spontaneous 
improvement over a similar time period (∼50%). Anti-
epileptics and some antidepressants (e.g., amitriptyline) 
have been used to treat dysosmias and smell distor-
tions, particularly after head trauma. Ironically, amitrip-
tyline is also frequently on the list of medications that 
can ultimately distort smell and taste function, possibly 
from its anticholinergic effects. The use of donepezil 
(an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor) in AD may result in 
improvements in smell identiﬁcation measures that cor-
relate with overall clinician-based impressions of change 
scales (Clinician Interview Based Impression of Sever-
ity [CIBIC]-plus). Smell identiﬁcation function could 
become a useful measure to assess overall treatment 
response with this medication.
A major and often overlooked element of therapy 
comes from chemosensory testing itself. Conﬁrmation 
or lack of conﬁrmation of loss is beneﬁcial to patients 
who come to believe, in light of unsupportive fam-
ily members and medical providers, that they may be 
“crazy.” In cases in which the loss is minor, patients 
can be informed of the likelihood of a more posi-
tive prognosis. Importantly, quantitative testing places 
the patient’s problem into overall perspective. Thus, it 
is often therapeutic for an older person to know that 
although his or her smell function is not what it used 
to be, it still falls above the average of his or her peer 
group. Without testing, many such patients are simply 
told they are getting old and nothing can be done for 
them, leading in some cases to depression and decreased 
self-esteem.
 Anil K. Lalwani 
207
 Hearing loss is one of the most common sensory disor-
ders in humans and can present at any age. Nearly 10% 
of the adult population has some hearing loss, and one-
third of individuals age >65 years have a hearing loss of 
sufﬁ cient magnitude to require a hearing aid. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF HEARING 
 The function of the external and middle ear is to 
amplify sound to facilitate conversion of the mechanical 
energy of the sound wave into an electrical signal by the 
inner ear hair cells, a process called mechanotransduc-
tion  ( Fig. 24-1 ) . Sound waves enter the external audi-
tory canal and set the tympanic membrane in motion, 
which in turn moves the malleus, incus, and stapes of 
the middle ear. Movement of the footplate of the sta-
pes causes pressure changes in the ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled inner ear, 
eliciting a traveling wave in the basilar membrane of 
the cochlea. The tympanic membrane and the ossicular 
chain in the middle ear serve as an impedance-matching 
mechanism, improving the efﬁ ciency of energy transfer 
from air to the ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled inner ear. 
 Stereocilia of the hair cells of the organ of Corti, 
which rests on the basilar membrane, are in con-
tact with the tectorial membrane and are deformed by 
the traveling wave. A point of maximal displacement of 
the basilar membrane is determined by the frequency of 
the stimulating tone. High-frequency tones cause maxi-
mal displacement of the basilar membrane near the base 
of the cochlea, whereas for low-frequency sounds, the 
point of maximal displacement is toward the apex of the 
cochlea. 
 The inner and outer hair cells of the organ of Corti 
have different innervation patterns, but both are mecha-
noreceptors. The afferent innervation relates princi-
pally to the inner hair cells, and the efferent innervation 
relates principally to outer hair cells. The motility of the 
outer hair cells alters the micromechanics of the inner 
 DISORDERS OF HEARING 
 CHAPTER 24 
Auricle or
pinna
External ear
A  
B
External acoustic
meatus
External
acoustic
canal
Tympanic
membrane
Semicircular canals
Semicircular
canals
Anterior
Bony labyrinth
(contains perilymph)
Membranous labyrinth
(contains endolymph)
Ampulla of
semicircular canal
Utricle
Saccule
Cochlea
Cochlear
duct
Round
window
Oval
window
Vestibule
Posterior
Lateral
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
Cochlea
Stapes
Incus
Malleus
Lobe
Inner
ear
Middle ear
Eustachian tube
 FIGURE 24-1  
Ear anatomy.  A. Drawing of modiﬁ ed coronal section 
through external ear and temporal bone, with structures of 
the middle and inner ear demonstrated.  B. High-resolution 
view of inner ear. 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
208
Hearing Loss
History
Otologic examination
Cerumen impaction
TM perforation
Cholesteatoma
SOM
AOM
External auditory
  canal atresia/
  stenosis
Eustachian tube
  dysfunction
Tympanosclerosis
Pure tone and
speech audiometry
Conductive HL
Impedance audiometry
Mixed HL
SNHL
abnormal
Impedance audiometry
Acute
Asymmetric/symmetric
Chronic
normal
Otosclerosis
Cerumen
  impaction
Ossicular
  fixation
Cholesteatoma*
Temporal bone
  trauma*
Inner ear
  dehiscence or
  “third window”
 
AOM
SOM
TM perforation*
Eustachian tube
  dysfunction
Cerumen
  impaction
Cholesteatoma*
Temporal bone
  trauma*
Ossicular
  discontinuity*
Middle ear tumor*
abnormal
normal
AOM
TM perforation*
Cholesteatoma*
Temporal bone
  trauma*
Middle ear tumors*
    glomus
      tympanicum
    glomus jugulare
Stapes gusher
   syndrome*
Inner ear
  malformation*
Otosclerosis
Temporal bone
  trauma*
Inner ear
  dehiscence or
  “third window”
CNS infection†
Tumors†
    Cerebellopontine
      angle
    CNS
Stroke†
Trauma*
Symmetric
Asymmetric
Inner ear
  malformation*
Presbycusis
Noise exposure
Radiation therapy
MRI/BAER
abnormal
normal
Endolymphatic hydrops
Labyrinthitis*
Perilymphatic fistula*
Radiation therapy
Labyrinthitis*
Inner ear malformations*
Cerebellopontine angle tumors
    Arachnoid cyst; facial nerve tumor;
    lipoma; meningioma; vestibular
    schwannoma
Multiple sclerosis†
abnormal
normal
FIGURE 24-2 
An algorithm for the approach to hearing loss. HL, hear-
ing loss; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; TM, tympanic 
membrane; SOM, serous otitis media; AOM, acute otitis 
media; BAER, brainstem auditory evoked response; *CT 
scan of temporal bone; †MRI scan.
hair cells, creating a cochlear ampliﬁer, which explains 
the exquisite sensitivity and frequency selectivity of the 
cochlea.
Beginning in the cochlea, the frequency speciﬁcity is 
maintained at each point of the central auditory path-
way: dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei, trapezoid body, 
superior olivary complex, lateral lemniscus, inferior col-
liculus, medial geniculate body, and auditory cortex. At 
low frequencies, individual auditory nerve ﬁbers can 
respond more or less synchronously with the stimulat-
ing tone. At higher frequencies, phase-locking occurs 
so that neurons alternate in response to particular phases 
of the cycle of the sound wave. Intensity is encoded by 
the amount of neural activity in individual neurons, the 
number of neurons that are active, and the speciﬁc neu-
rons that are activated.
DISORDERS OF THE SENSE OF HEARING
Hearing loss can result from disorders of the auricle, 
external auditory canal, middle ear, inner ear, or central 
auditory pathways (Fig. 24-2). In general, lesions in the 
auricle, external auditory canal, or middle ear that impede the 
transmission of sound from the external environment to the 
inner ear cause conductive hearing loss, whereas lesions that 
impair mechanotransduction in the inner ear or transmission of 
the electrical signal along the eighth nerve to the brain cause 
sensorineural hearing loss.
Conductive hearing loss
The external ear, the external auditory canal, and the 
middle ear apparatus are designed to collect and amplify 
sound and efﬁciently transfer the mechanical energy of 
the sound wave to the ﬂuid-ﬁlled cochlea. Factors that 
obstruct the transmission of sound or serve to dampen 
the acoustical energy result in conductive hearing loss. 
Conductive hearing loss can occur from obstruction 
of the external auditory canal by cerumen, debris, and 
foreign bodies; swelling of the lining of the canal; atre-
sia or neoplasms of the canal; perforations of the tym-
panic membrane; disruption of the ossicular chain, as 
 
CHAPTER 24
Disorders of Hearing
209
occurs with necrosis of the long process of the incus in 
trauma or infection; otosclerosis; or ﬂuid, scarring, or 
neoplasms in the middle ear. Rarely, inner ear malfor-
mations or pathologies may also be associated with con-
ductive hearing loss.
Eustachian tube dysfunction is extremely common 
in adults and may predispose to acute otitis media 
(AOM) or serous otitis media (SOM). Trauma, AOM, 
or chronic otitis media are the usual factors responsi-
ble for tympanic membrane perforation. While small 
perforations often heal spontaneously, larger defects 
usually require surgical intervention. Tympanoplasty 
is highly effective (>90%) in the repair of tympanic 
membrane perforations. Otoscopy is usually sufﬁ-
cient to diagnose AOM, SOM, chronic otitis media, 
cerumen impaction, tympanic membrane perfora-
tion, and eustachian tube dysfunction; tympanometry 
can be useful to conﬁrm the clinical suspicion of these 
conditions.
Cholesteatoma, a benign tumor composed of strati-
ﬁed squamous epithelium in the middle ear or mastoid, 
occurs frequently in adults. This is a slowly growing 
lesion that destroys bone and normal ear tissue. Theo-
ries of pathogenesis include traumatic immigration and 
invasion of squamous epithelium through a retraction 
pocket, implantation of squamous epithelia in the mid-
dle ear through a perforation or surgery, and metaplasia 
following chronic infection and irritation. On exami-
nation, there is often a perforation of the tympanic 
membrane ﬁlled with cheesy white squamous debris. A 
chronically draining ear that fails to respond to appro-
priate antibiotic therapy should raise suspicion of a cho-
lesteatoma. Conductive hearing loss secondary to ossic-
ular erosion is common. Surgery is required to remove 
this destructive process.
Conductive hearing loss with a normal ear canal 
and intact tympanic membrane suggests either ossicular 
pathology or the presence of “third window” in the 
inner ear (see later). Fixation of the stapes from oto-
sclerosis is a common cause of low-frequency conduc-
tive hearing loss. It occurs equally in men and women 
and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with 
incomplete penetrance; in some cases, it may be a 
manifestation of osteogenesis imperfecta. Hearing 
impairment usually presents between the late teens 
and the forties. In women, the otosclerotic process is 
accelerated during pregnancy, and the hearing loss is 
often ﬁrst noticeable at this time. A hearing aid or a 
simple outpatient surgical procedure (stapedectomy) 
can provide adequate auditory rehabilitation. Exten-
sion of otosclerosis beyond the stapes footplate to 
involve the cochlea (cochlear otosclerosis) can lead to 
mixed or sensorineural hearing loss. Fluoride therapy 
to prevent hearing loss from cochlear otosclerosis is of 
uncertain value.
Disorders that lead to the formation of a pathologic 
“third window” in the inner ear can be associated with 
conductive hearing loss. There are normally two major 
openings, or windows, that connect the inner ear with 
the middle ear and serve as conduits for transmission of 
sound; these are, respectively, the oval and round win-
dows. A third window is formed where the normally 
hard otic bone surrounding the inner ear is eroded; dis-
sipation of the acoustic energy at the third window is 
responsible for the “inner ear conductive hearing loss.” 
The superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome 
resulting from erosion of the otic bone over the supe-
rior circular canal can present with conductive hearing 
loss that mimics otosclerosis. A common symptom is 
vertigo evoked by loud sounds (Tullio phenomenon), 
by Valsalva maneuvers that change middle ear pressure, 
or by applying positive pressure on the tragus (the car-
tilage anterior to the external opening of the ear canal). 
Patients with this syndrome also complain of being able 
to hear the movement of their eyes and neck. A large 
jugular bulb or jugular bulb diverticulum can create a 
“third window” by eroding into the vestibular aqueduct 
or posterior semicircular canal; the symptoms are simi-
lar to those of the superior semicircular canal dehiscence 
syndrome.
Sensorineural hearing loss
Sensorineural hearing loss results from either damage to 
the mechanotransduction apparatus of the cochlea or 
disruption of the electrical conduction pathway from 
the inner ear to the brain. Thus, injury to hair cells, 
supporting cells, auditory neurons, or the central audi-
tory pathway can cause sensorineural hearing loss. Dam-
age to the hair cells of the organ of Corti may be caused 
by intense noise, viral infections, ototoxic drugs (e.g., 
salicylates, quinine and its synthetic analogues, amino-
glycoside antibiotics, loop diuretics such as furosemide 
and ethacrynic acid, and cancer chemotherapeutic 
agents such as cisplatin), fractures of the temporal bone, 
meningitis, cochlear otosclerosis (see earlier), Ménière’s 
disease, and aging. Congenital malformations of the 
inner ear may be the cause of hearing loss in some 
adults. Genetic predisposition alone or in concert with 
environmental exposures may also be responsible (see 
later).
Presbycusis (age-associated hearing loss) is the most 
common cause of sensorineural hearing loss in adults. In 
the early stages, it is characterized by symmetric, gentle 
to sharply sloping high-frequency hearing loss. With 
progression, the hearing loss involves all frequencies. 
More importantly, the hearing impairment is associated 
with signiﬁcant loss in clarity. There is a loss of discrim-
ination for phonemes, recruitment (abnormal growth 
of loudness), and particular difﬁculty in understanding 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
210
speech in noisy environments such as at restaurants 
and social events. Hearing aids are helpful in enhanc-
ing the signal-to-noise ratio by amplifying sounds that 
are close to the listener. Although hearing aids are able 
to amplify sounds, they cannot restore the clarity of hearing. 
Thus, ampliﬁcation with hearing aids may provide only 
limited rehabilitation once the word recognition score 
deteriorates below 50%. Cochlear implants are the treat-
ment of choice when hearing aids prove inadequate, 
even when hearing loss is incomplete (see later).
Ménière’s disease is characterized by episodic vertigo, 
ﬂuctuating sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus, and aural 
fullness. Tinnitus and/or deafness may be absent during 
the initial attacks of vertigo, but it invariably appears as 
the disease progresses and increases in severity during 
acute attacks. The annual incidence of Ménière’s dis-
ease is 0.5–7.5 per 1000; onset is most frequently in the 
ﬁfth decade of life but may also occur in young adults 
or the elderly. Histologically, there is distention of the 
endolymphatic system (endolymphatic hydrops) lead-
ing to degeneration of vestibular and cochlear hair cells. 
This may result from endolymphatic sac dysfunction 
secondary to infection, trauma, autoimmune disease, 
inﬂammatory causes, or tumor; an idiopathic etiology 
constitutes the largest category and is most accurately 
referred to as Ménière’s disease. Although any pattern of 
hearing loss can be observed, typically, low-frequency, 
unilateral sensorineural hearing impairment is pres-
ent. MRI should be obtained to exclude retrocochlear 
pathology such as a cerebellopontine angle tumor or 
demyelinating disorder. Therapy is directed toward the 
control of vertigo. A 2-g/d low-salt diet is the mainstay 
of treatment for control of rotatory vertigo. Diuretics, a 
short course of glucocorticoids, and intratympanic gen-
tamicin may also be useful adjuncts in recalcitrant cases. 
Surgical therapy of vertigo is reserved for unresponsive 
cases and includes endolymphatic sac decompression, 
labyrinthectomy, and vestibular nerve section. Both lab-
yrinthectomy and vestibular nerve section abolish rota-
tory vertigo in >90% of cases. Unfortunately, there is 
no effective therapy for hearing loss, tinnitus, or aural 
fullness from Ménière’s disease.
Sensorineural hearing loss may also result from any 
neoplastic, vascular, demyelinating, infectious, or degen-
erative disease or trauma affecting the central auditory 
pathways. HIV leads to both peripheral and central audi-
tory system pathology and is associated with sensorineural 
hearing impairment.
Primary diseases of the central nervous system can 
also present with hearing impairment. Characteristically, 
a reduction in clarity of hearing and speech comprehen-
sion is much greater than the loss of the ability to hear 
pure tone. Auditory testing is consistent with an auditory 
neuropathy; normal otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and an 
abnormal auditory brainstem response (ABR) are typical 
(see later). Hearing loss can accompany hereditary senso-
rimotor neuropathies and inherited disorders of myelin. 
Tumors of the cerebellopontine angle such as vestibular 
schwannoma and meningioma usually present with asym-
metric sensorineural hearing loss with greater deterioration 
of speech understanding than pure tone hearing. Multi-
ple sclerosis may present with acute unilateral or bilateral 
hearing loss; typically, pure tone testing remains relatively 
stable while speech understanding ﬂuctuates. Isolated laby-
rinthine infarction can present with acute hearing loss and 
vertigo due to a cerebrovascular accident involving the 
posterior circulation, usually the anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery; it may also be the heralding sign of impending cata-
strophic basilar artery infarction (Chap. 27).
A ﬁnding of conductive and sensory hearing loss in 
combination is termed mixed hearing loss. Mixed hear-
ing losses are due to pathology of both the middle and 
inner ear, as can occur in otosclerosis involving the ossi-
cles and the cochlea, head trauma, chronic otitis media, 
cholesteatoma, middle ear tumors, and some inner ear 
malformations.
Trauma resulting in temporal bone fractures may be 
associated with conductive, sensorineural, or mixed 
hearing loss. If the fracture spares the inner ear, there 
may simply be conductive hearing loss due to rupture 
of the tympanic membrane or disruption of the ossicular 
chain. These abnormalities can be surgically corrected. 
Profound hearing loss and severe vertigo are associated 
with temporal bone fractures involving the inner ear. 
A perilymphatic ﬁstula associated with leakage of inner 
ear ﬂuid into the middle ear can occur and may require 
surgical repair. An associated facial nerve injury is not 
uncommon. CT is best suited to assess fracture of the 
traumatized temporal bone, evaluate the ear canal, and 
determine the integrity of the ossicular chain and the 
involvement of the inner ear. CSF leaks that accompany 
temporal bone fractures are usually self-limited; the 
value of prophylactic antibiotics is uncertain.
Tinnitus is deﬁned as the perception of a sound when 
there is no sound in the environment. It may have a 
buzzing, roaring, or ringing quality and may be pulsa-
tile (synchronous with the heartbeat). Tinnitus is often 
associated with either a conductive or sensorineural 
hearing loss. The pathophysiology of tinnitus is not well 
understood. The cause of the tinnitus can usually be 
determined by ﬁnding the cause of the associated hear-
ing loss. Tinnitus may be the ﬁrst symptom of a serious 
condition such as a vestibular schwannoma. Pulsatile 
tinnitus requires evaluation of the vascular system of the 
head to exclude vascular tumors such as glomus jugu-
lare tumors, aneurysms, dural arteriovenous ﬁstulas, and 
stenotic arterial lesions; it may also occur with SOM. It 
is most commonly associated with some abnormality of 
the jugular bulb such as a large jugular bulb or jugular 
bulb diverticulum.
 
CHAPTER 24
Disorders of Hearing
211
GENETIC CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS
More than half of childhood hearing impairment 
is thought to be hereditary; hereditary hearing 
impairment (HHI) can also manifest later in life. 
HHI may be classiﬁed as either nonsyndromic, when 
hearing loss is the only clinical abnormality, or syn-
dromic, when hearing loss is associated with anomalies 
in other organ systems. Nearly two-thirds of HHIs are 
nonsyndromic, and the remaining one-third are syn-
dromic. Between 70 and 80% of nonsyndromic HHI 
is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and des-
ignated DFNB; another 15–20% is autosomal domi-
nant (DFNA). Less than 5% is X-linked or maternally 
inherited via the mitochondria.
Nearly 100 loci harboring genes for nonsyndromic 
HHI have been mapped, with equal numbers of domi-
nant and recessive modes of inheritance; numerous 
genes have now been cloned (Table 24-1). The hear-
ing genes fall into the categories of structural proteins 
(MYH9, MYO7A, MYO15, TECTA, DIAPH1), tran-
scription factors (POU3F4, POU4F3), ion channels 
(KCNQ4, SLC26A4), and gap junction proteins (GJB2, 
GJB3, GJB6). Several of these genes, including GJB2, 
TECTA, and TMC1, cause both autosomal dominant 
and recessive forms of nonsyndromic HHI. In general, 
TABLE 24-1
HEREDITARY HEARING IMPAIRMENT GENES
DESIGNATION
GENE
FUNCTION
Autosomal Dominant
CRYM
Thyroid hormone–binding protein
DFNA1
DIAPH1
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNA2A
KCNQ4
Potassium channel
DFNA2B
GJB3 (Cx31)
Gap junction
DFNA3A
GJB2 (Cx26)
Gap junction
DFNA3B
GJB6 (Cx30)
Gap junction
DFNA4
MYH14
Class II nonmuscle myosin
DFNA5
DFNA5
Unknown
DFNA6/14/38
WFS1
Transmembrane protein
DFNA8/12
TECTA
Tectorial membrane protein
DFNA9
COCH
Unknown
DFNA10
EYA4
Developmental gene
DFNA11
MYO7A
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNA13
COL11A2
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNA15
POU4F3
Transcription factor
DFNA17
MYH9
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNA20/26
ACTG1
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNA22
MYO6
Unconventional myosin
DFNA28
TFCP2L3
Transcription factor
DFNA36
TMC1
Transmembrane protein
DFNA44
CCDC50
Effector of EGF-mediated signaling
DFNA48
MYO1A
Unconventional myosin
DFNA50
MIRN96
MicroRNA
DFNA51
TJP2
Tight junction protein
Autosomal Recessive
DFNB1A
GJB2 (CX26)
Gap junction
DFNB1B
GJB6 (CX30)
Gap junction
DFNB2
MYO7A
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNB3
MYO15
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNB4
PDS (SLC26A4) Chloride/iodide transporter
DFNB6
TMIE
Transmembrane protein
DFNB7/B11
TMC1
Transmembrane protein
DESIGNATION
GENE
FUNCTION
DFNB9
OTOF
Trafﬁcking of membrane vesicles
DFNB8/10
TMPRSS3
Transmembrane serine protease
DFNB12
CDH23
Intercellular adherence protein
DFNB16
STRC
Stereocilia protein
DFNB18
USH1C
Unknown
DFNB21
TECTA
Tectorial membrane protein
DFNB22
OTOA
Gel attachment to nonsensory
DFNB23
PCDH15
Morphogenesis and cohesion
DFNB24
RDX
Cytoskeletal protein
DFNB25
GRXCR1
Reversible S-glutathionylation of 
proteins
DFNB28
TRIOBP
Cytoskeletal-organizing protein
DFNB29
CLDN14
Tight junctions
DFNB30
MYO3A
Hybrid motor-signaling myosin
DFNB31
WHRN
PDZ domain–containing protein
DFNB35
ESRRB
Estrogen-related receptor beta 
protein
DFNB36
ESPN
Ca-insensitive actin-bundling 
protein
DFNB37
MYO6
Unconventional myosin
DFNB39
HFG
Hepatocyte growth factor
DFNB49
MARVELD2
Tight junction protein
DFNB53
COL11A2
Collagen protein
DFNB59
PJVK
Zn-binding protein
DFNB61
SLC26A5
Motor protein
DFNB63
LRTOMT/
COMT2
Putative methyltransferase
DFNB66/67
LHFPL5
Tetraspan protein
DFNB77
LOXHD1
Stereociliary protein
DFNB79
TPRN
Unknown
DFNB82
GPSM2
G protein signaling modulator
DFNB84
PTPRQ
Type III receptor-like protein-
tyrosine phosphatase family
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
212
the hearing loss associated with dominant genes has its 
onset in adolescence or adulthood and varies in sever-
ity, whereas the hearing loss associated with recessive 
inheritance is congenital and profound. Connexin 26, 
product of the GJB2 gene, is particularly important 
because it is responsible for nearly 20% of all cases of 
childhood deafness; half of genetic deafness in children 
is GJB2-related. Two frameshift mutations, 35delG 
and 167delT, account for >50% of the cases; however, 
screening for these two mutations alone is insufﬁcient 
and sequencing of the entire gene is required to diag-
nose GJB2-related recessive deafness. The 167delT 
mutation is highly prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews; ∼1 in 
1765 individuals in this population are homozygous 
and affected. The hearing loss can also vary among the 
members of the same family, suggesting that other genes 
or factors inﬂuence the auditory phenotype.
In addition to GJB2, several other nonsyndromic 
genes are associated with hearing loss that progresses 
with age. The contribution of genetics to presbycusis 
is also becoming better understood. Sensitivity to ami-
noglycoside ototoxicity can be maternally transmit-
ted through a mitochondrial mutation. Susceptibility 
to noise-induced hearing loss may also be genetically 
determined.
There are >400 syndromic forms of hearing loss. 
These include Usher syndrome (retinitis pigmentosa 
and hearing loss), Waardenburg syndrome (pigmen-
tary abnormality and hearing loss), Pendred syndrome 
(thyroid organiﬁcation defect and hearing loss), Alport 
syndrome (renal disease and hearing loss), Jervell and 
Lange-Nielsen syndrome (prolonged QT interval and 
hearing loss), neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (bilateral acous-
tic schwannoma), and mitochondrial disorders (mito-
chondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-
like episodes [MELAS]; myoclonic epilepsy and ragged 
red ﬁbers [MERRF]; progressive external ophthalmo-
plegia [PEO]) (Table 24-2).
mation regarding head trauma, exposure to ototoxins, 
occupational or recreational noise exposure, and family 
history of hearing impairment may also be important. A 
sudden onset of unilateral hearing loss, with or without 
tinnitus, may represent a viral infection of the inner ear 
or a stroke. Patients with unilateral hearing loss (sensory 
or conductive) usually complain of reduced hearing, 
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Disorders of the Sense of Hearing
The goal in the evaluation of a patient with auditory 
complaints is to determine (1) the nature of the hearing 
impairment (conductive vs. sensorineural vs. mixed), (2) 
the severity of the impairment (mild, moderate, severe, 
profound), (3) the anatomy of the impairment (external 
ear, middle ear, inner ear, or central auditory pathway), 
and (4) the etiology. The history should elicit character-
istics of the hearing loss, including the duration of deaf-
ness, unilateral vs. bilateral involvement, nature of onset 
(sudden vs. insidious), and rate of progression (rapid vs. 
slow). Symptoms of tinnitus, vertigo, imbalance, aural 
fullness, otorrhea, headache, facial nerve dysfunction, 
and head and neck paresthesias should be noted. Infor-
TABLE 24-2
SYNDROMIC HEREDITARY HEARING IMPAIRMENT 
GENES
SYNDROME
GENE
FUNCTION
Alport syndrome
COL4A3-5
Cytoskeletal protein
BOR syndrome
EYA1
Developmental gene
SIX5
Developmental gene
SIX1
Developmental gene
Jervell and 
Lange-Nielsen 
syndrome
KCNQ1 
KCNE1
Delayed rectiﬁer K+ 
channel 
Delayed rectiﬁer K+ 
channel
Norrie disease
NDP
Cell-cell interactions
Pendred  
syndrome
SLC26A4
Chloride/iodide trans-
porter
FOXI1
Transcriptional acti-
vator of SLC26A4
Treacher Collins
TCOF1
Nucleolar-cytoplas-
mic transport
Usher syndrome
MYO7A
Cytoskeletal protein
USH1C
Unknown
CDH23
Intercellular adher-
ence protein
PCDH15
Cell adhesion molecule
SANS
Harmonin-associated 
protein
USH2A
Cell adhesion  
molecule
VLGR1
G protein–coupled 
receptor
USH3
Unknown
WHRN
PDZ domain– 
containing protein
WS type I, III
PAX3
Transcription factor
WS type II
MITF
Transcription factor
SNAI2
Transcription factor
WS type IV
EDNRB
Endothelin B receptor
EDN3
Endothelin B receptor 
ligand
SOX10
Transcription factor
Abbreviations: BOR, branchio-oto-renal syndrome; WS, Waarden-
burg syndrome.
 
CHAPTER 24
Disorders of Hearing
213
poor sound localization, and difficulty hearing clearly 
with background noise. Gradual progression of a hear-
ing deficit is common with otosclerosis, noise-induced 
hearing loss, vestibular schwannoma, or Ménière’s 
disease. Small vestibular schwannomas typically pres-
ent with asymmetric hearing impairment, tinnitus, and 
imbalance (rarely vertigo); cranial neuropathy, in par-
ticular of the trigeminal or facial nerve, may accompany 
larger tumors. In addition to hearing loss, Ménière’s dis-
ease may be associated with episodic vertigo, tinnitus, 
and aural fullness. Hearing loss with otorrhea is most 
likely due to chronic otitis media or cholesteatoma.
Examination should include the auricle, external ear 
canal, and tympanic membrane. The external ear canal 
of the elderly is often dry and fragile; it is preferable 
to clean cerumen with wall-mounted suction or ceru-
men loops and to avoid irrigation. In examining the 
eardrum, the topography of the tympanic membrane 
is more important than the presence or absence of 
the light reflex. In addition to the pars tensa (the lower 
two-thirds of the eardrum), the pars flaccida above the 
short process of the malleus should also be examined 
for retraction pockets that may be evidence of chronic 
eustachian tube dysfunction or cholesteatoma. Insuf-
flation of the ear canal is necessary to assess tympanic 
membrane mobility and compliance. Careful inspection 
of the nose, nasopharynx, and upper respiratory tract 
is indicated. Unilateral serous effusion should prompt a 
fiberoptic examination of the nasopharynx to exclude 
neoplasms. Cranial nerves should be evaluated with 
special attention to facial and trigeminal nerves, which 
are commonly affected with tumors involving the cer-
ebellopontine angle.
The Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests, with a 512-Hz 
tuning fork, are used to screen for hearing loss, differ-
entiate conductive from sensorineural hearing losses, 
and to confirm the findings of audiologic evaluation. 
Rinne’s test compares the ability to hear by air conduc-
tion with the ability to hear by bone conduction. The 
tines of a vibrating tuning fork are held near the open-
ing of the external auditory canal, and then the stem is 
placed on the mastoid process; for direct contact, it may 
be placed on teeth or dentures. The patient is asked to 
indicate whether the tone is louder by air conduction 
or bone conduction. Normally, and in the presence of 
sensorineural hearing loss, a tone is heard louder by air 
conduction than by bone conduction; however, with 
conductive hearing loss of ≥30 dB (see “Audiologic 
Assessment”), the bone-conduction stimulus is per-
ceived as louder than the air-conduction stimulus. For 
the Weber test, the stem of a vibrating tuning fork is 
placed on the head in the midline and the patient asked 
whether the tone is heard in both ears or better in one 
ear than in the other. With a unilateral conductive hear-
ing loss, the tone is perceived in the affected ear. With 
a unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, the tone is per-
ceived in the unaffected ear. A 5-dB difference in hear-
ing between the two ears is required for lateralization.
LABORATORY ASSESSMENT OF HEARING
Audiologic assessment
The minimum audiologic assessment for hearing loss 
should include the measurement of pure tone air-
conduction and bone-conduction thresholds, speech 
reception threshold, word recognition score, tympa-
nometry, acoustic reﬂexes, and acoustic-reﬂex decay. 
This test battery provides a screening evaluation of the 
entire auditory system and allows one to determine 
whether further differentiation of a sensory (cochlear) 
from a neural (retrocochlear) hearing loss is indicated.
Pure tone audiometry assesses hearing acuity for pure 
tones. The test is administered by an audiologist and is 
performed in a sound-attenuated chamber. The pure 
tone stimulus is delivered with an audiometer, an elec-
tronic device that allows the presentation of speciﬁc fre-
quencies (generally between 250 and 8000 Hz) at spe-
ciﬁc intensities. Air- and bone-conduction thresholds 
are established for each ear. Air-conduction thresholds 
are determined by presenting the stimulus in air with 
the use of headphones. Bone-conduction thresholds are 
determined by placing the stem of a vibrating tuning 
fork or an oscillator of an audiometer in contact with 
the head. In the presence of a hearing loss, broad-spec-
trum noise is presented to the nontest ear for masking 
purposes so that responses are based on perception from 
the ear under test.
The responses are measured in decibels. An audiogram 
is a plot of intensity in decibels of hearing threshold 
versus frequency. A decibel (dB) is equal to 20 times the 
logarithm of the ratio of the sound pressure required to 
achieve threshold in the patient to the sound pressure 
required to achieve threshold in a normal hearing per-
son. Therefore, a change of 6 dB represents doubling 
of sound pressure, and a change of 20 dB represents a 
tenfold change in sound pressure. Loudness, which 
depends on the frequency, intensity, and duration of a 
sound, doubles with approximately each 10-dB increase 
in sound pressure level. Pitch, on the other hand, does 
not directly correlate with frequency. The percep-
tion of pitch changes slowly in the low and high fre-
quencies. In the middle tones, which are important for 
human speech, pitch varies more rapidly with changes 
in frequency.
Pure tone audiometry establishes the presence and 
severity of hearing impairment, unilateral vs. bilateral 
involvement, and the type of hearing loss. Conduc-
tive hearing losses with a large mass component, as is 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
214
often seen in middle ear effusions, produce elevation of 
thresholds that predominate in the higher frequencies. 
Conductive hearing losses with a large stiffness compo-
nent, as in ﬁxation of the footplate of the stapes in early 
otosclerosis, produce threshold elevations in the lower 
frequencies. Often, the conductive hearing loss involves 
all frequencies, suggesting involvement of both stiffness 
and mass. In general, sensorineural hearing losses such 
as presbycusis affect higher frequencies more than lower 
frequencies. An exception is Ménière’s disease, which 
is characteristically associated with low-frequency sen-
sorineural hearing loss. Noise-induced hearing loss has 
an unusual pattern of hearing impairment in which 
the loss at 4000 Hz is greater than at higher frequen-
cies. Vestibular schwannomas characteristically affect the 
higher frequencies, but any pattern of hearing loss can 
be observed.
Speech recognition requires greater synchronous 
neural ﬁring than is necessary for appreciation of pure 
tones. Speech audiometry tests the clarity with which one 
hears. The speech reception threshold (SRT) is deﬁned as 
the intensity at which speech is recognized as a mean-
ingful symbol and is obtained by presenting two-syllable 
words with an equal accent on each syllable. The inten-
sity at which the patient can repeat 50% of the words 
correctly is the SRT. Once the SRT is determined, 
discrimination or word recognition ability is tested by 
presenting one-syllable words at 25–40 dB above the 
SRT. The words are phonetically balanced in that the 
phonemes (speech sounds) occur in the list of words at 
the same frequency that they occur in ordinary con-
versational English. An individual with normal hearing 
or conductive hearing loss can repeat 88–100% of the 
phonetically balanced words correctly. Patients with a 
sensorineural hearing loss have variable loss of discrimi-
nation. As a general rule, neural lesions produce greater 
deﬁcits in discrimination than do cochlear lesions. For 
example, in a patient with mild asymmetric sensori-
neural hearing loss, a clue to the diagnosis of vestibu-
lar schwannoma is the presence of greater than expected 
deterioration in discrimination ability. Deterioration 
in discrimination ability at higher intensities above the 
SRT also suggests a lesion in the eighth nerve or central 
auditory pathways.
Tympanometry measures the impedance of the middle 
ear to sound and is useful in diagnosis of middle-ear 
effusions. A tympanogram is the graphic representation 
of change in impedance or compliance as the pres-
sure in the ear canal is changed. Normally, the mid-
dle ear is most compliant at atmospheric pressure, and 
the compliance decreases as the pressure is increased 
or decreased (type A); this pattern is seen with nor-
mal hearing or in the presence of sensorineural hearing 
loss. Compliance that does not change with change in 
pressure suggests middle-ear effusion (type B). With a 
negative pressure in the middle ear, as with eustachian 
tube obstruction, the point of maximal compliance 
occurs with negative pressure in the ear canal (type C). 
A tympanogram in which no point of maximal compli-
ance can be obtained is most commonly seen with dis-
continuity of the ossicular chain (type Ad). A reduction 
in the maximal compliance peak can be seen in otoscle-
rosis (type As).
During tympanometry, an intense tone elicits con-
traction of the stapedius muscle. The change in compli-
ance of the middle ear with contraction of the stapedius 
muscle can be detected. The presence or absence of this 
acoustic reﬂex is important in determining the etiology 
of hearing loss as well as in the anatomic localization 
of facial nerve paralysis. The acoustic reﬂex can help 
differentiate between conductive hearing loss due to 
otosclerosis and that caused by an inner ear “third win-
dow”: it is absent in otosclerosis and present in inner 
ear conductive hearing loss. Normal or elevated acous-
tic reﬂex thresholds in an individual with sensorineu-
ral hearing impairment suggests a cochlear hearing loss. 
An absent acoustic reﬂex in the setting of sensorineural 
hearing loss is not helpful in localizing the site of lesion. 
Assessment of acoustic reﬂex decay helps differentiate sen-
sory from neural hearing losses. In neural hearing loss, 
the reﬂex adapts or decays with time.
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) generated by outer hair 
cells only can be measured with microphones inserted 
into the external auditory canal. The emissions may be 
spontaneous or evoked with sound stimulation. The 
presence of OAEs indicates that the outer hair cells of 
the organ of Corti are intact and can be used to assess 
auditory thresholds and to distinguish sensory from neu-
ral hearing losses.
Evoked responses
Electrocochleography measures the earliest evoked poten-
tials generated in the cochlea and the auditory nerve. 
Receptor potentials recorded include the cochlear 
microphonic, generated by the outer hair cells of the 
organ of Corti, and the summating potential, generated 
by the inner hair cells in response to sound. The whole 
nerve action potential representing the composite ﬁring 
of the ﬁrst-order neurons can also be recorded during 
electrocochleography. Clinically, the test is useful in the 
diagnosis of Ménière’s disease, where an elevation of the 
ratio of summating potential to action potential is seen.
Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs), also 
known as auditory brainstem responses (ABRs), are useful 
in differentiating the site of sensorineural hearing loss. 
In response to sound, ﬁve distinct electrical potentials 
arising from different stations along the peripheral and 
central auditory pathway can be identiﬁed using com-
puter averaging from scalp surface electrodes. BAERs 
 
CHAPTER 24
Disorders of Hearing
215
are valuable in situations in which patients cannot or 
will not give reliable voluntary thresholds. They are 
also used to assess the integrity of the auditory nerve 
and brainstem in various clinical situations, including 
intraoperative monitoring and in determination of brain 
death.
The vestibular-evoked myogenic potential (VEMP) test 
elicits a vestibulocollic reﬂex whose afferent limb arises 
from acoustically sensitive cells in the saccule, with sig-
nals conducted via the inferior vestibular nerve. VEMP 
is a biphasic, short-latency response recorded from the 
tonically contracted sternocleidomastoid muscle in 
response to loud auditory clicks or tones. VEMPs may 
be diminished or absent in patients with early and late 
Ménière’s disease, vestibular neuritis, benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo, and vestibular schwannoma. On the 
other hand, the threshold for VEMPs may be lower in 
cases of superior canal dehiscence, other inner ear dehis-
cence, and perilymphatic ﬁstula.
Imaging studies
The choice of radiologic tests is largely determined 
by whether the goal is to evaluate the bony anatomy 
of the external, middle, and inner ear or to image the 
auditory nerve and brain. Axial and coronal CT of the 
temporal bone with ﬁne 0.3- to 0.6-mm cuts is ideal 
for determining the caliber of the external auditory 
canal, integrity of the ossicular chain, and presence of 
middle-ear or mastoid disease; it can also detect inner 
ear malformations. CT is also ideal for the detection 
of bone erosion with chronic otitis media and choles-
teatoma. MRI is superior to CT for imaging of ret-
rocochlear pathology such as vestibular schwannoma, 
meningioma, other lesions of the cerebellopontine 
angle, demyelinating lesions of the brainstem, and 
brain tumors. Both CT and MRI are equally capa-
ble of identifying inner ear malformations and assess-
ing cochlear patency for preoperative evaluation of 
patients for cochlear implantation.
TREATMENT 
Disorders of the Sense of Hearing
In general, conductive hearing losses are amenable to 
surgical correction, while sensorineural hearing losses 
are more difficult to manage. Atresia of the ear canal can 
be surgically repaired, often with significant improve-
ment in hearing. Tympanic membrane perforations due 
to chronic otitis media or trauma can be repaired with 
an outpatient tympanoplasty. Likewise, conductive 
hearing loss associated with otosclerosis can be treated 
by stapedectomy, which is successful in 90–95% of 
cases. Tympanostomy tubes allow the prompt return of 
normal hearing in individuals with middle ear effusions. 
Hearing aids are effective and well tolerated in patients 
with conductive hearing losses.
Patients with mild, moderate, and severe sensorineu-
ral hearing losses are regularly rehabilitated with hearing 
aids of varying configuration and strength. Hearing aids 
have been improved to provide greater fidelity and have 
been miniaturized. The current generation of hearing aids 
can be placed entirely within the ear canal, thus reducing 
any stigma associated with their use. In general, the more 
severe the hearing impairment, the larger the hearing aid 
required for auditory rehabilitation. Digital hearing aids 
lend themselves to individual programming, and mul-
tiple and directional microphones at the ear level may 
be helpful in noisy surroundings. Since all hearing aids 
amplify noise as well as speech, the only absolute solu-
tion to the problem of noise is to place the microphone 
closer to the speaker than the noise source. This arrange-
ment is not possible with a self-contained, cosmetically 
acceptable device. A significant limitation of rehabilita-
tion with a hearing aid is that while it is able to enhance 
detection of sound with amplification, it cannot restore 
clarity of hearing that is lost with presbycusis.
Patients with unilateral deafness have difficulty 
with sound localization and reduced clarity of hearing 
in background noise. They may benefit from a CROS 
(contralateral routing of signal) hearing aid in which 
a microphone is placed on the hearing-impaired side 
and the sound is transmitted to the receiver placed on 
the contralateral ear. The same result may be obtained 
with a bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA), in which a 
hearing aid clamps to a screw osseointegrated into the 
skull on the hearing-impaired side. Like the CROS hear-
ing aid, the BAHA transfers the acoustic signal to the 
contralateral hearing ear, but it does so by vibrating the 
skull. Patients with profound deafness on one side and 
some hearing loss in the better ear are candidates for a 
BICROS hearing aid; it differs from the CROS hearing aid 
in that the patient wears a hearing aid, and not simply 
a receiver, in the better ear. Unfortunately, CROS and 
BAHA devices are often judged by patients to be unsat-
isfactory.
In many situations, including lectures and the the-
ater, hearing-impaired persons benefit from assistive 
devices that are based on the principle of having the 
speaker closer to the microphone than any source of 
noise. Assistive devices include infrared and frequency-
modulated (FM) transmission as well as an electromag-
netic loop around the room for transmission to the indi-
vidual’s hearing aid. Hearing aids with telecoils can also 
be used with properly equipped telephones in the same 
way.
In the event that the hearing aid provides inadequate 
rehabilitation, cochlear implants may be appropriate. 
Criteria for implantation include severe to profound 
SECTION II
Clinical Manifestations of Neurologic Disease
216
hearing loss with open-set sentence cognition of ≤40% 
under best aided conditions. Worldwide, nearly 200,000 
hearing impaired children and adults have received 
cochlear implants. Cochlear implants are neural pros-
theses that convert sound energy to electrical energy 
and can be used to stimulate the auditory division of 
the eighth nerve directly. In most cases of profound 
hearing impairment, the auditory hair cells are lost 
but the ganglionic cells of the auditory division of the 
eighth nerve are preserved. Cochlear implants consist 
of electrodes that are inserted into the cochlea through 
the round window, speech processors that extract 
acoustical elements of speech for conversion to electri-
cal currents, and a means of transmitting the electrical 
energy through the skin. Patients with implants expe-
rience sound that helps with speech reading, allows 
open-set word recognition, and helps in modulating 
the person’s own voice. Usually, within the first 3–6 
months after implantation, adult patients can under-
stand speech without visual cues. With the current gen-
eration of multichannel cochlear implants, nearly 75% 
of patients are able to converse on the telephone. For 
individuals who have had both eighth nerves destroyed 
by trauma or bilateral vestibular schwannomas (e.g., 
neurofibromatosis type 2), brainstem auditory implants 
placed near the cochlear nucleus may provide auditory 
rehabilitation.
Tinnitus often accompanies hearing loss. As for back-
ground noise, tinnitus can degrade speech comprehen-
sion in individuals with hearing impairment. Therapy 
for tinnitus is usually directed toward minimizing the 
appreciation of tinnitus. Relief of the tinnitus may be 
obtained by masking it with background music. Hear-
ing aids are also helpful in tinnitus suppression, as are 
tinnitus maskers, devices that present a sound to the 
affected ear that is more pleasant to listen to than the 
tinnitus. The use of a tinnitus masker is often followed 
by several hours of inhibition of the tinnitus. Antide-
pressants have been shown to be beneficial in helping 
patients cope with tinnitus.
Hard-of-hearing individuals often benefit from a 
reduction in unnecessary noise in the environment (e.g., 
radio or television) to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. 
Speech comprehension is aided by lip reading; there-
fore, the impaired listener should be seated so that the 
face of the speaker is well illuminated and easily seen. 
Although speech should be in a loud, clear voice, one 
should be aware that in sensorineural hearing losses 
in general and in hard-of-hearing elderly in particular, 
recruitment (abnormal perception of loud sounds) may 
be troublesome. Above all, optimal communication can-
not take place without both parties giving it their full 
and undivided attention.
PREVENTION
Conductive hearing losses may be prevented by prompt 
antibiotic therapy of adequate duration for AOM and 
by ventilation of the middle ear with tympanostomy 
tubes in middle-ear effusions lasting v12 weeks. Loss of 
vestibular function and deafness due to aminoglycoside 
antibiotics can largely be prevented by careful monitor-
ing of serum peak and trough levels.
Some 10 million Americans have noise-induced 
hearing loss, and 20 million are exposed to hazard-
ous noise in their employment. Noise-induced hear-
ing loss can be prevented by avoidance of exposure to 
loud noise or by regular use of ear plugs or ﬂuid-ﬁlled 
ear muffs to attenuate intense sound. High-risk activi-
ties for noise-induced hearing loss include wood and 
metal working with electrical equipment and target 
practice and hunting with small ﬁrearms. All internal-
combustion and electric engines, including snow and 
leaf blowers, snowmobiles, outboard motors, and chain 
saws, require protection of the user with hearing pro-
tectors. Virtually all noise-induced hearing loss is pre-
ventable through education, which should begin before 
the teenage years. Programs of industrial conservation of 
hearing are required by Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) when the exposure over an 
8-h period averages 85 dB. OSHA mandates that work-
ers in such noisy environments have hearing monitor-
ing and protection programs that include a pre-employ-
ment screen, annual audiologic assessment, as well as 
the mandatory use of hearing protectors. Exposure to 
loud sounds above 85 dB in the work environment is 
restricted by OSHA, with halving of allowed exposure 
time for each increment of 5 dB above this threshold: 
for example 90 dB exposure is permitted for 8 h; 95 dB 
for 4 h, and 100 dB for 2 h.
SECTION III
DISEASES OF THE  
NERVOUS SYSTEM
 Stephen L. Hauser  ■   M. Flint Beal 
218
 The human nervous system is the organ of conscious-
ness, cognition, ethics, and behavior; as such, it is the 
most intricate structure known to exist. More than 
one-third of the 23,000 genes encoded in the human 
genome are expressed in the nervous system. Each 
mature brain is composed of 100 billion neurons, sev-
eral million miles of axons and dendrites, and >10 15
synapses. Neurons exist within a dense parenchyma of 
multifunctional glial cells that synthesize myelin, pre-
serve homeostasis, and regulate immune responses. 
Measured against this background of complexity, the 
achievements of molecular neuroscience have been 
extraordinary. This chapter reviews selected themes in 
neuroscience that provide a context for understand-
ing fundamental mechanisms that underlie neurologic 
disorders. 
 NEUROGENETICS 
 The landscape of neurology has been transformed by 
modern molecular genetics. More than 350 different 
disease-causing genes have been identiﬁ ed, and >1000 
neurologic disorders have been genetically mapped to 
various chromosomal locations. Several hundred neu-
rologic and psychiatric disorders now can be diagnosed 
through genetic testing  ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/
GeneTests/?db=GeneTests ). The vast majority of these 
disorders represent highly penetrant mutations that cause 
rare neurologic disorders; alternatively, they represent rare 
monogenic causes of common phenotypes. Examples of 
the latter include mutations of the amyloid precursor pro-
tein in familial Alzheimer’s disease, the microtubule-asso-
ciated protein tau (MAPT) in frontotemporal dementia, 
and α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease. These discoveries 
have been profoundly important because the mutated gene 
in a familial disorder often encodes a protein that is also 
pathogenetically involved (although not mutated) in the 
typical, sporadic form. The common mechanism involves 
disordered processing and, ultimately, aggregation of the 
protein, leading to cell death (see “Protein Aggregation 
and Neurodegeneration”). 
 There is great optimism that complex genetic dis-
orders that are caused by combinations of genetic and 
environmental factors have become tractable prob-
lems. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have 
been carried out in many complex neurologic disor-
ders, with many hundreds of variants identiﬁ ed, nearly 
all of which confer only a small increment in disease 
risk (1.15–1.5 fold). GWAS are rooted in the “com-
mon disease, common variant” hypothesis, as they 
examine potential risk alleles that are relatively com-
mon (e.g., >5%) in the general population. More 
than 1000 GWAS have been carried out to date, with 
notable successes such as the identiﬁ cation of >50 risk 
alleles for multiple sclerosis. Furthermore, when bioin-
formatics tools are used, risk variants can be aligned in 
functional biologic pathways to identify novel patho-
genic mechanisms as well as to reveal heterogene-
ity (e.g., different pathways in different individuals). 
Despite these successes, many experienced geneticists 
question the value of common disease-associated vari-
ants, particularly whether they are actually causative 
or merely mark the approximate locations of more 
important—truly causative—rare mutations. 
 This debate has set the stage for the next revolu-
tion in human genetics, made possible by the devel-
opment of increasingly efﬁ cient and cost-effective 
high-throughput sequencing methodologies. It is cur-
rently possible to sequence an entire human genome in 
approximately an hour, at a cost of only $4000 for the 
entire coding sequence (“whole-exome”) or $10,000 
for the entire genome; it is certain that these costs will 
continue to decline. This makes it feasible to look 
for disease-causing sequence variations in individual 
patients with the possibility of identifying rare variants 
that cause disease. The utility of this approach was dem-
onstrated by whole-genome sequencing in a patient 
 MECHANISMS OF NEUROLOGIC DISEASES 
 CHAPTER 25 
 
CHAPTER 25
Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases
219
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy in which com-
pound heterozygous mutations were identiﬁed in the 
SH3TC2 gene that then were shown to co-segregate 
with the disease in other members of the family.
It is also increasingly recognized that not all genetic 
diseases or predispositions are caused by simple changes 
in the linear nucleotide sequence of genes. As the com-
plex architecture of the human genome becomes better 
deﬁned, many disorders that result from alterations in 
copy numbers of genes (“gene-dosage” effects) resulting 
from unequal crossing-over are likely to be identiﬁed. As 
much as 5–10% of the human genome consists of nonho-
mologous duplications and deletions, and these appear to 
occur with a much higher mutational rate than is the case 
for single base pair mutations. The ﬁrst copy-number 
disorders to be recognized were Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease type 1A (CMT1A), caused by a duplication in 
the gene encoding the myelin protein PMP22, and the 
reciprocal deletion of the gene causing hereditary liabil-
ity to pressure palsies (HNPP) (Chap. 45). Gene-dosage 
effects are causative in some cases of Parkinson’s disease 
(α-synuclein), Alzheimer’s disease (amyloid precursor 
protein), spinal muscular atrophy (survival motor neu-
ron 2), the dysmyelinating disorder Pelizaeus-Merzbacher 
syndrome (proteolipid protein 1), late-onset leukodystro-
phy (lamin B1), and a variety of developmental neuro-
logic disorders. It is now evident that copy-number vari-
ations contribute substantially to normal human genomic 
variation for numerous genes involved in neurologic 
function, regulation of cell growth, and regulation of 
metabolism. It is also already clear that gene-dosage 
effects will inﬂuence many behavioral phenotypes, learn-
ing disorders, and autism spectrum disorders. Deletions at 
ch1q and ch15q have been associated with schizophrenia, 
and deletions at 15q and 16p with autism. Interestingly, 
the 16p deletion also is associated with epilepsy. Duplica-
tions of the X-linked MeCP2 gene cause autism in males 
and psychiatric disorders with anxiety in females, whereas 
point mutations in this gene produce the neurodevelop-
mental disorder Rett syndrome. The understanding of 
the role of copy-number variation in human disease is 
still in its infancy.
The role of splicing variation as a contributor to neu-
rologic disease is another area of active investigation. 
Alternative splicing refers to the inclusion of different 
combinations of exons in mature mRNA, resulting 
in the potential for many different protein products 
encoded by a single gene. Alternative splicing rep-
resents a powerful mechanism for generation of com-
plexity and variation, and this mechanism appears to be 
highly prevalent in the nervous system, affecting key 
processes such as neurotransmitter receptors and ion 
channels. Numerous diseases are known to result from 
abnormalities in alternative splicing. Increased inclusion 
of exon 10–containing transcripts of MAPT can cause 
frontotemporal dementia. Aberrant splicing also con-
tributes to the pathogenesis of Duchenne’s, myotonic, 
and fascioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophies; ataxia-
telangiectasia; neuroﬁbromatosis; some inherited atax-
ias; and fragile X syndrome, among other disorders. It 
is also likely that subtle variations of splicing will inﬂu-
ence many genetically complex disorders. For example, 
a splicing variant of the interleukin 7 receptor α chain, 
resulting in production of more soluble and less mem-
brane-bound receptor, was found to be associated with 
susceptibility to multiple sclerosis (MS) in multiple dif-
ferent populations.
Epigenetics refers to the mechanisms by which lev-
els of gene expression can be exquisitely modulated 
not by variations in the primary genetic sequence of 
DNA but rather by postgenomic alterations in DNA 
and chromatin structure, which inﬂuence how, when, 
and where genes are expressed. DNA methylation and 
the methylation and acetylation of histone proteins that 
interact with nuclear DNA to form chromatin are key 
mediators of these events. Epigenetic processes appear 
to be dynamically active even in postmitotic neurons. 
Imprinting refers to an epigenetic feature, present for a 
subset of genes, in which the predominant expres-
sion of one allele is determined by its parent of origin. 
The distinctive neurodevelopmental disorders Prader-
Willi syndrome (mild mental retardation and endocrine 
abnormalities) and Angelman syndrome (cortical atro-
phy, cerebellar dysmyelination, Purkinje cell loss) are 
classic examples of imprinting disorders whose distinc-
tive features are determined by whether the paternal or 
maternal copy of chromosome of the critical genetic 
region 15q11-13 was responsible. In a study of discor-
dant monozygotic twins for MS in which the entire 
DNA sequence, transcriptome (e.g., mRNA levels), 
and methylome were assessed genomewide, tantalizing 
allelic differences in the use of the paternal, compared 
to maternal, copy for a group of genes were identiﬁed. 
Preferential allelic expression, whether due to imprint-
ing, resistance to X inactivation, or other mechanisms, 
is likely to play a major role in determining complex 
behaviors and susceptibility to many neurologic and 
psychiatric disorders.
Another advance is the development of transgenic 
mouse models of neurologic diseases, which has been 
particularly fruitful in producing models relevant to 
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s 
disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. These mod-
els are useful in both studying disease pathogenesis and 
developing and testing new therapies. Models in both 
Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila have also been 
extremely useful, particularly in studying genetic modi-
ﬁers as well as therapeutic interventions.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
220
ION CHANNELS AND 
CHANNELOPATHIES
The resting potential of neurons and the action poten-
tials responsible for impulse conduction are generated 
by ion currents and ion channels. Most ion channels 
are gated, meaning that they can transition between 
conformations that are open or closed to ion conduc-
tance. Individual ion channels are distinguished by the 
speciﬁc ions they conduct; their kinetics; and whether 
they directly sense voltage, are linked to receptors 
for neurotransmitters or other ligands such as neuro-
trophins, or are activated by second messengers. The 
diverse characteristics of different ion channels provide 
a means by which neuronal excitability can be modu-
lated exquisitely at both the cellular and subcellular 
levels. Disorders of ion channels—channelopathies—
are responsible for a growing list of human neurologic 
diseases (Table 25-1). Most are caused by mutations 
in ion channel genes or by autoantibodies against ion 
channel proteins. One example is epilepsy, a syndrome 
of diverse causes characterized by repetitive, synchro-
nous ﬁring of neuronal action potentials. Action poten-
tials normally are generated by the opening of sodium 
channels and the inward movement of sodium ions 
down the intracellular concentration gradient. Depo-
larization of the neuronal membrane opens potassium 
channels, resulting in outward movement of potassium 
TABLE 25-1
EXAMPLES OF NEUROLOGIC CHANNELOPATHIES
CATEGORY
DISORDER
CHANNEL TYPE
MUTATED GENE
CHAP. REF.
Genetic
Ataxias
Episodic ataxia-1
Episodic ataxia-2
Spinocerebellar ataxia-6
K
Ca
Ca
KCNA1
CACNL1A
CACNL1A
31
Migraine
Familial hemiplegic migraine 1
Familial hemiplegic migraine 3
Ca
Na
CACNL1A
SCN1A
8
Epilepsy
Benign neonatal familial convulsions
Generalized epilepsy with febrile convulsions 
plus
K
Na
KCNQ2, KCNQ3
SCN1B
26
Periodic paralysis
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
Na
Ca
SCN4A
CACNL1A3
48
Myotonia
Myotonia congenita
Paramyotonia congenita
Cl
Na
CLCN1
SCN4A
48
Deafness
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (deafness, 
prolonged QT interval, and arrhythmia)
K
KCNQ1, KCNE1
24
Autosomal dominant progressive deafness
K
KCNQ4
Autoimmune
Paraneoplastic
Limbic encephalitis
Acquired neuromyotonia
Cerebellar ataxia
Lambert-Eaton syndrome
Kv1
Kv1
Ca (P/Q type)
Ca (P/Q type)
—
—
—
—
44
44
44
44
ions, repolarization, closure of the sodium channel, and 
hyperpolarization. Sodium or potassium channel sub-
unit genes have long been considered candidate disease 
genes in inherited epilepsy syndromes, and recently 
such mutations were identiﬁed. These mutations appear 
to alter the normal gating function of these channels, 
increasing the inherent excitability of neuronal mem-
branes in regions where the abnormal channels are 
expressed.
Whereas the speciﬁc clinical manifestations of chan-
nelopathies are quite variable, one common feature is 
that manifestations tend to be intermittent or paroxys-
mal, as occurs in epilepsy, migraine, ataxia, myotonia, 
or periodic paralysis. Exceptions are clinically progres-
sive channel disorders such as autosomal dominant hear-
ing impairment. The genetic channelopathies identiﬁed 
to date are all uncommon disorders caused by obvious 
mutations in channel genes. As the full repertoire of 
human ion channels and related proteins is identiﬁed, 
it is likely that additional channelopathies will be dis-
covered. In addition to rare disorders that result from 
obvious mutations, it is likely that less penetrant allelic 
variations in channel genes or their pattern of expres-
sion might underlie susceptibility to some apparently 
sporadic forms of epilepsy, migraine, or other disorders. 
For example, mutations in the potassium channel gene 
Kir2.6 have been found in many individuals with thyro-
toxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis, a disorder similar 
 
CHAPTER 25
Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases
221
to hypokalemic periodic paralysis but precipitated by 
stress from thyrotoxicosis or carbohydrate loading.
NEUROTRANSMITTERS AND 
NEUROTRANSMITTER RECEPTORS
Synaptic neurotransmission is the predominant means 
by which neurons communicate with each other. Classic 
neurotransmitters are synthesized in the presynaptic region 
of the nerve terminal; stored in vesicles; and released into 
the synaptic cleft, where they bind to receptors on the 
postsynaptic cell. Secreted neurotransmitters are eliminated 
by reuptake into the presynaptic neuron (or glia), diffu-
sion away from the synaptic cleft, and/or speciﬁc inacti-
vation. In addition to the classic neurotransmitters, many 
neuropeptides have been identiﬁed as deﬁnite or probable 
neurotransmitters; they include substance P, neurotensin, 
enkephalins, β-endorphin, histamine, vasoactive intes-
tinal polypeptide, cholecystokinin, neuropeptide Y, and 
somatostatin. Peptide neurotransmitters are synthesized 
in the cell body rather than the nerve terminal and may 
colocalize with classic neurotransmitters in single neurons. 
A number of neuropeptides are important in pain modu-
lation, including substance P and calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP), which causes migraine-like headaches 
in patients. As a consequence, CGRP receptor antagonists 
have been developed and shown to be effective in treating 
migraine headaches. Nitric oxide and carbon monoxide 
are gases that appear also to function as neurotransmitters, 
in part by signaling in a retrograde fashion from the post-
synaptic to the presynaptic cell.
Neurotransmitters modulate the function of post-
synaptic cells by binding to speciﬁc neurotransmitter 
receptors, of which there are two major types. Iono-
tropic receptors are direct ion channels that open after 
engagement by the neurotransmitter. Metabotropic recep-
tors interact with G proteins, stimulating production of 
second messengers and activating protein kinases, which 
modulate a variety of cellular events. Ionotropic recep-
tors are multiple-subunit structures, whereas metabo-
tropic receptors are composed of single subunits only. 
One important difference between ionotropic and 
metabotropic receptors is that the kinetics of ionotropic 
receptor effects are fast (generally <1 ms) because neu-
rotransmitter binding directly alters the electrical prop-
erties of the postsynaptic cell, whereas metabotropic 
receptors function over longer periods. These different 
properties contribute to the potential for selective and 
ﬁnely modulated signaling by neurotransmitters.
Neurotransmitter systems are perturbed in a large 
number of clinical disorders, examples of which 
are highlighted in Table 25-2. One example is the 
involvement of dopaminergic neurons originating in the 
substantia nigra of the midbrain and projecting to the 
striatum (nigrostriatal pathway) in Parkinson’s disease 
and in heroin addicts after the ingestion of the toxin 
MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine).
A second important dopaminergic system arising in 
the midbrain is the mediocorticolimbic pathway, which 
is implicated in the pathogenesis of addictive behaviors 
including drug reward. Its key components include the 
midbrain ventral tegmental area (VTA), median fore-
brain bundle, and nucleus accumbens (see Fig. 53-1). 
The cholinergic pathway originating in the nucleus 
basalis of Meynert plays a role in memory function in 
Alzheimer’s disease.
Addictive drugs share the property of increasing dopamine 
release in the nucleus accumbens. Amphetamine increases 
intracellular release of dopamine from vesicles and 
reverses transport of dopamine through the dopamine 
transporters. Patients prone to addiction show increased 
activation of the nucleus accumbens after administra-
tion of amphetamine. Cocaine binds to dopamine trans-
porters and inhibits dopamine reuptake. Ethanol inhib-
its inhibitory neurons in the VTA, leading to increased 
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. Opioids 
also disinhibit these dopaminergic neurons by bind-
ing to μ receptors expressed by γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)-containing interneurons in the VTA. Nico-
tine increases dopamine release by activating nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors on cell bodies and nerve ter-
minals of dopaminergic VTA neurons. Tetrahydrocan-
nabinol, the active ingredient of cannabis, also increases 
dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens. Blockade of 
dopamine in the nucleus accumbens can terminate the 
rewarding effects of addictive drugs.
Not all cell-to-cell communication in the nervous 
system occurs via neurotransmission. Gap junctions 
provide for direct neuron-neuron electrical conduc-
tion and also create openings for the diffusion of ions 
and metabolites between cells. In addition to neurons, 
gap junctions are widespread in glia, creating a syn-
cytium that protects neurons by removing glutamate 
and potassium from the extracellular environment. 
Gap junctions consist of membrane-spanning proteins, 
termed connexins, that pair across adjacent cells. Mecha-
nisms that involve gap junctions have been related to a 
variety of neurologic disorders. Mutations in connexin 
32, a gap junction protein expressed by Schwann cells, 
are responsible for the X-linked form of CMT dis-
ease. Mutations in either of two gap junction proteins 
expressed in the inner ear—connexin 26 and connexin 
31—result in autosomal dominant progressive hearing 
loss (Chap. 24). Glial calcium waves mediated through 
gap junctions also appear to explain the phenom-
enon of spreading depression associated with migraine 
auras and the march of epileptic discharges. Spreading 
depression is a neural response that follows a variety of 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
222
CH—CH2—NH2
HO
HO
OH
TABLE 25-2
PRINCIPAL CLASSIC NEUROTRANSMITTERS
NEUROTRANSMITTER
ANATOMY
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Motor neurons in spinal cord → neuro-
muscular junction
Acetylcholinesterases (nerve gases)
Myasthenia gravis (antibodies to ACh 
receptor)
Congenital myasthenic syndromes 
(mutations in ACh receptor subunits)
Lambert-Eaton syndrome (antibodies to 
Ca channels impair ACh release)
Botulism (toxin disrupts ACh release by 
exocytosis)
Basal forebrain → widespread cortex
Alzheimer’s disease (selective cell death)
Autosomal dominant frontal lobe epi-
lepsy (mutations in CNS ACh receptor)
Interneurons in striatum
Parkinson’s disease (tremor)
Autonomic nervous system (pregangli-
onic and postganglionic parasympa-
thetic; preganglionic sympathetic)
Dopamine
Substantia nigra → striatum (nigrostriatal 
pathway)
Substantia nigra → limbic system and 
widespread cortex
Arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus → 
anterior pituitary (via portal veins)
Parkinson’s disease (selective cell death)
MPTP parkinsonism (toxin transported 
into neurons)
Addiction, behavioral disorders
Inhibits prolactin secretion
Norepinephrine (NE)
Locus coeruleus (pons) → limbic system, 
hypothalamus, cortex
Medulla → locus coeruleus, spinal cord
Postganglionic neurons of sympathetic 
nervous system
Mood disorders (MAOA inhibitors and 
tricyclics increase NE and improve 
depression)
Anxiety
Orthostatic tachycardia syndrome 
(mutations in NE transporter)
Serotonin
Pontine raphe nuclei → widespread 
projections
Medulla/pons → dorsal horn of spinal 
cord
Mood disorders (SSRIs improve  
depression)
Migraine pain pathway
Pain pathway
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Major inhibitory neurotransmitter in 
brain; widespread cortical interneurons 
and long projection pathways
Stiff-person syndrome (antibodies to 
glutamic acid decarboxylase, the  
biosynthetic enzyme for GABA)
Epilepsy (gabapentin and valproic acid 
increase GABA)
Glycine
Major inhibitory neurotransmitter in spi-
nal cord
Spasticity
Hyperekplexia (myoclonic startle 
 syndrome) due to mutations in glycine 
receptor
Glutamate
Major excitatory neurotransmitter; 
located throughout CNS, including cor-
tical pyramidal cells
Seizures due to ingestion of domoic acid 
(a glutamate analogue)
Rasmussen’s encephalitis (antibody 
against glutamate receptor 3)
Excitotoxic cell death
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; MAOA, monoamine oxidase A; MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine; SSRI, selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
CH3—C—O—CH2—N—(CH3)3
O
CH2—CH2—NH3
HO
HO
CH2—CH2—NH2
N
H
HO
H2N—CH2—CH2—CH2—COOH
H2N—CH2—COOH
H2N—CH—CH2—CH2—COOH
COOH
CH—CH2—NH2
HO
HO
OH
 
CHAPTER 25
Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases
223
different stimuli and is characterized by a circumferen-
tially expanding negative potential that propagates at a 
characteristic speed of 20 m/s and is associated with an 
increase in extracellular potassium.
SIGNALING PATHWAYS AND GENE 
TRANSCRIPTION
The fundamental issue of how memory, learning, and 
thinking are encoded in the nervous system is likely to 
be clariﬁed by identiﬁcation of the signaling pathways 
involved in neuronal differentiation, axon guidance, 
and synapse formation and by an understanding of how 
these pathways are modulated by experience. Many 
families of transcription factors, each consisting of mul-
tiple individual components, are expressed in the ner-
vous system. Elucidation of these signaling pathways has 
begun to provide insights into the causes of a variety 
of neurologic disorders, including inherited disorders 
of cognition such as X-linked mental retardation. This 
problem affects ∼1 in 500 males, and linkage studies 
in different families suggest that as many as 60 different 
X-chromosome-encoded genes may be responsi-
ble. Rett syndrome, a common cause of (dominant) 
X-linked progressive mental retardation in females, 
is due to a mutation in a gene (MECP2) that encodes 
a DNA-binding protein involved in transcriptional 
repression. As the X chromosome accounts for only 
∼3% of germ-line DNA, by extrapolation, the number 
of genes that potentially contribute to clinical disorders 
affecting intelligence in humans must be potentially 
very large. As discussed later in the chapter, there is 
increasing evidence that abnormal gene transcription 
may play a role in neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Huntington’s disease, in which proteins with polygluta-
mine expansions bind to and sequester transcription fac-
tors. A critical transcription factor for neuronal survival 
is CREB (cyclic adenosine monophosphate responsive 
element-binding) protein, which also plays an important 
role in memory in the hippocampus.
MYELIN
Myelin is the multilayered insulating substance that sur-
rounds axons and speeds impulse conduction by permit-
ting action potentials to jump between naked regions 
of axons (nodes of Ranvier) and across myelinated seg-
ments. Molecular interactions between the myelin mem-
brane and the axon are required to maintain the stabil-
ity, function, and normal life span of both structures. 
A single oligodendrocyte usually ensheathes multiple 
axons in the central nervous system (CNS), whereas in 
the peripheral nervous system (PNS) each Schwann cell 
typically myelinates a single axon. Myelin is a lipid-rich 
material formed by a spiraling process of the membrane 
of the myelinating cell around the axon, creating mul-
tiple membrane bilayers that are tightly apposed (com-
pact myelin) by charged protein interactions. Several 
inhibitors of axon growth are expressed on the innermost 
(periaxonal) lamellae of the myelin membrane (see “Stem 
Cells and Transplantation”). A number of clinically 
important neurologic disorders are caused by inherited 
mutations in myelin proteins of the CNS or PNS (Fig. 
25-1). Constituents of myelin also have a propensity to 
be targeted as autoantigens in autoimmune demyelinating 
disorders (Fig. 25-2). Speciﬁcation to oligodendrocyte 
Myelin basic protein
PLP
PMP22
MOG
MAG
Myelin basic protein
GM1
GQ1b
Cx32
PLP
Po
Po
FIGURE 25-1 
The molecular architecture of the myelin sheath illustrat-
ing the most important disease-related proteins. The illus-
tration represents a composite of CNS and PNS myelin. 
Proteins restricted to CNS myelin are shown in green, pro-
teins of PNS myelin are lavender, and proteins present in 
both CNS and PNS are red. In the CNS, the X-linked allelic 
disorders Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and one variant of 
familial spastic paraplegia are caused by mutations in the 
gene for proteolipid protein (PLP) that normally promotes 
extracellular compaction between adjacent myelin lamellae. 
The homologue of PLP in the PNS is the P0 protein, muta-
tions in which cause the neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease (CMT) type 1B. The most common form of CMT 
is the 1A subtype caused by a duplication of the PMP22 
gene; deletions in PMP22 are responsible for another inher-
ited neuropathy termed hereditary liability to pressure pal-
sies (Chap. 45).
 In multiple sclerosis (MS), myelin basic protein (MBP) and 
the quantitatively minor CNS protein myelin oligodendrocyte 
glycoprotein (MOG) are probably T cell and B cell antigens, 
respectively (Chap. 39). The location of MOG at the outer-
most lamella of the CNS myelin membrane may facilitate 
its targeting by autoantibodies. In the PNS, autoantibodies 
against myelin gangliosides are implicated in a variety of dis-
orders, including GQ1b in the Fisher variant of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome, GM1 in multifocal motor neuropathy, and sulfa-
tide constituents of myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) 
in peripheral neuropathies associated with monoclonal gam-
mopathies (Chap. 46).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
224
precursor cells (OPCs) is transcriptionally regulated by 
the Olig 2 and Yin Yang 1 genes, whereas myelination 
mediated by postmitotic oligodendrocytes depends on a 
different transcription factor, myelin gene regulatory factor 
(MRF). It is noteworthy that in the normal adult brain 
large numbers of OPCs (expressing platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor alpha [PDGFR-α] and NG2) are 
widely distributed but do not myelinate axons, even in 
demyelinating environments such as lesions of MS. The 
characterization of these cells, including an understand-
ing of their transcriptional regulation and functional roles, 
could result in novel approaches to remyelination and 
brain repair.
NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS
Neurotrophic factors (Table 25-3) are secreted pro-
teins that modulate neuronal growth, differentiation, 
repair, and survival; some have additional functions, 
including roles in neurotransmission and in the synaptic 
reorganization involved in learning and memory. The 
neurotrophin (NT) family contains nerve growth fac-
tor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 
NT3, and NT4/5. The neurotrophins act at TrK and 
p75 receptors to promote survival of neurons. Because 
TABLE 25-3
NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS
Neurotrophin family 
Transforming growth factor β family
 Nerve growth factor 
 Glial-derived neurotrophic family
 Brain-derived 
 Neurturin
  neurotrophic factor 
 Persephin
 Neurotrophin-3 
Fibroblast growth factor family
 Neurotrophin-4 
Hepatocyte growth factor
 Neurotrophin-6 
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family
Cytokine family 
 IGF-1
 Ciliary neurotrophic factor      IGF-2
 Leukemia inhibitory factor
 Interleukin 6
 Cardiotrophin-1
Rolling
Activated
lymphocyte
Flow
LFA-1
α4 Integrin
VCAM
ICAM
Triggering
Strong adhesion
Gelatinases
Antibody
Complement
B cell
Basal lamina
Microglia/macrophages
T cell
activation
Chemokines
and cytokines
TNF, IFN, free radicals, vasoactive amines,
complement, proteases, cytokines, eicosanoids
Chemokines
IL-1, IL-12
IFN-γ
IL-2
Heat-shock
proteins?
Activated
Microglia/
macrophages
Astrocytes
Blood-brain
barrier
endothelium
Fc receptor
Extravasation
CD 31
Myelin damage
Brain tissue
FIGURE 25-2 
A model for experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE). 
Crucial steps for disease initiation and progression include 
peripheral activation of preexisting autoreactive T cells; hom-
ing to the CNS and extravasation across the blood-brain bar-
rier; reactivation of T cells by exposed autoantigens; secre-
tion of cytokines; activation of microglia and astrocytes and 
recruitment of a secondary inﬂammatory wave; and immune-
mediated myelin destruction. ICAM, intercellular adhesion 
molecule; LFA-1, lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1; 
VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule; IFN, interferon; IL, 
interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 
CHAPTER 25
Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases
225
of their survival-promoting and antiapoptotic effects, 
neurotrophic factors are in theory outstanding candi-
dates for therapy for disorders characterized by prema-
ture death of neurons as occurs in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) and other degenerative motor neuron 
disorders. Knockout mice lacking receptors for ciliary 
neurotrophic factor (CNTF) or BDNF show loss of 
motor neurons, and experimental motor neuron death 
can be rescued by treatment with various neurotrophic 
factors, including CNTF, BDNF, and vascular endothe-
lial growth factor (VEGF). However, in phase 3 clini-
cal trials, growth factors were ineffective in human ALS. 
The growth factor glial-derived neurotrophic factor 
(GDNF) is important for survival of dopaminergic neu-
rons. Direct infusions of GDNF showed initial promise 
in Parkinson’s disease (PD), but the beneﬁts were not 
replicated in a larger clinical trial.
STEM CELLS AND TRANSPLANTATION
The nervous system is traditionally considered to be a 
nonmitotic organ, particularly with respect to neu-
rons. These concepts have been challenged by the 
ﬁnding that neural progenitor or stem cells exist in the 
adult CNS that are capable of differentiation, migra-
tion over long distances, and extensive axonal arbori-
zation and synapse formation with appropriate targets. 
These capabilities also indicate that the repertoire of fac-
tors required for growth, survival, differentiation, and 
migration of these cells exists in the mature nervous sys-
tem. In rodents, neural stem cells, deﬁned as progeni-
tor cells capable of differentiating into mature cells of 
neural or glial lineage, have been experimentally propa-
gated from fetal CNS and neuroectodermal tissues and 
also from adult germinal matrix and ependyma regions. 
Human fetal CNS tissue is also capable of differentiation 
into cells with neuronal, astrocyte, and oligodendrocyte 
morphology when cultured in the presence of growth 
factors.
Once the repertoire of signals required for cell type 
speciﬁcation is better understood, differentiation into 
speciﬁc neural or glial subpopulations could be directed 
in vitro; such cells also could be engineered to express 
therapeutic molecules. Another promising approach 
is to utilize growth factors such as BDNF to stimulate 
endogenous stem cells to proliferate and migrate to 
areas of neuronal damage. Administration of epidermal 
growth factor with ﬁbroblast growth factor replenished 
up to 50% of hippocampal CA1 neurons a month after 
global ischemia in rats. The new neurons made connec-
tions and improved performance in a memory task.
A major advance has been the development of 
induced pluripotent stem cells. Using this technique, 
adult somatic cells such as skin ﬁbroblasts are treated 
with four pluripotency factors (SOX2, KLF4, cMYC, 
and Oct4), and this generates induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs). These adult-derived stem cells sidestep the 
ethical issues of utilizing stem cells derived from human 
embryos. The development of these cells has tremen-
dous promise for both studying disease mechanisms and 
testing therapeutics. There is no consensus on the best 
way to generate and differentiate iPSCs; however, tech-
niques to avoid using viral vectors and the use of Cre-
lox systems to remove reprogramming factors result in 
a better match of gene expression proﬁles with those of 
embryonic stem cells. Thus far, iPSC cells have been 
made from patients with all the major human neurode-
generative diseases, and studies utilizing them are under 
way.
Although stem cells hold tremendous promise 
for the treatment of debilitating neurologic diseases 
such as Parkinson’s disease and spinal cord injury, it 
should be emphasized that medical application is in 
its infancy. Major obstacles are the generation of posi-
tion- and neurotransmitter-deﬁned subtypes of neu-
rons and their isolation as pure populations of the 
desired cells. This is crucial to avoid persistence of 
undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells, which can 
generate tumors. The establishment of appropriate 
neural connections and afferent control is also critical. 
For instance, human ES motor neurons will have to be 
introduced at multiple segments in the neuraxis, and 
then their axons will have to regenerate from the spi-
nal cord to distal musculature.
Experimental transplantation of human fetal dopami-
nergic neurons in patients with Parkinson’s disease has 
shown that these transplanted cells can survive within 
the host striatum; however, some patients developed dis-
abling dyskinesias, and this approach is no longer in clini-
cal development. Human ES cells can be differentiated 
into dopaminergic neurons, which reverse symptoms 
of Parkinson’s disease in experimental animal models. 
Studies of transplantation for patients with Huntington’s 
disease have reported encouraging, although very pre-
liminary, results. Oligodendrocyte precursor cells trans-
planted into mice with a dysmyelinating disorder effec-
tively migrated in the new environment, interacted with 
axons, and mediated myelination; such experiments raise 
hope that similar transplantation strategies may be feasible 
in human disorders of myelin such as MS. The promise 
of stem cells for treatment of both neurodegenerative 
diseases and neural injury is great, but development has 
been slowed by unresolved concerns over safety (includ-
ing the theoretical risk of malignant transformation of 
transplanted cells), ethics (particularly with respect to use 
of fetal tissue), and efﬁcacy.
In developing brain, the extracellular matrix provides 
stimulatory and inhibitory signals that promote neuro-
nal migration, neurite outgrowth, and axonal extension. 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
226
After neuronal damage, reexpression of inhibitory mol-
ecules such as chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans may 
prevent tissue regeneration. Chondroitinase degraded 
these inhibitory molecules and enhanced axonal regen-
eration and motor recovery in a rat model of spinal 
cord injury. Several myelin proteins, speciﬁcally Nogo, 
oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein (OMGP), and 
myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), also may inter-
fere with axon regeneration. Sialidase, which cleaves 
one class of receptors for MAG, enhances axonal out-
growth. Antibodies against Nogo promote regenera-
tion after experimental focal ischemia or spinal cord 
injury. Nogo, OMGP, and MAG all bind to the same 
neural receptor, the Nogo receptor, which mediates its 
inhibitory function via the p75 neurotrophin receptor 
signaling.
CELL DEATH: EXCITOTOXICITY AND 
APOPTOSIS
Excitotoxicity refers to neuronal cell death caused by acti-
vation of excitatory amino acid receptors (Fig. 25-3). 
Compelling evidence for a role of excitotoxicity, espe-
cially in ischemic neuronal injury, is derived from experi-
ments in animal models. Experimental models of stroke 
are associated with increased extracellular concentrations 
of the excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter gluta-
mate, and neuronal damage is attenuated by denervation 
of glutamate-containing neurons or the administration 
of glutamate receptor antagonists. The distribution of 
cells sensitive to ischemia corresponds closely with that 
of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors (except for 
cerebellar Purkinje cells, which are vulnerable to hypox-
emia-ischemia but lack NMDA receptors), and competi-
tive and noncompetitive NMDA antagonists are effective 
in preventing focal ischemia. In global cerebral ischemia, 
non-NMDA receptors (kainic acid and α-amino-3-
hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionate [AMPA]) are 
activated, and antagonists to these receptors are protec-
tive. Experimental brain damage induced by hypoglyce-
mia also is attenuated by NMDA antagonists.
Excitotoxicity is not a single event but rather a cas-
cade of cell injury. Excitotoxicity causes inﬂux of cal-
cium into cells, and much of the calcium is sequestered 
in mitochondria rather than in the cytoplasm. Increased 
cytoplasmic calcium causes metabolic dysfunction and 
free radical generation; activates protein kinases, phos-
pholipases, nitric oxide synthase, proteases, and endo-
nucleases; and inhibits protein synthesis. Activation 
of nitric oxide synthase generates nitric oxide (NO•), 
which can react with superoxide (O• 
2) to generate per-
oxynitrite (ONOO–), which may play a direct role in 
neuronal injury. Another critical pathway is activa-
tion of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase, which occurs in 
response to free radical–mediated DNA damage. Exper-
imentally, mice with knockout mutations of neuronal 
nitric oxide synthase or poly-ADP-ribose polymerase, 
or those which overexpress superoxide dismutase, are 
resistant to focal ischemia.
Another aspect of excitotoxicity is that it has been 
demonstrated that stimulation of extrasynaptic NMDA 
receptors mediates cell death, whereas stimulation of 
synaptic receptors is protective. This has been shown to 
play a role in excitotoxicity in transgenic mouse models 
of Huntington’s disease, in which the use of low-dose 
memantine to selectively block the extrasynaptic recep-
tors is beneﬁcial.
Although excitotoxicity is clearly implicated in the 
pathogenesis of cell death in stroke, to date treatment with 
NMDA antagonists has not proved clinically useful. Tran-
sient receptor potentials (TRPs) are calcium channels that 
are activated by oxidative stress in parallel with excitotoxic 
signal pathways. In addition, glutamate-independent path-
ways of calcium inﬂux via acid-sensing ion channels have 
been identiﬁed. These channels transport calcium in the 
setting of acidosis and substrate depletion, and pharmaco-
logic blockade of these channels markedly attenuates stroke 
injury. These channels offer a potential new therapeutic 
target for stroke.
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, plays an impor-
tant role in both physiologic and pathologic conditions. 
During embryogenesis, apoptotic pathways operate to 
destroy neurons that fail to differentiate appropriately or 
reach their intended targets. There is mounting evidence 
for an increased rate of apoptotic cell death in a variety of 
acute and chronic neurologic diseases. Apoptosis is char-
acterized by neuronal shrinkage, chromatin condensation, 
and DNA fragmentation, whereas necrotic cell death is 
associated with cytoplasmic and mitochondrial swelling 
followed by dissolution of the cell membrane. Apoptotic 
death and necrotic cell death can coexist or be sequential 
events, depending on the severity of the initiating insult. 
Cellular energy reserves appear to have an important role 
in these two forms of cell death, with apoptosis favored 
under conditions in which ATP levels are preserved. 
Evidence of DNA fragmentation has been found in a 
number of degenerative neurologic disorders, including 
Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and ALS. The 
best characterized genetic neurologic disorder related to 
apoptosis is infantile spinal muscular atrophy (Werdnig-
Hoffmann disease), in which two genes thought to be 
involved in the apoptosis pathways are causative.
Mitochondria are essential in controlling speciﬁc 
apoptosis pathways. The redistribution of cytochrome c, 
as well as apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), from mito-
chondria during apoptosis leads to the activation of a 
cascade of intracellular proteases known as caspases. Cas-
pase-independent apoptosis occurs after DNA dam-
age, activation of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase, and 
 
CHAPTER 25
Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases
227
translocation of AIF into the nucleus. Redistribution 
of cytochrome c is prevented by overproduction of the 
apoptotic protein BCL2 and is promoted by the pro-
apoptotic protein BAX. These pathways may be trig-
gered by activation of a large pore in the mitochondrial 
inner membrane known as the permeability transition pore, 
although in other circumstances they occur indepen-
dently. Recent studies suggest that blocking the mito-
chondrial pore reduces both hypoglycemic and ischemic 
cell death. Mice deﬁcient in cyclophilin D, a key protein 
involved in opening the permeability transition pore, are 
resistant to necrosis produced by focal cerebral ischemia.
PROTEIN AGGREGATION AND 
NEURODEGENERATION
The possibility that protein aggregation plays a role 
in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases is a 
major focus of current research. Protein aggregation is 
NMDA receptor
Glutamate
Glycine-(D-series)
Mg2+
NMDA receptor
Glutamate
Glycine-(D-series)
Mg2+
[Ca2+]
Impaired
ATP generation
Preserved
ATP generation
Activation of
caspase cascade
Mitochondrial swelling,
rupture of outer membrane
PTP activation
NOS
NO+
ONOO–
Peroxynitrite
Hydrogen peroxide
Oxidative
stress
Nucleus
Hydrogen ion
SOD
Catalase
Protein oxidation
Lipid peroxidation
DNA/RNA oxidation
PARS
activation
ATP depletion
NAD depletion
Cell death by necrosis
Cell death by apoptosis
O2
Aif
Cytc
Caspase 9
Aif
Apaf1 + dATP
NO
NOS
ONOO–
+ O2
O2
H2O2
OH
H2O
[Ca2+]
A
B
Nucleus
O2
[Ca2+]
O2
[Ca2+]
FIGURE 25-3 
Involvement of mitochondria in cell death. A severe exci-
totoxic insult (A) results in cell death by necrosis, whereas a 
mild excitotoxic insult (B) results in apoptosis. After a severe 
insult (such as ischemia), there is a large increase in glutamate 
activation of NMDA receptors, an increase in intracellular Ca2+ 
concentrations, activation of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), and 
increased mitochondrial Ca2+ and superoxide generation fol-
lowed by the formation of ONOO–. This sequence results in 
damage to cellular macromolecules including DNA, leading to 
activation of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARS). Both mito-
chondrial accumulation of Ca2+ and oxidative damage lead 
to activation of the permeability transition pore (PTP) that is 
linked to excitotoxic cell death. A mild excitotoxic insult can 
occur due either to an abnormality in an excitotoxicity amino 
acid receptor, allowing more Ca2+ ﬂux, or to impaired func-
tioning of other ionic channels or of energy production, which 
may allow the voltage-dependent NMDA receptor to be acti-
vated by ambient concentrations of glutamate. This event 
can then lead to increased mitochondrial Ca2+ and free radi-
cal production, yet relatively preserved ATP generation. The 
mitochondria may then release cytochrome c (Cytc), caspase 
9, apoptosis-inducing factor (Aif), and perhaps other media-
tors that lead to apoptosis. The precise role of the PTP in 
this mode of cell death is still being clariﬁed, but there does 
appear to be involvement of the adenine nucleotide trans-
porter that is a key component of the PTP.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
228
a major histopathologic hallmark of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Deposition of β-amyloid is strongly implicated 
in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Genetic 
mutations in familial Alzheimer’s disease cause increased 
production of β-amyloid with 42 amino acids, which 
has an increased propensity to aggregate, compared with 
β-amyloid with 40 amino acids. Mutations in genes 
encoding the MAPT lead to altered splicing of tau and 
the production of neuroﬁbrillary tangles in fronto-
temporal dementia and progressive supranuclear palsy. 
Familial Parkinson’s disease is associated with mutations 
in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), α-synuclein, par-
kin, PINK1, and DJ-1. PINK1 is a mitochondrial kinase 
(see later), and DJ-1 is a protein involved in protection 
from oxidative stress. Parkin, which causes autosomal 
recessive early-onset Parkinson’s disease, is a ubiqui-
tin ligase. The characteristic histopathologic feature of 
Parkinson’s disease is the Lewy body, an eosinophilic 
cytoplasmic inclusion that contains both neuroﬁlaments 
and α-synuclein. Huntington’s disease and cerebellar 
degenerations are associated with expansions of polyglu-
tamine repeats in proteins, which aggregate to produce 
neuronal intranuclear inclusions. Familial ALS is asso-
ciated with superoxide dismutase mutations and cyto-
plasmic inclusions that contain superoxide dismutase. 
An important ﬁnding was the discovery that the ubi-
quinated inclusions observed in most cases of ALS and 
the most common form of frontotemporal dementia are 
composed of TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43). 
Subsequently, mutations in the TDP-43 gene and in 
the fused in sarcoma gene (FUS) were found in familial 
ALS. These two proteins are involved in transcription 
regulation as well as RNA metabolism. In autosomal 
dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus, muta-
tions in vasopressin result in abnormal protein process-
ing, accumulation in the endoplasmic reticulum, and 
cell death.
Another key mechanism linked to cell death is 
mitochondrial dynamics, which refer to the processes 
involved in movement of mitochondria, as well as in 
mitochondrial ﬁssion and fusion, which play a critical 
role in mitochondrial turnover and in replenishment 
of damaged mitochondria. Mitochondrial dysfunction 
is strongly linked to the pathogenesis of a number of 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Friedreich’s ataxia, 
which is caused by mutations in an iron-binding pro-
tein that plays an important role in transferring iron to 
iron-sulfur clusters in aconitase and complex I and II 
of the electron transport chain. Mitochondrial ﬁssion 
is dependent on the dynamin-related proteins (Drp1), 
which bind to its receptor Fis, whereas mitofuscins 1 
and 2 (MF 1/2) and optic atrophy protein 1 (Opa1) 
are responsible for fusion of the outer and inner mito-
chondrial membrane, respectively. Mutations in Mfn2 
cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A, and 
mutations in Opa1 cause autosomal dominant optic 
atrophy. Both β-amyloid and mutant huntingtin pro-
tein induce mitochondrial fragmentation and neuronal 
cell death associated with increased activity of Drp1. In 
addition, mutations in genes causing autosomal recessive 
Parkinson’s disease, parkin and PINK1, cause abnormal 
mitochondrial morphology and result in impairment of 
the ability of the cell to remove damaged mitochondria 
by autophagy.
The current major scientiﬁc question is whether pro-
tein aggregates contribute to neuronal death or whether 
they are merely secondary bystanders. A major focus in 
all the neurodegenerative diseases is now on small pro-
tein aggregates termed oligomers. These aggregates may 
be the toxic species of β-amyloid, α-synuclein, and 
proteins with expanded polyglutamines such as those 
that are associated with Huntington’s disease. Protein 
aggregates are usually ubiquinated, which targets them 
for degradation by the 26S component of the protea-
some. An inability to degrade protein aggregates could 
lead to cellular dysfunction, impaired axonal transport, 
and cell death by apoptotic mechanisms.
Autophagy is the degradation of cystolic components 
in lysosomes. There is increasing evidence that autoph-
agy plays an important role in degradation of protein 
aggregates in the neurodegenerative diseases, and it is 
impaired in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s dis-
ease, and Huntington’s disease (HD). Autophagy is par-
ticularly important to the health of neurons, and failure 
of autophagy contributes to cell death. In Huntington’s 
disease, a failure of cargo recognition occurs, contrib-
uting to protein aggregates and cell death. Rapamycin, 
which induces autophagy, exerts beneﬁcial therapeutic 
effects in transgenic mouse models of AD, PD, and HD.
In experimental models of Huntington’s disease and 
cerebellar degeneration, protein aggregates are not well 
correlated with neuronal death and may be protective. 
A substantial body of evidence suggests that the mutant 
proteins with polyglutamine expansions in these dis-
eases bind to transcription factors and that this contrib-
utes to disease pathogenesis. In Huntington’s disease 
there is dysfunction of the transcriptional co-regulator 
PGC-1α, a key regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. 
There is evidence that impaired function of PGC-1α is 
also important in both Parkinson’s disease and Alzheim-
er’s disease, making it an attractive target for treatments. 
Agents that upregulate gene transcription are neuropro-
tective in animal models of these diseases. A number of 
compounds have been developed to block β-amyloid 
production and/or aggregation, and these agents are 
being studied in early clinical trials in humans. Another 
approach under investigation is immunotherapy with 
antibodies that bind β-amyloid, tau, or α-synuclein.
Another emerging theme is the role of chronic 
inﬂammation, and in particular of activated microglia 
 
CHAPTER 25
Mechanisms of Neurologic Diseases
229
and innate immunity, in the pathogenesis of many neu-
rodegenerative diseases. Activation of Toll-like recep-
tors (TLR) in response to pattern-recognition signals 
from damaged or aging cells, including those mediated 
by heat shock proteins or aggregated proteins, can trig-
ger or amplify pro-inﬂammatory responses. Familial 
frontotemporal degeneration (Chap. 29) is caused by 
mutations in the gene encoding progranulin, a growth 
factor that regulates inﬂammation via binding to tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) receptors.
SYSTEMS NEUROSCIENCE
Systems neuroscience refers to study of the functions of 
neurocircuits and the way they relate to brain function, 
behavior, motor activity, and cognition. Brain imag-
ing techniques, primarily functional MRI (fMRI) and 
positron emission tomography (PET), have made it pos-
sible to investigate cognitive processes such as percep-
tion, making judgments, paying attention, and thinking. 
This has allowed insights into how networks of neu-
rons operate to produce behavior. Many of these stud-
ies at present are based on determining the connectivity 
of neural circuits and how they operate and how this 
can be modeled to produce improved understanding 
of physiologic processes. fMRI uses contrast mecha-
nisms related to physiologic changes in tissue, and brain 
perfusion can be studied by observing the time course 
of changes in brain water signal as a bolus of injected 
paramagnetic gadolinium contrast moves through the 
brain. More recently, to study intrinsic contrast-related 
local changes in blood oxygenation with brain activ-
ity, blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast 
has been used to provide a rapid noninvasive approach 
for functional assessment. These techniques have been 
used reliably in both behavioral and cognitive sciences. 
One example is the use of fMRI to demonstrate mir-
ror neuron systems, imitative pathways activated when 
observing actions of others (Fig. 25-4). Mirror neu-
rons are thought to be important for social condition-
ing and for many forms of learning, and abnormalities 
in mirror neurons may underlie some autism disorders. 
Data also suggest that enhancement of mirror neuron 
pathways might have potential for rehabilitation after 
stroke. Other examples of the use of fMRI include the 
study of memory. Recent studies have shown that not 
only is hippocampal activity correlated with declarative 
FIGURE 25-4 
Mirror neuron systems are bilaterally activated during imi-
tation. A. Bilateral activations (circled in yellow) in inferior fron-
tal mirror neuron areas during imitation, as measured by BOLD 
fMRI signal changes. In red, activation during right hand imita-
tion. In blue, activation during left hand imitation. B. In contrast, 
there is lateralized (contralateral) primary visual activation of the 
primary visual cortex for imitated actions presented to the right 
visual ﬁeld (in red, left visual cortex) and to the left visual ﬁeld (in 
blue, right visual cortex). C. Lateralized primary motor activation 
for hand actions imitated with the right hand (in red, left motor 
cortex) and with the left hand (in blue, right motor cortex). (From 
L Aziz-Zadeh et al: J Neurosci 26:2964, 2006.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
230
memory consolidation, it also involves activation in 
the ventral medial prefrontal cortex. Consolidation 
of memory over time results in decreased activity of 
the hippocampus and progressively stronger activa-
tion in the ventral medial prefrontal region associated 
with retrieval of consolidated memories. fMRI also 
has been utilized to identify sequences of brain activa-
tion involved in normal movements and alterations in 
their activation associated with both injury and recov-
ery and to plan neurosurgical operations. Diffusion ten-
sor imaging is a recently developed MRI technique that 
can measure macroscopic axonal organization in ner-
vous system tissues; it appears to be useful in assessing 
myelin and axonal injuries as well as brain development. 
Advances in understanding neural processing have led 
to the development of the ability to demonstrate that 
humans have on-line voluntary control of human tem-
poral lobe neurons.
A further advance that has far-reaching implica-
tions for the development of novel interventions for 
neurologic, including behavioral, conditions has been 
the development of deep-brain stimulation as a highly 
effective therapeutic intervention for treating exces-
sively ﬁring neurons in the subthalamic nucleus of 
patients with Parkinson’s disease and the precingulate 
cortex in patients with depression.
 Daniel H. Lowenstein 
231
 A  seizure (from the Latin  sacire , “to take possession of”) 
is a paroxysmal event due to abnormal excessive or syn-
chronous neuronal activity in the brain. Depending on 
the distribution of discharges, this abnormal brain activ-
ity can have various manifestations, ranging from dra-
matic convulsive activity to experiential phenomena not 
readily discernible by an observer. Although a variety 
of factors inﬂ uence the incidence and prevalence of sei-
zures, ∼5–10% of the population will have at least one 
seizure, with the highest incidence occurring in early 
childhood and late adulthood. 
 The meaning of the term  seizure needs to be carefully 
distinguished from that of epilepsy.  Epilepsy describes a 
condition in which a person has  recurrent seizures due to 
a chronic, underlying process. This deﬁ nition implies 
that a person with a single seizure, or recurrent seizures 
due to correctable or avoidable circumstances, does not 
necessarily have epilepsy. Epilepsy refers to a clinical 
phenomenon rather than a single disease entity, since 
there are many forms and causes of epilepsy. How-
ever, among the many causes of epilepsy there are vari-
ous  epilepsy syndromes in which the clinical and patho-
logic characteristics are distinctive and suggest a speciﬁ c 
underlying etiology. 
 Using the deﬁ nition of epilepsy as two or more 
unprovoked seizures, the incidence of epilepsy is ∼0.3–
0.5% in different populations throughout the world, and 
the prevalence of epilepsy has been estimated at 5–10 
persons per 1000. 
 CLASSIFICATION OF SEIZURES 
 Determining the type of seizure that has occurred is 
essential for focusing the diagnostic approach on par-
ticular etiologies, selecting the appropriate therapy, 
and providing potentially vital information regarding 
prognosis. The International League against Epilepsy 
(ILAE) Commission on Classiﬁ cation and Terminol-
ogy, 2005–2009 has provided an updated approach 
to classiﬁ cation of seizures  ( Table 26-1 ) . This system 
is based on the clinical features of seizures and associ-
ated electroencephalographic ﬁ ndings. Other potentially 
distinctive features such as etiology or cellular substrate 
are not considered in this classiﬁ cation system, although 
this will undoubtedly change in the future as more is 
learned about the pathophysiologic mechanisms that 
underlie speciﬁ c seizure types. 
 A fundamental principle is that seizures may be either 
focal or generalized.  Focal seizures originate within net-
works limited to one cerebral hemisphere (note that the 
term  partial seizures is no longer used).  Generalized sei-
zures arise within and rapidly engage networks distrib-
uted across both cerebral hemispheres. Focal seizures are 
usually associated with structural abnormalities of the 
brain. In contrast, generalized seizures may result from 
cellular, biochemical, or structural abnormalities that 
have a more widespread distribution. There are clear 
exceptions in both cases, however. 
 SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY 
 CHAPTER 26 
TABLE 26-1
 CLASSIFICATION OF SEIZURES 
1. Focal seizures 
 (Can be further described as having motor, sensory, 
autonomic, cognitive, or other features) 
2. Generalized seizures 
 a. Absence 
 
Typical 
 
Atypical 
 b. Tonic clonic 
 c. Clonic 
 d. Tonic 
 e. Atonic 
f.  Myoclonic 
3. May be focal, generalized, or unclear 
 Epileptic spasms 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
232
FOCAL SEIZURES
Focal seizures arise from a neuronal network either 
discretely localized within one cerebral hemisphere 
or more broadly distributed but still within the 
hemisphere. With the new classiﬁcation system, the 
subcategories of “simple focal seizures” and “complex 
focal seizures” have been eliminated. Instead, depending 
on the presence of cognitive impairment, they can be 
described as focal seizures with or without dyscognitive 
features. Focal seizures can also evolve into generalized 
seizures. In the past this was referred to as focal seizures 
with secondary generalization, but the new system relies on 
speciﬁc descriptions of the type of generalized seizures 
that evolve from the focal seizure.
The routine interictal (i.e., between seizures) elec-
troencephalogram (EEG) in patients with focal seizures 
is often normal or may show brief discharges termed 
epileptiform spikes, or sharp waves. Since focal seizures 
can arise from the medial temporal lobe or inferior 
frontal lobe (i.e., regions distant from the scalp), the 
EEG recorded during the seizure may be nonlocaliz-
ing. However, the seizure focus is often detected using 
sphenoidal or surgically placed intracranial electrodes.
Focal seizures without dyscognitive 
features
Focal seizures can cause motor, sensory, autonomic, or 
psychic symptoms without impairment of cognition. 
For example, a patient having a focal motor seizure 
arising from the right primary motor cortex near the 
area controlling hand movement will note the onset of 
involuntary movements of the contralateral, left hand. 
These movements are typically clonic (i.e., repetitive, 
ﬂexion/extension movements) at a frequency of ∼2–3 
Hz; pure tonic posturing may be seen as well. Since the 
cortical region controlling hand movement is imme-
diately adjacent to the region for facial expression, the 
seizure may also cause abnormal movements of the face 
synchronous with the movements of the hand. The 
EEG recorded with scalp electrodes during the seizure 
(i.e., an ictal EEG) may show abnormal discharges in a 
very limited region over the appropriate area of cerebral 
cortex if the seizure focus involves the cerebral con-
vexity. Seizure activity occurring within deeper brain 
structures is often not recorded by the standard EEG, 
however, and may require intracranial electrodes for its 
detection.
Three additional features of focal motor seizures 
are worth noting. First, in some patients the abnormal 
motor movements may begin in a very restricted region 
such as the ﬁngers and gradually progress (over seconds 
to minutes) to include a larger portion of the extremity. 
This phenomenon, described by Hughlings Jackson and 
known as a “Jacksonian march,” represents the spread 
of seizure activity over a progressively larger region of 
motor cortex. Second, patients may experience a local-
ized paresis (Todd’s paralysis) for minutes to many hours 
in the involved region following the seizure. Third, in 
rare instances the seizure may continue for hours or 
days. This condition, termed epilepsia partialis continua, is 
often refractory to medical therapy.
Focal seizures may also manifest as changes in somatic 
sensation (e.g., paresthesias), vision (ﬂashing lights or 
formed hallucinations), equilibrium (sensation of falling 
or vertigo), or autonomic function (ﬂushing, sweating, 
piloerection). Focal seizures arising from the temporal 
or frontal cortex may also cause alterations in hearing, 
olfaction, or higher cortical function (psychic symp-
toms). This includes the sensation of unusual, intense 
odors (e.g., burning rubber or kerosene) or sounds 
(crude or highly complex sounds), or an epigastric sen-
sation that rises from the stomach or chest to the head. 
Some patients describe odd, internal feelings such as 
fear, a sense of impending change, detachment, deper-
sonalization, déjá vu, or illusions that objects are grow-
ing smaller (micropsia) or larger (macropsia). These sub-
jective, “internal” events that are not directly observable 
by someone else are referred to as auras.
Focal seizures with dyscognitive  
features
Focal seizures may also be accompanied by a transient 
impairment of the patient’s ability to maintain normal 
contact with the environment. The patient is unable 
to respond appropriately to visual or verbal commands 
during the seizure and has impaired recollection or 
awareness of the ictal phase. The seizures frequently 
begin with an aura (i.e., a focal seizure without cog-
nitive disturbance) that is stereotypic for the patient. 
The start of the ictal phase is often a sudden behavioral 
arrest or motionless stare, which marks the onset of the 
period of impaired awareness. The behavioral arrest is 
usually accompanied by automatisms, which are invol-
untary, automatic behaviors that have a wide range of 
manifestations. Automatisms may consist of very basic 
behaviors such as chewing, lip smacking, swallowing, 
or “picking” movements of the hands, or more elabo-
rate behaviors such as a display of emotion or running. 
The patient is typically confused following the seizure, 
and the transition to full recovery of consciousness may 
range from seconds up to an hour. Examination imme-
diately following the seizure may show an anterograde 
amnesia or, in cases involving the dominant hemi-
sphere, a postictal aphasia.
The range of potential clinical behaviors linked to 
focal seizures is so broad that extreme caution is advised 
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
233
before concluding that stereotypic episodes of bizarre or 
atypical behavior are not due to seizure activity. In such 
cases additional, detailed EEG studies may be helpful.
EVOLUTION OF FOCAL SEIZURES TO 
GENERALIZED SEIZURES
Focal seizures can spread to involve both cerebral hemi-
spheres and produce a generalized seizure, usually of 
the tonic-clonic variety (discussed later). This evolu-
tion is observed frequently following focal seizures aris-
ing from a focus in the frontal lobe, but may also be 
associated with focal seizures occurring elsewhere in 
the brain. A focal seizure that evolves into a generalized 
seizure is often difﬁcult to distinguish from a primary 
generalized-onset tonic-clonic seizure, since bystand-
ers tend to emphasize the more dramatic, general-
ized convulsive phase of the seizure and overlook the 
more subtle, focal symptoms present at onset. In some 
cases, the focal onset of the seizure becomes apparent 
only when a careful history identiﬁes a preceding aura. 
Often, however, the focal onset is not clinically evident 
and may be established only through careful EEG analy-
sis. Nonetheless, distinguishing between these two enti-
ties is extremely important, as there may be substantial 
differences in the evaluation and treatment of epilepsies 
associated with focal versus generalized seizures.
GENERALIZED SEIZURES
Generalized seizures are thought to arise at some point 
in the brain but immediately and rapidly engage neu-
ronal networks in both cerebral hemispheres. Several 
types of generalized seizures have features that place 
them in distinctive categories and facilitate clinical 
diagnosis.
Typical absence seizures
Typical absence seizures are characterized by sudden, 
brief lapses of consciousness without loss of postural 
control. The seizure typically lasts for only seconds, 
consciousness returns as suddenly as it was lost, and 
there is no postictal confusion. Although the brief loss 
of consciousness may be clinically inapparent or the sole 
manifestation of the seizure discharge, absence seizures 
are usually accompanied by subtle, bilateral motor signs 
such as rapid blinking of the eyelids, chewing move-
ments, or small-amplitude, clonic movements of the 
hands.
Typical absence seizures are associated with a group 
of genetically determined epilepsies with onset usually 
in childhood (ages 4–8 years) or early adolescence and 
are the main seizure type in 15–20% of children with 
epilepsy. The seizures can occur hundreds of times per 
day, but the child may be unaware of or unable to con-
vey their existence. Since the clinical signs of the sei-
zures are subtle, especially to parents who may not have 
had previous experience with seizures, it is not surpris-
ing that the ﬁrst clue to absence epilepsy is often unex-
plained “daydreaming” and a decline in school perfor-
mance recognized by a teacher.
The electrophysiologic hallmark of typical absence 
seizures is a generalized, symmetric, 3-Hz spike-and-
wave discharge that begins and ends suddenly, superim-
posed on a normal EEG background. Periods of spike-
and-wave discharges lasting more than a few seconds 
usually correlate with clinical signs, but the EEG often 
shows many more brief bursts of abnormal cortical activ-
ity than were suspected clinically. Hyperventilation tends 
to provoke these electrographic discharges and even the 
seizures themselves and is routinely used when recording 
the EEG.
Atypical absence seizures
Atypical absence seizures have features that deviate both 
clinically and electrophysiologically from typical absence 
seizures. For example, the lapse of consciousness is usu-
ally of longer duration and less abrupt in onset and ces-
sation, and the seizure is accompanied by more obvious 
motor signs that may include focal or lateralizing fea-
tures. The EEG shows a generalized, slow spike-and-
wave pattern with a frequency of f2.5 per second, as 
well as other abnormal activity. Atypical absence sei-
zures are usually associated with diffuse or multifocal 
structural abnormalities of the brain and therefore may 
accompany other signs of neurologic dysfunction such 
as mental retardation. Furthermore, the seizures are 
less responsive to anticonvulsants compared to typical 
absence seizures.
Generalized, tonic-clonic seizures
Generalized-onset tonic-clonic seizures are the main sei-
zure type in ∼10% of all persons with epilepsy. They 
are also the most common seizure type resulting from 
metabolic derangements and are therefore frequently 
encountered in many different clinical settings. The sei-
zure usually begins abruptly without warning, although 
some patients describe vague premonitory symptoms in 
the hours leading up to the seizure. This prodrome is 
distinct from the stereotypic auras associated with focal 
seizures that generalize. The initial phase of the seizure 
is usually tonic contraction of muscles throughout the 
body, accounting for a number of the classic features 
of the event. Tonic contraction of the muscles of expi-
ration and the larynx at the onset will produce a loud 
moan or “ictal cry.” Respirations are impaired, secretions 
pool in the oropharynx, and cyanosis develops. Contrac-
tion of the jaw muscles may cause biting of the tongue. 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
234
A marked enhancement of sympathetic tone leads to 
increases in heart rate, blood pressure, and pupillary size. 
After 10–20 s, the tonic phase of the seizure typically 
evolves into the clonic phase, produced by the super-
imposition of periods of muscle relaxation on the tonic 
muscle contraction. The periods of relaxation progres-
sively increase until the end of the ictal phase, which usu-
ally lasts no more than 1 min. The postictal phase is char-
acterized by unresponsiveness, muscular ﬂaccidity, and 
excessive salivation that can cause stridorous breathing 
and partial airway obstruction. Bladder or bowel incon-
tinence may occur at this point. Patients gradually regain 
consciousness over minutes to hours, and during this 
transition there is typically a period of postictal confusion. 
Patients subsequently complain of headache, fatigue, and 
muscle ache that can last for many hours. The duration 
of impaired consciousness in the postictal phase can be 
extremely long (i.e., many hours) in patients with pro-
longed seizures or underlying central nervous system 
(CNS) diseases such as alcoholic cerebral atrophy.
The EEG during the tonic phase of the seizure shows 
a progressive increase in generalized low-voltage fast 
activity, followed by generalized high-amplitude, poly-
spike discharges. In the clonic phase, the high-ampli-
tude activity is typically interrupted by slow waves to 
create a spike-and-wave pattern. The postictal EEG 
shows diffuse slowing that gradually recovers as the 
patient awakens.
There are a number of variants of the generalized 
tonic-clonic seizure, including pure tonic and pure 
clonic seizures. Brief tonic seizures lasting only a few 
seconds are especially noteworthy since they are usu-
ally associated with speciﬁc epileptic syndromes having 
mixed seizure phenotypes, such as the Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome (discussed later).
Atonic seizures
Atonic seizures are characterized by sudden loss of pos-
tural muscle tone lasting 1–2 s. Consciousness is brieﬂy 
impaired, but there is usually no postictal confusion. A 
very brief seizure may cause only a quick head drop or 
nodding movement, while a longer seizure will cause 
the patient to collapse. This can be extremely danger-
ous, since there is a substantial risk of direct head injury 
with the fall. The EEG shows brief, generalized spike-
and-wave discharges followed immediately by diffuse 
slow waves that correlate with the loss of muscle tone. 
Similar to pure tonic seizures, atonic seizures are usually 
seen in association with known epilepsy syndromes.
Myoclonic seizures
Myoclonus is a sudden and brief muscle contraction that 
may involve one part of the body or the entire body. 
A normal, common physiologic form of myoclonus 
is the sudden jerking movement observed while fall-
ing asleep. Pathologic myoclonus is most commonly 
seen in association with metabolic disorders, degenera-
tive CNS diseases, or anoxic brain injury (Chap. 28). 
Although the distinction from other forms of myoclo-
nus is imprecise, myoclonic seizures are considered to 
be true epileptic events since they are caused by cortical 
(versus subcortical or spinal) dysfunction. The EEG may 
show bilaterally synchronous spike-and-wave discharges 
synchronized with the myoclonus, although these can 
be obscured by movement artifact. Myoclonic seizures 
usually coexist with other forms of generalized seizures 
but are the predominant feature of juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy (discussed later).
CURRENTLY UNCLASSIFIABLE SEIZURES
Not all seizure types can be designated as focal or 
generalized, and they should therefore be labeled as 
“unclassiﬁable” until additional evidence allows a valid 
classiﬁcation. Epileptic spasms are such an example. 
These are characterized by a brieﬂy sustained ﬂexion or 
extension of predominantly proximal muscles, includ-
ing truncal muscles. The EEG in these patients usually 
shows hypsarrhythmias, which consist of diffuse, giant 
slow waves with a chaotic background of irregular, 
multifocal spikes and sharp waves. During the clini-
cal spasm, there is a marked suppression of the EEG 
background (the “electrodecremental response”). The 
electromyogram (EMG) also reveals a characteristic 
rhomboid pattern that may help distinguish spasms from 
brief tonic and myoclonic seizures. Epileptic spasms 
occur predominantly in infants and likely result from 
differences in neuronal function and connectivity in the 
immature versus mature CNS.
EPILEPSY SYNDROMES
Epilepsy syndromes are disorders in which epilepsy is 
a predominant feature, and there is sufﬁcient evidence 
(e.g., through clinical, EEG, radiologic, or genetic 
observations) to suggest a common underlying mecha-
nism. Three important epilepsy syndromes are listed 
next; additional examples with a known genetic basis 
are shown in Table 26-2.
JUVENILE MYOCLONIC EPILEPSY
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) is a generalized seizure 
disorder of unknown cause that appears in early adoles-
cence and is usually characterized by bilateral myoclonic 
jerks that may be single or repetitive. The myoclonic sei-
zures are most frequent in the morning after awakening 
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
235
TABLE 26-2
 EXAMPLES OF GENES ASSOCIATED WITH EPILEPSY SYNDROMESa
GENE (LOCUS)
FUNCTION OF GENE
CLINICAL SYNDROME
COMMENTS
CHRNA4 (20q13.2)
Nicotinic acetylcholine recep-
tor subunit; mutations cause 
alterations in Ca2+ ﬂux through 
the receptor; this may reduce 
amount of GABA release in pre-
synaptic terminals
Autosomal dominant nocturnal 
frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE); 
childhood onset; brief, nighttime 
seizures with prominent motor 
movements; often misdiag-
nosed as primary sleep disorder
Rare; ﬁrst identiﬁed in a large 
Australian family; other fami-
lies found to have mutations 
in CHRNA2 or CHRNB2, and 
some families appear to have 
mutations at other loci
KCNQ2 (20q13.3)
Voltage-gated potassium chan-
nel subunits; mutation in pore 
regions may cause a 20–40% 
reduction of potassium currents, 
which will lead to impaired repo-
larization
Benign familial neonatal con-
vulsions (BFNC); autosomal 
dominant inheritance; onset in 
1st week of life in infants who 
are otherwise normal; remission 
usually within weeks to months; 
long-term epilepsy in 10–15%
Rare; other families found to 
have mutations in KCNQ3; 
sequence and functional 
homology to KCNQ1, muta-
tions of which cause long QT 
syndrome and a cardiac-audi-
tory syndrome
SCN1B (19q12.1)
β-Subunit of a voltage-gated 
sodium channel; mutation dis-
rupts disulﬁde bridge that is 
crucial for structure of extracel-
lular domain; mutated β-subunit 
leads to slower sodium channel 
inactivation
Generalized epilepsy with febrile 
seizures plus (GEFS+); auto-
somal dominant inheritance; 
presents with febrile seizures 
at median 1 year, which may 
persist >6 years, then variable 
seizure types not associated 
with fever
Incidence uncertain; GEFS+ 
identiﬁed in other families with 
mutations in other sodium 
channel subunits (SCN1A 
and SCN2A) and GABAA 
receptor subunit (GABRG2 and 
GABRA1); signiﬁcant pheno-
typic heterogeneity within same 
family, including members with 
febrile seizures only
LGI1 (10q24)
Leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 
1 gene; previous evidence for 
role in glial tumor progression; 
protein homology suggests a 
possible role in nervous system 
development
Autosomal dominant partial 
epilepsy with auditory features 
(ADPEAF); a form of idiopathic 
lateral temporal lobe epilepsy 
with auditory symptoms or 
aphasia as a major simple par-
tial seizure manifestation; age of 
onset usually between 10 and 
25 years
Mutations found in approxi-
mately 50% of families contain-
ing two or more subjects with 
idiopathic localization-related 
epilepsy with ictal auditory 
symptoms, suggesting that 
at least one other gene may 
underlie this syndrome. LGI1 is 
the only gene identiﬁed so far 
in temporal lobe epilepsy
CSTB (21q22.3)
Cystatin B, a noncaspase cys-
teine protease inhibitor; normal 
protein may block neuronal 
apoptosis by inhibiting caspases 
directly or indirectly (via cathep-
sins), or controlling proteolysis
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy 
(PME) (Unverricht-Lundborg 
disease); autosomal reces-
sive inheritance; age of onset 
between 6 and 15 years, myo-
clonic seizures, ataxia, and pro-
gressive cognitive decline; brain 
shows neuronal degeneration
Overall rare, but relatively com-
mon in Finland and Western 
Mediterranean (>1 in 20,000); 
precise role of cystatin B in 
human disease unknown, 
although mice with null muta-
tions of cystatin B have similar 
syndrome
EPM2A (6q24)
Laforin, a protein tyrosine phos-
phatase (PTP); involved in glyco-
gen metabolism and may have 
antiapoptotic activity
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy 
(Lafora’s disease); autosomal 
recessive inheritance; onset 
age 6–19 years, death within 
10 years; brain degeneration 
associated with polyglucosan 
intracellular inclusion bodies in 
numerous organs
Most common PME in Southern 
Europe, Middle East, Northern 
Africa, and Indian subconti-
nent; genetic heterogeneity; 
unknown whether seizure phe-
notype due to degeneration or 
direct effects of abnormal lafo-
rin expression
Doublecortin 
(Xq21-24)
Doublecortin, expressed primarily 
in frontal lobes; directly regulates 
microtubule polymerization and 
bundling
Classic lissencephaly associated 
with severe mental retardation 
and seizures in males; subcorti-
cal band heterotopia with more 
subtle ﬁndings in females (pre-
sumably due to random X-inac-
tivation); X-linked dominant
Relatively rare but of uncertain 
incidence, recent increased 
ascertainment due to improved 
imaging techniques; rela-
tionship between migration 
defect and seizure phenotype 
unknown
aThe ﬁrst four syndromes listed in the table (ADNFLE, BFNC, GEFS+, and ADPEAF) are examples of idiopathic epilepsies associated with identiﬁed 
gene mutations. The last three syndromes are examples of the numerous Mendelian disorders in which seizures are one part of the phenotype.
Abbreviations: GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; PME, progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
236
TABLE 26-3
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MESIAL TEMPORAL 
LOBE EPILEPSY SYNDROME
History
History of febrile seizures
Family history of epilepsy
Early onset
Rare generalized seizures
Seizures may remit and 
reappear
Seizures often intractable
Clinical Observations
Aura common
Behavioral arrest/stare
Complex automatisms
Unilateral posturing
Postictal disorientation
Memory loss
Dysphasia (with focus in 
dominant hemisphere)
Laboratory Studies
Unilateral or bilateral anterior temporal spikes on EEG
Hypometabolism on interictal PET
Hypoperfusion on interictal SPECT
Material-speciﬁc memory deﬁcits on intracranial amobarbi-
tal (Wada) test
MRI Findings
Small hippocampus with increased signal on T2-weighted 
sequences
Small temporal lobe
Enlarged temporal horn
Pathologic Findings
Highly selective loss of speciﬁc cell populations within hip-
pocampus in most cases
Abbreviations: EEG, electroencephalogram; PET, positron emission 
tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
and can be provoked by sleep deprivation. Conscious-
ness is preserved unless the myoclonus is especially severe. 
Many patients also experience generalized tonic-clonic sei-
zures, and up to one-third have absence seizures. Although 
complete remission is relatively uncommon, the seizures 
respond well to appropriate anticonvulsant medication. 
There is often a family history of epilepsy, and genetic 
linkage studies suggest a polygenic cause.
LENNOX-GASTAUT SYNDROME
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome occurs in children and 
is deﬁned by the following triad: (1) multiple sei-
zure types (usually including generalized tonic-clonic, 
atonic, and atypical absence seizures); (2) an EEG 
showing slow (<3 Hz) spike-and-wave discharges 
and a variety of other abnormalities; and (3) impaired 
cognitive function in most but not all cases. Lennox-
Gastaut syndrome is associated with CNS disease or 
dysfunction from a variety of causes, including devel-
opmental abnormalities, perinatal hypoxia/ischemia, 
trauma, infection, and other acquired lesions. The 
multifactorial nature of this syndrome suggests that it 
is a nonspeciﬁc response of the brain to diffuse neu-
ral injury. Unfortunately, many patients have a poor 
prognosis due to the underlying CNS disease and the 
physical and psychosocial consequences of severe, 
poorly controlled epilepsy.
MESIAL TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY 
SYNDROME
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most 
common syndrome associated with focal seizures 
with dyscognitive features and is an example of an 
epilepsy syndrome with distinctive clinical, electro-
encephalographic, and pathologic features (Table 
26-3). High-resolution MRI can detect the character-
istic hippocampal sclerosis that appears to be essential 
in the pathophysiology of MTLE for many patients 
(Fig. 26-1). Recognition of this syndrome is espe-
cially important because it tends to be refractory to 
treatment with anticonvulsants but responds extremely 
well to surgical intervention. Advances in the under-
standing of basic mechanisms of epilepsy have come 
through studies of experimental models of MTLE, dis-
cussed next.
THE CAUSES OF SEIZURES AND 
EPILEPSY
Seizures are a result of a shift in the normal balance of 
excitation and inhibition within the CNS. Given the 
numerous properties that control neuronal excitability, 
FIGURE 26-1 
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. The EEG suggested a right 
temporal lobe focus. Coronal high-resolution T2-weighted 
fast spin echo magnetic resonance image obtained through 
the body of the hippocampus demonstrates abnormal high-
signal intensity in the right hippocampus (white arrows; com-
pare with the normal hippocampus on the left, black arrows) 
consistent with mesial temporal sclerosis.
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
237
it is not surprising that there are many different ways to 
perturb this normal balance, and therefore many differ-
ent causes of both seizures and epilepsy. Three clinical 
observations emphasize how a variety of factors deter-
mine why certain conditions may cause seizures or epi-
lepsy in a given patient.
1. The normal brain is capable of having a seizure under the 
appropriate circumstances, and there are differences between 
individuals in the susceptibility or threshold for seizures. 
For example, seizures may be induced by high fevers 
in children who are otherwise normal and who 
never develop other neurologic problems, including 
epilepsy. However, febrile seizures occur only in a 
relatively small proportion of children. This implies 
there are various underlying endogenous factors that 
inﬂuence the threshold for having a seizure. Some of 
these factors are clearly genetic, as it has been shown 
that a family history of epilepsy will inﬂuence the 
likelihood of seizures occurring in otherwise nor-
mal individuals. Normal development also plays an 
important role, since the brain appears to have dif-
ferent seizure thresholds at different maturational 
stages.
2. There are a variety of conditions that have an extremely 
high likelihood of resulting in a chronic seizure disorder. 
One of the best examples of this is severe, penetrat-
ing head trauma, which is associated with up to a 
45% risk of subsequent epilepsy. The high propen-
sity for severe traumatic brain injury to lead to epi-
lepsy suggests that the injury results in a long-lasting 
pathologic change in the CNS that transforms a 
presumably normal neural network into one that is 
abnormally hyperexcitable. This process is known as 
epileptogenesis, and the speciﬁc changes that result in a 
lowered seizure threshold can be considered epilepto-
genic factors. Other processes associated with epilepto-
genesis include stroke, infections, and abnormalities 
of CNS development. Likewise, the genetic abnor-
malities associated with epilepsy likely involve pro-
cesses that trigger the appearance of speciﬁc sets of 
epileptogenic factors.
3. Seizures are episodic. Patients with epilepsy have sei-
zures intermittently and, depending on the underly-
ing cause, many patients are completely normal for 
months or even years between seizures. This implies 
there are important provocative or precipitating factors 
that induce seizures in patients with epilepsy. Simi-
larly, precipitating factors are responsible for causing 
the single seizure in someone without epilepsy. Pre-
cipitants include those due to intrinsic physiologic 
processes such as psychological or physical stress, 
sleep deprivation, or hormonal changes associated 
with the menstrual cycle. They also include exoge-
nous factors such as exposure to toxic substances and 
certain medications.
These observations emphasize the concept that 
the many causes of seizures and epilepsy result from a 
dynamic interplay between endogenous factors, epilep-
togenic factors, and precipitating factors. The poten-
tial role of each needs to be carefully considered when 
determining the appropriate management of a patient 
with seizures. For example, the identiﬁcation of pre-
disposing factors (e.g., family history of epilepsy) in a 
patient with febrile seizures may increase the necessity 
for closer follow-up and a more aggressive diagnostic 
evaluation. Finding an epileptogenic lesion may help 
in the estimation of seizure recurrence and duration of 
therapy. Finally, removal or modiﬁcation of a precipi-
tating factor may be an effective and safer method for 
preventing further seizures than the prophylactic use of 
anticonvulsant drugs.
CAUSES ACCORDING TO AGE
In practice, it is useful to consider the etiologies of sei-
zures based on the age of the patient, as age is one of 
the most important factors determining both the inci-
dence and the likely causes of seizures or epilepsy (Table 
26-4). During the neonatal period and early infancy, poten-
tial causes include hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 
trauma, CNS infection, congenital CNS abnormalities, 
and metabolic disorders. Babies born to mothers using 
neurotoxic drugs such as cocaine, heroin, or ethanol are 
susceptible to drug-withdrawal seizures in the ﬁrst few 
days after delivery. Hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia, 
which can occur as secondary complications of perinatal 
injury, are also causes of seizures early after delivery. Sei-
zures due to inborn errors of metabolism usually present 
once regular feeding begins, typically 2–3 days after birth. 
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) deﬁciency, an important cause 
of neonatal seizures, can be effectively treated with pyri-
doxine replacement. The idiopathic or inherited forms 
of benign neonatal convulsions are also seen during this 
time period.
The most common seizures arising in late infancy 
and early childhood are febrile seizures, which are sei-
zures associated with fevers but without evidence of 
CNS infection or other deﬁned causes. The over-
all prevalence is 3–5% and even higher in some parts 
of the world such as Asia. Patients often have a fam-
ily history of febrile seizures or epilepsy. Febrile seizures 
usually occur between 3 months and 5 years of age 
and have a peak incidence between 18 and 24 months. 
The typical scenario is a child who has a generalized, 
tonic-clonic seizure during a febrile illness in the set-
ting of a common childhood infection such as oti-
tis media, respiratory infection, or gastroenteritis. The 
seizure is likely to occur during the rising phase of the 
temperature curve (i.e., during the ﬁrst day) rather than 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
238
well into the course of the illness. A simple febrile sei-
zure is a single, isolated event, brief, and symmetric in 
appearance. Complex febrile seizures are characterized 
by repeated seizure activity, duration >15 min, or by 
focal features. Approximately one-third of patients with 
febrile seizures will have a recurrence, but <10% have 
three or more episodes. Recurrences are much more 
likely when the febrile seizure occurs in the ﬁrst year 
of life. Simple febrile seizures are not associated with an 
increase in the risk of developing epilepsy, while com-
plex febrile seizures have a risk of 2–5%; other risk fac-
tors include the presence of preexisting neurologic deﬁ-
cits and a family history of nonfebrile seizures.
Childhood marks the age at which many of the well-
deﬁned epilepsy syndromes present. Some children 
who are otherwise normal develop idiopathic, gen-
eralized tonic-clonic seizures without other features 
that ﬁt into speciﬁc syndromes. Temporal lobe epi-
lepsy usually presents in childhood and may be related 
to mesial temporal lobe sclerosis (as part of the MTLE 
syndrome) or other focal abnormalities such as corti-
cal dysgenesis. Other types of focal seizures, including 
those that evolve into generalized seizures, may be the 
relatively late manifestation of a developmental disor-
der, an acquired lesion such as head trauma, CNS infec-
tion (especially viral encephalitis), or very rarely a CNS 
tumor.
The period of adolescence and early adulthood is one 
of transition during which the idiopathic or geneti-
cally based epilepsy syndromes, including JME and 
juvenile absence epilepsy, become less common, while 
epilepsies secondary to acquired CNS lesions begin to 
predominate. Seizures that begin in patients in this age 
range may be associated with head trauma, CNS infec-
tions (including parasitic infections such as cysticercosis), 
brain tumors, congenital CNS abnormalities, illicit drug 
use, or alcohol withdrawal.
Head trauma is a common cause of epilepsy in ado-
lescents and adults. The head injury can be caused by a 
variety of mechanisms, and the likelihood of develop-
ing epilepsy is strongly correlated with the severity of 
the injury. A patient with a penetrating head wound, 
depressed skull fracture, intracranial hemorrhage, 
or prolonged posttraumatic coma or amnesia has a 
40–50% risk of developing epilepsy, while a patient 
with a closed head injury and cerebral contusion has a 
5–25% risk. Recurrent seizures usually develop within 
1 year after head trauma, although intervals of v10 
years are well known. In controlled studies, mild head 
injury, deﬁned as a concussion with amnesia or loss of 
consciousness of <30 min, was found to be associated 
with only a slightly increased likelihood of epilepsy. 
Nonetheless, most epileptologists know of patients 
who have focal seizures within hours or days of a mild 
head injury and subsequently develop chronic sei-
zures of the same type; such cases may represent rare 
examples of chronic epilepsy resulting from mild head 
injury.
The causes of seizures in older adults include cerebro-
vascular disease, trauma (including subdural hematoma), 
CNS tumors, and degenerative diseases. Cerebrovascu-
lar disease may account for ∼50% of new cases of epi-
lepsy in patients older than age 65. Acute seizures (i.e., 
occurring at the time of the stroke) are seen more often 
with embolic rather than hemorrhagic or thrombotic 
stroke. Chronic seizures typically appear months to 
years after the initial event and are associated with all 
forms of stroke.
TABLE 26-4
CAUSES OF SEIZURES
Neonates 
(<1 month)
Perinatal hypoxia and ischemia
Intracranial hemorrhage and trauma
Acute CNS infection
Metabolic disturbances (hypoglyce-
mia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnese-
mia, pyridoxine deﬁciency)
Drug withdrawal
Developmental disorders
Genetic disorders
Infants and children 
(>1 month and  
<12 years)
Febrile seizures
Genetic disorders (metabolic, 
degenerative, primary epilepsy syn-
dromes)
CNS infection
Developmental disorders
Trauma
Idiopathic
Adolescents  
(12–18 years)
Trauma
Genetic disorders
Infection
Brain tumor
Illicit drug use
Idiopathic
Young adults  
(18–35 years)
Trauma
Alcohol withdrawal
Illicit drug use
Brain tumor
Idiopathic
Older adults  
(>35 years)
Cerebrovascular disease
Brain tumor
Alcohol withdrawal
Metabolic disorders (uremia, hepatic 
failure, electrolyte abnormalities, 
hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia)
Alzheimer’s disease and other 
degenerative CNS diseases
Idiopathic
Abbreviation: CNS, central nervous system.
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
239
Metabolic disturbances such as electrolyte imbalance, 
hypo- or hyperglycemia, renal failure, and hepatic fail-
ure may cause seizures at any age. Similarly, endocrine 
disorders, hematologic disorders, vasculitides, and many 
other systemic diseases may cause seizures over a broad 
age range. A wide variety of medications and abused 
substances are known to precipitate seizures as well 
(Table 26-5).
BASIC MECHANISMS
MECHANISMS OF SEIZURE INITIATION AND 
PROPAGATION
Focal seizure activity can begin in a very discrete 
region of cortex and then spread to neighboring 
regions, i.e., there is a seizure initiation phase and a sei-
zure propagation phase. The initiation phase is char-
acterized by two concurrent events in an aggregate of 
neurons: (1) high-frequency bursts of action poten-
tials and (2) hypersynchronization. The bursting activ-
ity is caused by a relatively long-lasting depolarization 
of the neuronal membrane due to inﬂux of extracel-
lular calcium (Ca2+), which leads to the opening of 
TABLE 26-5
DRUGS AND OTHER SUBSTANCES THAT CAN CAUSE 
SEIZURES
Alkylating agents (e.g., 
busulfan, chlorambucil)
Antimalarials (chloroquine, 
meﬂoquine)
Antimicrobials/antivirals
β-lactam and related com-
pounds
Quinolones
Acyclovir
Isoniazid
Ganciclovir
Anesthetics and 
analgesics
Meperidine
Tramadol
Local anesthetics
Dietary supplements
Ephedra (ma huang)
Gingko
Immunomodulatory drugs
Cyclosporine
OKT3 (monoclonal  
antibodies to T cells)
Tacrolimus
Interferons
Psychotropics
Antidepressants
Antipsychotics
Lithium
Radiographic contrast 
agents
Theophylline
Sedative-hypnotic drug 
withdrawal
Alcohol
Barbiturates (short-acting)
Benzodiazepines  
(short-acting)
Drugs of abuse
Amphetamine
Cocaine
Phencyclidine
Methylphenidate
Flumazenila
aIn benzodiazepine-dependent patients.
voltage-dependent sodium (Na+) channels, inﬂux of 
Na+, and generation of repetitive action potentials. This 
is followed by a hyperpolarizing afterpotential mediated 
by γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors or potassium 
(K+) channels, depending on the cell type. The syn-
chronized bursts from a sufﬁcient number of neurons 
result in a so-called spike discharge on the EEG.
Normally, the spread of bursting activity is prevented 
by intact hyperpolarization and a region of “surround” 
inhibition created by inhibitory neurons. With suf-
ﬁcient activation there is a recruitment of surround-
ing neurons via a number of synaptic and nonsynaptic 
mechanisms, including: (1) an increase in extracellu-
lar K+, which blunts hyperpolarization and depolarizes 
neighboring neurons; (2) accumulation of Ca2+ in pre-
synaptic terminals, leading to enhanced neurotransmit-
ter release; and (3) depolarization-induced activation 
of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of the 
excitatory amino acid receptor, which causes additional 
Ca2+ inﬂux and neuronal activation; and (4) ephaptic 
interactions related to changes in tissue osmolarity and 
cell swelling. The recruitment of a sufﬁcient number of 
neurons leads to the propagation of seizure activity into 
contiguous areas via local cortical connections, and to 
more distant areas via long commissural pathways such 
as the corpus callosum.
Many factors control neuronal excitability, and 
thus there are many potential mechanisms for alter-
ing a neuron’s propensity to have bursting activity. 
Mechanisms intrinsic to the neuron include changes 
in the conductance of ion channels, response charac-
teristics of membrane receptors, cytoplasmic buffer-
ing, second-messenger systems, and protein expression 
as determined by gene transcription, translation, and 
posttranslational modiﬁcation. Mechanisms extrinsic to 
the neuron include changes in the amount or type of 
neurotransmitters present at the synapse, modulation of 
receptors by extracellular ions and other molecules, and 
temporal and spatial properties of synaptic and nonsyn-
aptic input. Nonneural cells such as astrocytes and oli-
godendrocytes, have an important role in many of these 
mechanisms as well.
Certain recognized causes of seizures are explained 
by these mechanisms. For example, accidental inges-
tion of domoic acid, which is an analogue of glutamate 
(the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain), 
causes profound seizures via direct activation of excit-
atory amino acid receptors throughout the CNS. Peni-
cillin, which can lower the seizure threshold in humans 
and is a potent convulsant in experimental models, 
reduces inhibition by antagonizing the effects of GABA 
at its receptor. The basic mechanisms of other precipi-
tating factors of seizures such as sleep deprivation, fever, 
alcohol withdrawal, hypoxia, and infection, are not as 
well understood but presumably involve analogous 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
240
perturbations in neuronal excitability. Similarly, the 
endogenous factors that determine an individual’s sei-
zure threshold may relate to these properties as well.
Knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for ini-
tiation and propagation of most generalized seizures 
(including tonic-clonic, myoclonic, and atonic types) 
remains rudimentary and reﬂects the limited under-
standing of the connectivity of the brain at a systems 
level. Much more is understood about the origin of 
generalized spike-and-wave discharges in absence sei-
zures. These appear to be related to oscillatory rhythms 
normally generated during sleep by circuits connect-
ing the thalamus and cortex. This oscillatory behav-
ior involves an interaction between GABAB recep-
tors, T-type Ca2+ channels, and K+ channels located 
within the thalamus. Pharmacologic studies indicate that 
modulation of these receptors and channels can induce 
absence seizures, and there is good evidence that the 
genetic forms of absence epilepsy may be associated 
with mutations of components of this system.
MECHANISMS OF EPILEPTOGENESIS
Epileptogenesis refers to the transformation of a normal 
neuronal network into one that is chronically hyper-
excitable. There is often a delay of months to years 
between an initial CNS injury such as trauma, stroke, 
or infection and the ﬁrst seizure. The injury appears 
to initiate a process that gradually lowers the seizure 
threshold in the affected region until a spontaneous sei-
zure occurs. In many genetic and idiopathic forms of 
epilepsy, epileptogenesis is presumably determined by 
developmentally regulated events.
Pathologic studies of the hippocampus from patients 
with temporal lobe epilepsy have led to the suggestion 
that some forms of epileptogenesis are related to struc-
tural changes in neuronal networks. For example, many 
patients with MTLE have a highly selective loss of 
neurons that may contribute to inhibition of the main 
excitatory neurons within the dentate gyrus. There is 
also evidence that, in response to the loss of neurons, 
there is reorganization or “sprouting” of surviving neu-
rons in a way that affects the excitability of the net-
work. Some of these changes can be seen in experimen-
tal models of prolonged electrical seizures or traumatic 
brain injury. Thus, an initial injury such as head injury 
may lead to a very focal, conﬁned region of structural 
change that causes local hyperexcitability. The local 
hyperexcitability leads to further structural changes that 
evolve over time until the focal lesion produces clini-
cally evident seizures. Similar models have provided 
strong evidence for long-term alterations in intrinsic, 
biochemical properties of cells within the network such as 
chronic changes in glutamate or GABA receptor func-
tion. Recent work has suggested that induction of 
inﬂammatory cascades may be a critical factor in these 
processes as well.
GENETIC CAUSES OF EPILEPSY
The most important recent progress in epilepsy 
research has been the identiﬁcation of genetic 
mutations associated with a variety of epilepsy syn-
dromes (Table  26-2). Although all of the mutations iden-
tiﬁed to date cause rare forms of epilepsy, their discov-
ery has led to extremely important conceptual advances. 
For example, it appears that many of the inherited, idio-
pathic epilepsies (i.e., the relatively “pure” forms of epi-
lepsy in which seizures are the phenotypic abnormality 
and brain structure and function are otherwise normal) 
are due to mutations affecting ion channel function. 
These syndromes are therefore part of the larger group 
of channelopathies causing paroxysmal disorders such as 
cardiac arrhythmias, episodic ataxia, periodic weakness, 
and familial hemiplegic migraine. In contrast, gene muta-
tions observed in symptomatic epilepsies (i.e., disorders in 
which other neurologic abnormalities such as cognitive 
impairment, coexist with seizures) are proving to be asso-
ciated with pathways inﬂuencing CNS development or 
neuronal homeostasis. A current challenge is to identify 
the multiple susceptibility genes that underlie the more 
common forms of idiopathic epilepsies. Recent stud-
ies suggest that ion channel mutations and chromosomal 
microdeletions may be the cause of epilepsy in a subset of 
these patients.
MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF 
ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS
Antiepileptic drugs appear to act primarily by blocking 
the initiation or spread of seizures. This occurs through 
a variety of mechanisms that modify the activity of ion 
channels or neurotransmitters, and in most cases the 
drugs have pleiotropic effects. The mechanisms include 
inhibition of Na+-dependent action potentials in a fre-
quency-dependent manner (e.g., phenytoin, carbamaze-
pine, lamotrigine, topiramate, zonisamide, lacosamide, 
ruﬁnamide), inhibition of voltage-gated Ca2+ chan-
nels (phenytoin, gabapentin, pregabalin), attenuation of 
glutamate activity (lamotrigine, topiramate, felbamate), 
potentiation of GABA receptor function (benzodiaz-
epines and barbiturates), increase in the availability of 
GABA (valproic acid, gabapentin, tiagabine), and mod-
ulation of release of synaptic vesicles (levetiracetam). 
The two most effective drugs for absence seizures, etho-
suximide and valproic acid, probably act by inhibiting 
T-type Ca2+ channels in thalamic neurons.
In contrast to the relatively large number of anti-
epileptic drugs that can attenuate seizure activity, there 
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
241
are currently no drugs known to prevent the formation 
of a seizure focus following CNS injury. The even-
tual development of such “antiepileptogenic” drugs 
will provide an important means of preventing the 
emergence of epilepsy following injuries such as head 
trauma, stroke, and CNS infection.
such as sleep deprivation, systemic diseases, electrolyte 
or metabolic derangements, acute infection, drugs that 
lower the seizure threshold (Table  26-5), or alcohol or 
illicit drug use should also be identiﬁed.
The general physical examination includes a search 
for signs of infection or systemic illness. Careful exami-
nation of the skin may reveal signs of neurocutane-
ous disorders such as tuberous sclerosis or neuroﬁbro-
matosis, or chronic liver or renal disease. A ﬁnding of 
organomegaly may indicate a metabolic storage disease, 
and limb asymmetry may provide a clue to brain injury 
early in development. Signs of head trauma and use of 
alcohol or illicit drugs should be sought. Auscultation of 
the heart and carotid arteries may identify an abnormal-
ity that predisposes to cerebrovascular disease.
All patients require a complete neurologic examina-
tion, with particular emphasis on eliciting signs of cere-
bral hemispheric disease (Chap. 1). Careful assessment 
of mental status (including memory, language function, 
and abstract thinking) may suggest lesions in the ante-
rior frontal, parietal, or temporal lobes. Testing of visual 
ﬁelds will help screen for lesions in the optic pathways 
and occipital lobes. Screening tests of motor func-
tion such as pronator drift, deep tendon reﬂexes, gait, 
and coordination may suggest lesions in motor (frontal) 
cortex, and cortical sensory testing (e.g., double simul-
taneous stimulation) may detect lesions in the parietal 
cortex.
LABORATORY STUDIES
Routine blood studies are indicated to identify the 
more common metabolic causes of seizures such as 
abnormalities in electrolytes, glucose, calcium, or mag-
nesium, and hepatic or renal disease. A screen for tox-
ins in blood and urine should also be obtained from all 
patients in appropriate risk groups, especially when no 
clear precipitating factor has been identiﬁed. A lumbar 
puncture is indicated if there is any suspicion of men-
ingitis or encephalitis, and it is mandatory in all patients 
infected with HIV, even in the absence of symptoms or 
signs suggesting infection.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC STUDIES
All patients who have a possible seizure disorder should 
be evaluated with an EEG as soon as possible. Details 
about the EEG are covered in Chap. 5.
In the evaluation of a patient with suspected epi-
lepsy, the presence of electrographic seizure activity during 
the clinically evident event (i.e., abnormal, repetitive, 
rhythmic activity having a discrete onset and termina-
tion) clearly establishes the diagnosis. The absence of 
electrographic seizure activity does not exclude a seizure 
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Seizure
When a patient presents shortly after a seizure, the first 
priorities are attention to vital signs, respiratory and car-
diovascular support, and treatment of seizures if they 
resume (see “Treatment: Seizures and Epilepsy”). Life-
threatening conditions such as CNS infection, metabolic 
derangement, or drug toxicity must be recognized and 
managed appropriately.
When the patient is not acutely ill, the evaluation 
will initially focus on whether there is a history of earlier 
seizures (Fig. 26-2). If this is the first seizure, then the 
emphasis will be to: (1) establish whether the reported 
episode was a seizure rather than another paroxysmal 
event, (2) determine the cause of the seizure by identify-
ing risk factors and precipitating events, and (3) decide 
whether anticonvulsant therapy is required in addition 
to treatment for any underlying illness.
In the patient with prior seizures or a known history 
of epilepsy, the evaluation is directed toward (1) identifi-
cation of the underlying cause and precipitating factors, 
and (2) determination of the adequacy of the patient’s 
current therapy.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
The ﬁrst goal is to determine whether the event was 
truly a seizure. An in-depth history is essential, for in 
many cases the diagnosis of a seizure is based solely on clini-
cal grounds—the examination and laboratory studies are often 
normal. Questions should focus on the symptoms before, 
during, and after the episode in order to differentiate a 
seizure from other paroxysmal events (see “Differential 
Diagnosis of Seizures”). Seizures frequently occur out-
of-hospital, and the patient may be unaware of the ictal 
and immediate postictal phases; thus, witnesses to the 
event should be interviewed carefully.
The history should also focus on risk factors and pre-
disposing events. Clues for a predisposition to seizures 
include a history of febrile seizures, earlier auras or 
brief seizures not recognized as such, and a family his-
tory of seizures. Epileptogenic factors such as prior head 
trauma, stroke, tumor, or infection of the nervous sys-
tem should be identiﬁed. In children, a careful assess-
ment of developmental milestones may provide evi-
dence for underlying CNS disease. Precipitating factors 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
242
disorder, however, because focal seizures may originate 
from a region of the cortex that cannot be detected by 
standard scalp electrodes. The EEG is always abnormal 
during generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Since seizures 
are typically infrequent and unpredictable, it is often 
not possible to obtain the EEG during a clinical event. 
Continuous monitoring for prolonged periods in video-
EEG telemetry units for hospitalized patients or the use 
of portable equipment to record the EEG continuously 
on cassettes for v24 h in ambulatory patients has made it 
Normal
Adult Patient with a Seizure
History of epilepsy; currently treated
  with antiepileptics
Assess: adequacy of antiepileptic therapy
  Side effects
  Serum levels
No history of epilepsy
Laboratory studies
  CBC
  Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
  Serum glucose
  Liver and renal function tests
  Urinalysis
  Toxicology screen
Negative
metabolic screen
Positive metabolic screen
or symptoms/signs
suggesting a metabolic
or infectious disorder
Abnormal or change in
neurologic exam
  Treat identifiable
  metabolic abnormalities
Assess cause of
  neurologic change
  Lumbar puncture
  Cultures
  Endocrine studies
  CT
  MRI if focal
   features present
MRI scan
  and EEG
Subtherapeutic
antiepileptic
levels
Appropriate
increase or
resumption
of dose
Increase antiepileptic
therapy to maximum
tolerated dose;
consider alternative
antiepileptic drugs
Therapeutic
antiepileptic
levels
Focal features of 
seizures
Focal abnormalities
on clinical or lab
examination
Other evidence of
neurologic
dysfunction
Treat underlying
metabolic abnormality
Idiopathic seizures
Treat underlying disorder
Yes
No
Consider: Mass lesion; stroke; CNS infection;
  trauma; degenerative disease
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
Further workup
Other causes of episodic cerebral dysfunction
Syncope
Transient ischemic attack
Migraine
Acute psychosis
History
Physical examination
Exclude
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
ALGORITHM FOR THE ADULT PATIENT WITH A SEIZURE
Consider
 CBC
 Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
 Serum glucose
 Liver and renal function tests
 Urinalysis
 Toxicology screen
FIGURE 26-2 
Evaluation of the adult patient with a seizure. CBC, complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed 
tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
243
easier to capture the electrophysiologic accompaniments 
of clinical events. In particular, video-EEG telemetry 
is now a routine approach for the accurate diagnosis of 
epilepsy in patients with poorly characterized events or 
seizures that are difﬁcult to control.
The EEG may also be helpful in the interictal period 
by showing certain abnormalities that are highly sup-
portive of the diagnosis of epilepsy. Such epileptiform 
activity consists of bursts of abnormal discharges contain-
ing spikes or sharp waves. The presence of epileptiform 
activity is not speciﬁc for epilepsy, but it has a much 
greater prevalence in patients with epilepsy than in nor-
mal individuals. However, even in an individual who 
is known to have epilepsy, the initial routine interictal 
EEG may be normal up to 60% of the time. Thus, the 
EEG cannot establish the diagnosis of epilepsy in many 
cases.
The EEG is also used for classifying seizure disorders 
and aiding in the selection of anticonvulsant medica-
tions. For example, episodic generalized spike-wave 
activity is usually seen in patients with typical absence 
epilepsy and may be seen with other generalized epi-
lepsy syndromes. Focal interictal epileptiform discharges 
would support the diagnosis of a focal seizure disorder 
such as temporal lobe epilepsy or frontal lobe seizures, 
depending on the location of the discharges.
The routine scalp-recorded EEG may also be used 
to assess the prognosis of seizure disorders; in general, 
a normal EEG implies a better prognosis, whereas an 
abnormal background or profuse epileptiform activity 
suggests a poor outlook. Unfortunately, the EEG has 
not proved to be useful in predicting which patients 
with predisposing conditions such as head injury or 
brain tumor, will go on to develop epilepsy, because in 
such circumstances epileptiform activity is commonly 
encountered regardless of whether seizures occur.
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) provides another 
way of looking noninvasively at cortical activity. Instead 
of measuring electrical activity of the brain, it mea-
sures the small magnetic ﬁelds that are generated by this 
activity. Epileptiform activity seen on the MEG can be 
analyzed, and its source in the brain can be estimated 
using a variety of mathematical techniques. These 
source estimates can then be plotted on an anatomic 
image of the brain such as an MRI (discussed next), to 
generate a magnetic source image (MSI). MSI can be 
useful to localize potential seizure foci.
BRAIN IMAGING
Almost all patients with new-onset seizures should have 
a brain imaging study to determine whether there is an 
underlying structural abnormality that is responsible. 
The only potential exception to this rule is children 
who have an unambiguous history and examination 
suggestive of a benign, generalized seizure disorder such 
as absence epilepsy. MRI has been shown to be supe-
rior to CT for the detection of cerebral lesions asso-
ciated with epilepsy. In some cases MRI will identify 
lesions such as tumors, vascular malformations, or other 
pathologies that need immediate therapy. The use of 
newer MRI methods such as 3-Tesla scanners, multi-
channel head coils, three-dimensional structural imaging 
at submillimeter resolution, and new pulse sequences 
including ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), 
has increased the sensitivity for detection of abnormali-
ties of cortical architecture, including hippocampal atro-
phy associated with mesial temporal sclerosis, as well as 
abnormalities of cortical neuronal migration. In such 
cases the ﬁndings may not lead to immediate therapy, 
but they do provide an explanation for the patient’s sei-
zures and point to the need for chronic anticonvulsant 
therapy or possible surgical resection.
In the patient with a suspected CNS infection or 
mass lesion, CT scanning should be performed emer-
gently when MRI is not immediately available. Other-
wise, it is usually appropriate to obtain an MRI study 
within a few days of the initial evaluation. Functional 
imaging procedures such as positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET) and single-photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) are also used to evaluate certain 
patients with medically refractory seizures (discussed 
later).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF 
SEIZURES
Disorders that may mimic seizures are listed in 
Table 26-6. In most cases seizures can be distinguished 
from other conditions by meticulous attention to the 
history and relevant laboratory studies. On occasion, 
additional studies such as video-EEG monitoring, sleep 
studies, tilt-table analysis, or cardiac electrophysiology, 
may be required to reach a correct diagnosis. Two of 
the more common nonepileptic syndromes in the dif-
ferential diagnosis are detailed next.
SYNCOPE
(See also Chap. 10) The diagnostic dilemma encountered 
most frequently is the distinction between a generalized 
seizure and syncope. Observations by the patient and 
bystanders that can help differentiate between the two are 
listed in Table 26-7. Characteristics of a seizure include 
the presence of an aura, cyanosis, unconsciousness, motor 
manifestations lasting >15 s, postictal disorientation, mus-
cle soreness, and sleepiness. In contrast, a syncopal epi-
sode is more likely if the event was provoked by acute 
pain or anxiety or occurred immediately after arising 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
244
TABLE 26-6
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SEIZURES
Syncope
Vasovagal syncope
Cardiac arrhythmia
Valvular heart disease
Cardiac failure
Orthostatic hypotension
Psychological disorders
Psychogenic seizure
Hyperventilation
Panic attack
Metabolic disturbances
Alcoholic blackouts
Delirium tremens
Hypoglycemia
Hypoxia
Psychoactive drugs (e.g., 
hallucinogens)
Migraine
Confusional migraine
Basilar migraine
Transient ischemic attack 
(TIA)
Basilar artery TIA
Sleep disorders
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
Benign sleep myoclonus
Movement disorders
Tics
Nonepileptic myoclonus
Paroxysmal choreoathetosis
Special considerations in 
children
Breath-holding spells
Migraine with recurrent 
abdominal pain and cyclic 
vomiting
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Apnea
Night terrors
Sleepwalking
TABLE 26-7
FEATURES THAT DISTINGUISH GENERALIZED 
TONIC-CLONIC SEIZURE FROM SYNCOPE
FEATURES
SEIZURE
SYNCOPE
Immediate precipi-
tating factors
Usually none
Emotional stress, 
Valsalva, ortho-
static hypoten-
sion, cardiac 
etiologies
Premonitory 
symptoms
None or aura 
(e.g., odd odor)
Tiredness, nausea, 
diaphoresis, tun-
neling of vision
Posture at onset
Variable
Usually erect
Transition to 
unconsciousness
Often immediate
Gradual over  
secondsa
Duration of  
unconsciousness
Minutes
Seconds
Duration of tonic 
or clonic move-
ments
30–60 s
Never more than 
15 s
Facial appearance 
during event
Cyanosis,  
frothing at 
mouth
Pallor
Disorientation and 
sleepiness after 
event
Many minutes to 
hours
<5 min
Aching of muscles 
after event
Often
Sometimes
Biting of tongue
Sometimes
Rarely
Incontinence
Sometimes
Sometimes
Headache
Sometimes
Rarely
aMay be sudden with certain cardiac arrhythmias.
from the lying or sitting position. Patients with syncope 
often describe a stereotyped transition from conscious-
ness to unconsciousness that includes tiredness, sweating, 
nausea, and tunneling of vision, and they experience a 
relatively brief loss of consciousness. Headache or incon-
tinence usually suggests a seizure but may on occasion 
also occur with syncope. A brief period (i.e., 1–10 s) of 
convulsive motor activity is frequently seen immediately 
at the onset of a syncopal episode, especially if the patient 
remains in an upright posture after fainting (e.g., in a 
dentist’s chair) and therefore has a sustained decrease in 
cerebral perfusion. Rarely, a syncopal episode can induce 
a full tonic-clonic seizure. In such cases the evaluation 
must focus on both the cause of the syncopal event as 
well as the possibility that the patient has a propensity for 
recurrent seizures.
PSYCHOGENIC SEIZURES
Psychogenic seizures are nonepileptic behaviors that 
resemble seizures. They are often part of a conver-
sion reaction precipitated by underlying psychological 
distress. Certain behaviors such as side-to-side turning 
of the head, asymmetric and large-amplitude shaking 
movements of the limbs, twitching of all four extremi-
ties without loss of consciousness, and pelvic thrust-
ing are more commonly associated with psychogenic 
rather than epileptic seizures. Psychogenic seizures 
often last longer than epileptic seizures and may wax 
and wane over minutes to hours. However, the distinc-
tion is sometimes difﬁcult on clinical grounds alone, and 
there are many examples of diagnostic errors made by 
experienced epileptologists. This is especially true for 
psychogenic seizures that resemble focal seizures with 
dyscognitive features, since the behavioral manifesta-
tions of focal seizures (especially of frontal lobe origin) 
can be extremely unusual, and in both cases the rou-
tine surface EEG may be normal. Video-EEG monitor-
ing is very useful when historic features are nondiagnos-
tic. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures always produce 
marked EEG abnormalities during and after the seizure. 
For suspected focal seizures of temporal lobe origin, the 
use of additional electrodes beyond the standard scalp 
locations (e.g., sphenoidal electrodes) may be required 
to localize a seizure focus. Measurement of serum 
prolactin levels may also help to distinguish between 
organic and psychogenic seizures, since most gener-
alized seizures and some focal seizures are accompa-
nied by rises in serum prolactin (during the immediate 
30-min postictal period), whereas psychogenic seizures 
are not. The diagnosis of psychogenic seizures does not 
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
245
exclude a concurrent diagnosis of epilepsy, since the 
two often coexist.
For example, a patient who has seizures in the setting 
of sleep deprivation should obviously be advised to 
maintain a normal sleep schedule. Many patients note 
an association between alcohol intake and seizures, and 
they should be encouraged to modify their drinking 
habits accordingly. There are also relatively rare cases of 
patients with seizures that are induced by highly spe-
cific stimuli such as a video game monitor, music, or an 
individual’s voice (“reflex epilepsy”). If there is an associ-
ation between stress and seizures, stress reduction tech-
niques such as physical exercise, meditation, or counsel-
ing may be helpful.
ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG THERAPY Antiepilep-
tic drug therapy is the mainstay of treatment for most 
patients with epilepsy. The overall goal is to completely 
prevent seizures without causing any untoward side 
effects, preferably with a single medication and a dosing 
schedule that is easy for the patient to follow. Seizure 
classification is an important element in designing the 
treatment plan, since some antiepileptic drugs have dif-
ferent activities against various seizure types. However, 
there is considerable overlap between many antiepilep-
tic drugs such that the choice of therapy is often deter-
mined more by the patient’s specific needs, especially 
his or her assessment of side effects.
When to Initiate Antiepileptic Drug Ther-
apy Antiepileptic drug therapy should be started in 
any patient with recurrent seizures of unknown etiology 
or a known cause that cannot be reversed. Whether to 
initiate therapy in a patient with a single seizure is contro-
versial. Patients with a single seizure due to an identified 
lesion such as a CNS tumor, infection, or trauma, in which 
there is strong evidence that the lesion is epileptogenic, 
should be treated. The risk of seizure recurrence in a 
patient with an apparently unprovoked or idiopathic sei-
zure is uncertain, with estimates ranging from 31 to 71% 
in the first 12 months after the initial seizure. This uncer-
tainty arises from differences in the underlying seizure 
types and etiologies in various published epidemiologic 
studies. Generally accepted risk factors associated with 
recurrent seizures include the following: (1) an abnormal 
neurologic examination, (2) seizures presenting as sta-
tus epilepticus, (3) postictal Todd’s paralysis, (4) a strong 
family history of seizures, or (5) an abnormal EEG. Most 
patients with one or more of these risk factors should be 
treated. Issues such as employment or driving may influ-
ence the decision whether to start medications as well. 
For example, a patient with a single, idiopathic seizure 
whose job depends on driving may prefer taking antiepi-
leptic drugs rather than risk a seizure recurrence and the 
potential loss of driving privileges.
Selection 
of 
Antiepileptic 
Drugs Antiepi-
leptic drugs available in the United States are shown in 
TREATMENT 
Seizures and Epilepsy
Therapy for a patient with a seizure disorder is almost 
always multimodal and includes treatment of underly-
ing conditions that cause or contribute to the seizures, 
avoidance of precipitating factors, suppression of recur-
rent seizures by prophylactic therapy with antiepilep-
tic medications or surgery, and addressing a variety 
of psychological and social issues. Treatment plans 
must be individualized, given the many different types 
and causes of seizures as well as the differences in effi-
cacy and toxicity of antiepileptic medications for each 
patient. In almost all cases a neurologist with experi-
ence in the treatment of epilepsy should design and 
oversee implementation of the treatment strategy. 
Furthermore, patients with refractory epilepsy or those 
who require polypharmacy with antiepileptic drugs 
should remain under the regular care of a neurologist.
TREATMENT 
OF 
UNDERLYING 
CONDI-
TIONS If the sole cause of a seizure is a metabolic dis-
turbance such as an abnormality of serum electrolytes or 
glucose, then treatment is aimed at reversing the meta-
bolic problem and preventing its recurrence. Therapy 
with antiepileptic drugs is usually unnecessary unless 
the metabolic disorder cannot be corrected promptly 
and the patient is at risk of having further seizures. If the 
apparent cause of a seizure was a medication (e.g., the-
ophylline) or illicit drug use (e.g., cocaine), then appropri-
ate therapy is avoidance of the drug; there is usually no 
need for antiepileptic medications unless subsequent sei-
zures occur in the absence of these precipitants.
Seizures caused by a structural CNS lesion such as a 
brain tumor, vascular malformation, or brain abscess 
may not recur after appropriate treatment of the under-
lying lesion. However, despite removal of the structural 
lesion, there is a risk that the seizure focus will remain 
in the surrounding tissue or develop de novo as a result 
of gliosis and other processes induced by surgery, radia-
tion, or other therapies. Most patients are therefore 
maintained on an antiepileptic medication for at least 
1 year, and an attempt is made to withdraw medica-
tions only if the patient has been completely seizure 
free. If seizures are refractory to medication, the patient 
may benefit from surgical removal of the epileptic brain 
region (see later).
AVOIDANCE 
OF 
PRECIPITATING 
FAC-
TORS Unfortunately, little is known about the spe-
cific factors that determine precisely when a seizure 
will occur in a patient with epilepsy. Some patients can 
identify particular situations that appear to lower their 
seizure threshold; these situations should be avoided. 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
246
Table 26-8, and the main pharmacologic characteristics 
of commonly used drugs are listed in Table 26-9. World-
wide, older medications such as phenytoin, valproic acid, 
carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and ethosuximide are 
generally used as first-line therapy for most seizure dis-
orders since, overall, they are as effective as recently mar-
keted drugs and significantly less expensive. Most of the 
new drugs that have become available in the past decade 
are used as add-on or alternative therapy, although some 
are now being used as first-line monotherapy.
In addition to efficacy, factors influencing the choice 
of an initial medication include the convenience of dos-
ing (e.g., once daily versus three or four times daily) and 
potential side effects. In this regard, a number of the 
newer drugs have the advantage of a relative lack of 
drug-drug interactions and easier dosing. Almost all of 
the commonly used antiepileptic drugs can cause simi-
lar, dose-related side effects such as sedation, ataxia, 
and diplopia. Long-term use of some agents in adults, 
especially the elderly, can lead to osteoporosis. Close 
follow-up is required to ensure these side effects are 
promptly recognized and reversed. Most of the older 
drugs and some of the newer ones can also cause 
idiosyncratic toxicity such as rash, bone marrow sup-
pression, or hepatotoxicity. Although rare, these side 
effects should be considered during drug selection, and 
patients must be instructed about symptoms or signs 
that should signal the need to alert their health care 
provider. For some drugs, laboratory tests (e.g., com-
plete blood count and liver function tests) are recom-
mended prior to the institution of therapy (to establish 
baseline values) and during initial dosing and titration 
of the agent. Importantly, recent studies have shown 
that Asian individuals carrying the human leukocyte 
antigen allele, HLA-B∗1502, are at particularly high risk 
of developing serious skin reactions from carbamaze-
pine and phenytoin, so racial background and genotype 
are additional factors to consider in drug selection.
Antiepileptic Drug Selection for Focal Sei-
zures Carbamazepine (or a related drug, oxcar-
bazepine), lamotrigine, and phenytoin are currently 
the drugs of choice approved for the initial treatment 
of focal seizures, including those that evolve into gen-
eralized seizures. Overall they have very similar effi-
cacy, but differences in pharmacokinetics and toxicity 
are the main determinants for use in a given patient. 
For example, an advantage of carbamazepine (which 
is also available in an extended-release form) is that its 
metabolism follows first-order pharmacokinetics, and 
the relationship between drug dose, serum levels, and 
toxicity is linear. Carbamazepine can cause leukopenia, 
aplastic anemia, or hepatotoxicity and would therefore 
be contraindicated in patients with predispositions to 
these problems. Oxcarbazepine has the advantage of 
being metabolized in a way that avoids an intermedi-
ate metabolite associated with some of the side effects 
of carbamazepine. Oxcarbazepine also has fewer drug 
interactions than carbamazepine. Lamotrigine tends 
to be well tolerated in terms of side effects. However, 
patients need to be particularly vigilant about the pos-
sibility of a skin rash during the initiation of therapy. 
This can be extremely severe and lead to Stevens-
Johnson syndrome if unrecognized and if the medica-
tion is not discontinued immediately. This risk can be 
reduced by slow introduction and titration. Lamotrigine 
must be started slowly when used as add-on therapy 
with valproic acid, since valproic acid inhibits lamotrig-
ine metabolism, thereby substantially prolonging its 
half-life. Phenytoin has a relatively long half-life and 
offers the advantage of once or twice daily dosing com-
pared to two or three times daily dosing for many of 
the other drugs. However, phenytoin shows properties 
of saturation kinetics, such that small increases in phe-
nytoin doses above a standard maintenance dose can 
precipitate marked side effects. This is one of the main 
causes of acute phenytoin toxicity. Long-term use of 
phenytoin is associated with untoward cosmetic effects 
(e.g., hirsutism, coarsening of facial features, and gingi-
val hypertrophy), and effects on bone metabolism, so 
it is often avoided in young patients who are likely to 
require the drug for many years. Topiramate can be used 
for both focal and generalized seizures. Similar to some 
of the other antiepileptic drugs, topiramate can cause 
significant psychomotor slowing and other cognitive 
TABLE 26-8
SELECTION OF ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS
GENERALIZED-
ONSET TONIC-
CLONIC
FOCAL
TYPICAL 
ABSENCE
ATYPICAL 
ABSENCE, 
MYOCLONIC, 
ATONIC
First-Line
Valproic acid
Lamotrigine
Topiramate
Lamotrigine
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Phenytoin
Levetiracetam
Valproic acid
Ethosuximide
Valproic acid
Lamotrigine
Topiramate
Alternatives
Zonisamidea
Phenytoin
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Topiramate
Zonisamidea
Valproic acid
Tiagabinea
Gabapentina
Lacosamidea
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Lamotrigine
Clonazepam
Clonazepam
Felbamate
aAs adjunctive therapy.
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
247
TABLE 26-9
DOSAGE AND ADVERSE EFFECTS OF COMMONLY USED ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS
GENERIC 
NAME
TRADE NAME
PRINCIPAL 
USES
TYPICAL 
DOSE; DOSE 
INTERVAL
HALF-LIFE
THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE
ADVERSE EFFECTS
DRUG INTERACTIONS
NEUROLOGIC
SYSTEMIC
Phenytoin 
(diphenyl-
hydantoin
Dilantin
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
300–400 
mg/d (3–6 
mg/kg, 
adult; 4–8 
mg/kg, 
child); qd-
bid
24 h (wide 
variation, 
dose-
depen-
dent)
10–20 μg/mL
Dizziness
Diplopia
Ataxia
Incoordination
Confusion
Gum hyperplasia
Lymphadenopathy
Hirsutism
Osteomalacia
Facial coarsening
Skin rash
Level increased by isoniazid, sul-
fonamides, ﬂuoxetine
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Altered folate metabolism
Carbam-
azepine
Tegretolb
Carbatrol
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
600–1800 
mg/d (15–
35 mg/kg, 
child); bid-
qid
10–17 h
6–12 μg/mL
Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo
Aplastic anemia
Leukopenia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Hepatotoxicity
Hyponatremia
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Level increased by erythromycin, 
propoxyphene, isoniazid, cimeti-
dine, ﬂuoxetine
Valproic 
acid
Depakene
Depakoteb
Tonic-clonic
Absence
Atypical 
absence
Myoclonic
Focal-onset
Atonic
750–2000 
mg/d (20–
60 mg/kg); 
bid-qid
15 h
50–125 μg/mL
Ataxia
Sedation
Tremor
Hepatotoxicity
Thrombocytopenia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Weight gain
Transient alopecia
Hyperammonemia
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Lamotrigine
Lamictalb
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
Atypical 
absence
Myoclonic
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
150–500 
mg/d; bid
25 h
14 h (with 
enzyme-
inducers)
59 h (with 
valproic 
acid)
Not established
Dizziness
Diplopia
Sedation
Ataxia
Headache
Skin rash
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa and oral contra-
ceptives
Level increased by valproic acid
Ethosuxi-
mide
Zarontin
Absence
750–1250 
mg/d (20–
40 mg/kg); 
qd-bid
60 h, adult
30 h, child
40–100 μg/mL
Ataxia
Lethargy
Headache
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Skin rash
Bone marrow sup-
pression
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Level increased by valproic acid
(continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
248
TABLE 26-9
DOSAGE AND ADVERSE EFFECTS OF COMMONLY USED ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS (CONTINUED)
GENERIC 
NAME
TRADE NAME
PRINCIPAL 
USES
TYPICAL 
DOSE; DOSE 
INTERVAL
HALF-LIFE
THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE
ADVERSE EFFECTS
DRUG INTERACTIONS
NEUROLOGIC
SYSTEMIC
Gabapentin
Neurontin
Focal-onset
900–2400 
mg/d; tid-
qid
5–9 h
Not established
Sedation
Dizziness
Ataxia
Fatigue
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Weight gain
Edema
No known signiﬁcant interactions
Topiramate
Topamax
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
200–400 
mg/d; bid
20–30 h
Not established
Psychomotor 
slowing
Sedation
Speech or lan-
guage problems
Fatigue
Paresthesias
Renal stones (avoid 
use with other 
carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors)
Glaucoma
Weight loss
Hypohidrosis
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Tiagabine
Gabitril
Focal-onset
32–56 
mg/d;  
bid-qid
7–9 h
Not established
Confusion
Sedation
Depression
Dizziness
Speech or lan-
guage problems
Paresthesias
Psychosis
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Phenobar-
bital
Luminol
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
60–180 
mg/d; qd
90 h
10–40 μg/mL
Sedation
Ataxia
Confusion
Dizziness
Decreased libido
Depression
Skin rash
Level increased by valproic acid, 
phenytoin
Primidone
Mysoline
Tonic-clonic
Focal-onset
750–1000 
mg/d; bid-
tid
Primidone, 
8–15 h
Phenobar-
bital, 90 h
Primidone, 4–12 
μg/mL
Phenobarbital, 
10–40 μg/mL
Same as pheno-
barbital
Level increased by valproic acid, 
phenytoin
Clonaz-
epam
Klonopin
Absence
Atypical 
absence
Myoclonic
1–12 mg/d; 
qd-tid
24–48 h
10–70 ng/mL
Ataxia
Sedation
Lethargy
Anorexia
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
249
Felbamate
Felbatol
Focal-onset
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
Tonic-clonic
2400–3600 
mg/d, tid-
qid
16–22 h
Not established
Insomnia
Dizziness
Sedation
Headache
Aplastic anemia
Hepatic failure
Weight loss
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Increases phenytoin, valproic acid, 
active carbamazepine metabolite
Levetirace-
tam
Kepprab
Focal-onset
1000–3000 
mg/d; qd-
bid
6–8 h
Not established
Sedation
Fatigue
Incoordination
Mood changes
Anemia
Leukopenia
No known signiﬁcant interactions
Zonisamide
Zonegran
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
200–400 
mg/d; qd-
bid
50–68 h
Not established
Sedation
Dizziness
Confusion
Headache
Psychosis
Anorexia
Renal stones
Hypohidrosis
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Oxcarbaze-
pine
Trileptal
Focal-onset
Tonic-clonic
900–2400 
mg/d (30–
45 mg/kg, 
child); bid
10–17 h 
(for active 
metabolite)
Not established
Fatigue
Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo
Headache
See carbamazepine
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
May increase phenytoin
Lacosamide
Vimpat
Focal-onset
200–400 
mg/d; bid
13 h
Not established
Dizziness
Ataxia
Diplopia
Vertigo
GI irritation
Cardiac conduction 
(PR interval pro-
longation)
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Ruﬁnamide
Banzel
Lennox-
Gastaut 
syndrome
3200 mg/d 
(45 mg/kg, 
child); bid
6–10 h
Not established
Sedation
Fatigue
Dizziness
Ataxia
Headache
Diplopia
GI irritation
Leukopenia
Cardiac conduction 
(QT interval pro-
longation)
Level decreased by enzyme-
inducing drugsa
Level increased by valproic acid
May increase phenytoin
aPhenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital.
bExtended-release product available.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
250
problems, and it should not be used in patients at risk 
for the development of glaucoma or renal stones.
Valproic acid is an effective alternative for some 
patients with focal seizures, especially when the seizures 
generalize. Gastrointestinal side effects are fewer when 
using the valproate semisodium formulation (Depakote). 
Valproic acid also rarely causes reversible bone marrow 
suppression and hepatotoxicity, and laboratory testing 
is required to monitor toxicity. This drug should generally 
be avoided in patients with preexisting bone marrow or 
liver disease. Irreversible, fatal hepatic failure appearing 
as an idiosyncratic rather than dose-related side effect is 
a relatively rare complication; its risk is highest in children 
<2 years old, especially those taking other antiepileptic 
drugs or with inborn errors of metabolism.
Levetiracetam, zonisamide, tiagabine, gabapentin, 
and lacosamide are additional drugs currently used for 
the treatment of focal seizures with or without evolu-
tion into generalized seizures. Phenobarbital and other 
barbiturate compounds were commonly used in the 
past as first-line therapy for many forms of epilepsy. 
However, the barbiturates frequently cause sedation in 
adults, hyperactivity in children, and other more subtle 
cognitive changes; thus, their use should be limited to 
situations in which no other suitable treatment alterna-
tives exist.
Antiepileptic Drug Selection for General-
ized Seizures Valproic acid and lamotrigine are cur-
rently considered the best initial choice for the treatment 
of primary generalized, tonic-clonic seizures. Topiramate, 
zonisamide, phenytoin, and carbamazepine are suitable 
alternatives. Valproic acid is also particularly effective in 
absence, myoclonic, and atonic seizures and is therefore 
the drug of choice in patients with generalized epilepsy 
syndromes having mixed seizure types. Importantly, car-
bamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin can worsen 
certain types of generalized seizures, including absence, 
myoclonic, tonic, and atonic seizures. Ethosuximide is a 
particularly effective drug for the treatment of uncompli-
cated absence seizures, but it is not useful for tonic-clonic 
or focal seizures. Ethosuximide rarely causes bone mar-
row suppression, so that periodic monitoring of blood 
cell counts is required. Lamotrigine appears to be particu-
larly effective in epilepsy syndromes with mixed, general-
ized seizure types such as JME and Lennox-Gastaut syn-
drome. Topiramate, zonisamide, and felbamate may have 
similar broad efficacy.
Initiation and Monitoring of Therapy Because 
the response to any antiepileptic drug is unpredict-
able, patients should be carefully educated about the 
approach to therapy. The goal is to prevent seizures 
and minimize the side effects of therapy; determination 
of the optimal dose is often a matter of trial and error. 
This process may take months or longer if the baseline 
seizure frequency is low. Most anticonvulsant drugs 
need to be introduced relatively slowly to minimize 
side effects, and patients should expect that minor side 
effects such as mild sedation, slight changes in cogni-
tion, or imbalance will typically resolve within a few 
days. Starting doses are usually the lowest value listed 
under the dosage column in Table 26-9. Subsequent 
increases should be made only after achieving a steady 
state with the previous dose (i.e., after an interval of five 
or more half-lives).
Monitoring of serum antiepileptic drug levels can be 
very useful for establishing the initial dosing schedule. 
However, the published therapeutic ranges of serum 
drug concentrations are only an approximate guide for 
determining the proper dose for a given patient. The 
key determinants are the clinical measures of seizure 
frequency and presence of side effects, not the labo-
ratory values. Conventional assays of serum drug lev-
els measure the total drug (i.e., both free and protein 
bound). However, it is the concentration of free drug 
that reflects extracellular levels in the brain and corre-
lates best with efficacy. Thus, patients with decreased 
levels of serum proteins (e.g., decreased serum albumin 
due to impaired liver or renal function) may have an 
increased ratio of free to bound drug, yet the concen-
tration of free drug may be adequate for seizure con-
trol. These patients may have a “subtherapeutic” drug 
level, but the dose should be changed only if seizures 
remain uncontrolled, not just to achieve a “therapeutic” 
level. It is also useful to monitor free drug levels in such 
patients. In practice, other than during the initiation or 
modification of therapy, monitoring of antiepileptic 
drug levels is most useful for documenting compliance.
If seizures continue despite gradual increases to the 
maximum tolerated dose and documented compli-
ance, then it becomes necessary to switch to another 
antiepileptic drug. This is usually done by maintain-
ing the patient on the first drug while a second drug is 
added. The dose of the second drug should be adjusted 
to decrease seizure frequency without causing toxicity. 
Once this is achieved, the first drug can be gradually 
withdrawn (usually over weeks unless there is significant 
toxicity). The dose of the second drug is then further opti-
mized based on seizure response and side effects. Mono-
therapy should be the goal whenever possible.
When to Discontinue Therapy Overall, about 
70% of children and 60% of adults who have their sei-
zures completely controlled with antiepileptic drugs can 
eventually discontinue therapy. The following patient 
profile yields the greatest chance of remaining seizure 
free after drug withdrawal: (1) complete medical control 
of seizures for 1–5 years; (2) single seizure type, either 
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
251
focal or generalized; (3) normal neurologic examination, 
including intelligence; and (4) normal EEG. The appropri-
ate seizure-free interval is unknown and undoubtedly 
varies for different forms of epilepsy. However, it seems 
reasonable to attempt withdrawal of therapy after 2 years 
in a patient who meets all of the above criteria, is moti-
vated to discontinue the medication, and clearly under-
stands the potential risks and benefits. In most cases it is 
preferable to reduce the dose of the drug gradually over 
2–3 months. Most recurrences occur in the first 3 months 
after discontinuing therapy, and patients should be 
advised to avoid potentially dangerous situations such as 
driving or swimming during this period.
Treatment of Refractory Epilepsy Approxi-
mately one-third of patients with epilepsy do not 
respond to treatment with a single antiepileptic drug, 
and it becomes necessary to try a combination of drugs 
to control seizures. Patients who have focal epilepsy 
related to an underlying structural lesion or those with 
multiple seizure types and developmental delay are 
particularly likely to require multiple drugs. There are 
currently no clear guidelines for rational polypharmacy, 
although in theory a combination of drugs with differ-
ent mechanisms of action may be most useful. In most 
cases the initial combination therapy combines first-line 
drugs (i.e., carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, 
valproic acid, and phenytoin). If these drugs are unsuc-
cessful, then the addition of a newer drug such as leve-
tiracetam, topiramate, and zonisamide is indicated. 
Patients with myoclonic seizures resistant to valproic 
acid may benefit from the addition of clonazepam, and 
those with absence seizures may respond to a com-
bination of valproic acid and ethosuximide. The same 
principles concerning the monitoring of therapeutic 
response, toxicity, and serum levels for monotherapy 
apply to polypharmacy, and potential drug interactions 
need to be recognized. If there is no improvement, a 
third drug can be added while the first two are main-
tained. If there is a response, the less effective or less 
well tolerated of the first two drugs should be gradually 
withdrawn.
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF REFRACTORY 
EPILEPSY Approximately 20–30% of patients with 
epilepsy continue to have seizures despite efforts to 
find an effective combination of antiepileptic drugs. For 
some, surgery can be extremely effective in substan-
tially reducing seizure frequency and even providing 
complete seizure control. Understanding the potential 
value of surgery is especially important when a patient’s 
seizures are not controlled with initial treatment, as such 
patients often fail to respond to subsequent medica-
tion trials. Rather than submitting the patient to years 
of unsuccessful medical therapy and the psychosocial 
trauma and increased mortality associated with ongo-
ing seizures, the patient should have an efficient but 
relatively brief attempt at medical therapy and then be 
referred for surgical evaluation.
The most common surgical procedure for patients 
with temporal lobe epilepsy involves resection of the 
anteromedial temporal lobe (temporal lobectomy) or a 
more limited removal of the underlying hippocampus 
and amygdala (amygdalohippocampectomy). Focal 
seizures arising from extratemporal regions may be 
abolished by a focal neocortical resection with pre-
cise removal of an identified lesion (lesionectomy). 
When the cortical region cannot be removed, multiple 
subpial transection, which disrupts intracortical con-
nections, is sometimes used to prevent seizure spread. 
Hemispherectomy or multilobar resection is useful for 
some patients with severe seizures due to hemispheric 
abnormalities such as hemimegalencephaly or other 
dysplastic abnormalities, and corpus callosotomy has 
been shown to be effective for disabling tonic or atonic 
seizures, usually when they are part of a mixed-seizure 
syndrome (e.g., Lennox-Gastaut syndrome).
Presurgical evaluation is designed to identify the 
functional and structural basis of the patient’s seizure 
disorder. Inpatient video-EEG monitoring is used to 
define the anatomic location of the seizure focus and to 
correlate the abnormal electrophysiologic activity with 
behavioral manifestations of the seizure. Routine scalp 
or scalp-sphenoidal recordings are usually sufficient for 
localization, and advances in neuroimaging have made 
the use of invasive electrophysiologic monitoring such 
as implanted depth electrodes or subdural electrodes 
less common. A high-resolution MRI scan is routinely 
used to identify structural lesions, and this is sometimes 
augmented with MEG. Functional imaging studies such 
as SPECT and PET are adjunctive tests that may help ver-
ify the localization of an apparent epileptogenic region. 
Once the presumed location of the seizure onset is iden-
tified, additional studies, including neuropsychological 
testing and the intracarotid amobarbital test (Wada test) 
may be used to assess language and memory localiza-
tion and to determine the possible functional conse-
quences of surgical removal of the epileptogenic region. 
In some cases, the exact extent of the resection to be 
undertaken is determined by performing cortical map-
ping at the time of the surgical procedure, allowing for 
a tailored resection. This involves electrocorticographic 
recordings made with electrodes on the surface of the 
brain to identify the extent of epileptiform disturbances. 
If the region to be resected is within or near brain 
regions suspected of having sensorimotor or language 
function, electrical cortical stimulation mapping is per-
formed on the awake patient to determine the function 
of cortical regions in question in order to avoid resec-
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
252
tion of so-called eloquent cortex and thereby minimize 
postsurgical deficits.
Advances in presurgical evaluation and microsurgical 
techniques have led to a steady increase in the success 
of epilepsy surgery. Clinically significant complications 
of surgery are <5%, and the use of functional map-
ping procedures has markedly reduced the neurologic 
sequelae due to removal or sectioning of brain tissue. 
For example, about 70% of patients treated with tem-
poral lobectomy will become seizure free, and another 
15–25% will have at least a 90% reduction in seizure 
frequency. Marked improvement is also usually seen in 
patients treated with hemispherectomy for catastrophic 
seizure disorders due to large hemispheric abnormali-
ties. Postoperatively, patients generally need to remain 
on antiepileptic drug therapy, but the marked reduction 
of seizures following resective surgery can have a very 
beneficial effect on quality of life.
Not all medically refractory patients are suitable 
candidates for resective surgery. For example, some 
patients have seizures arising from more than one site, 
making the risk of ongoing seizures or potential harm 
from the surgery unacceptably high. Vagus nerve stim-
ulation (VNS) may be useful in some of these cases, 
although the benefit for most patients seems to be 
very limited (i.e., the efficacy of VNS appears to be no 
greater than trying another drug, which rarely works if 
a patient has proved to be refractory to the first two to 
three drugs). The precise mechanism of action of VNS is 
unknown, although experimental studies have shown 
that stimulation of vagal nuclei leads to widespread 
activation of cortical and subcortical pathways and an 
associated increased seizure threshold. Adverse effects 
of the surgery are rare, and stimulation-induced side 
effects, including transient hoarseness, cough, and dys-
pnea, are usually mild.
Although still in development, there are some 
additional therapies that will likely be of benefit to 
patients with medically refractory epilepsy. Prelimi-
nary studies suggest that stereotactic radiosurgery 
may be effective in certain focal seizure disorders. 
There has also been great interest in the develop-
ment of implantable devices that can detect the 
onset of a seizure (in some instances, before the sei-
zure becomes clinically apparent) and deliver either 
an electrical stimulation or drug directly to the sei-
zure focus to abort the event.
status epilepticus (GCSE) (e.g., persistent, generalized 
electrographic seizures, coma, and tonic-clonic move-
ments) and nonconvulsive status epilepticus (e.g., per-
sistent absence seizures or focal seizures, confusion or 
partially impaired consciousness, and minimal motor 
abnormalities). The duration of seizure activity suf-
ﬁcient to meet the deﬁnition of status epilepticus has 
traditionally been speciﬁed as 15–30 min. However, a 
more practical deﬁnition is to consider status epilep-
ticus as a situation in which the duration of seizures 
prompts the acute use of anticonvulsant therapy. For 
GCSE, this is typically when seizures last beyond 
5 min.
GCSE is an emergency and must be treated immediately, 
since cardiorespiratory dysfunction, hyperthermia, and 
metabolic derangements can develop as a consequence 
of prolonged seizures, and these can lead to irreversible 
neuronal injury. Furthermore, CNS injury can occur 
even when the patient is paralyzed with neuromuscular 
blockade but continues to have electrographic seizures. 
The most common causes of GCSE are anticonvulsant 
withdrawal or noncompliance, metabolic disturbances, 
drug toxicity, CNS infection, CNS tumors, refractory 
epilepsy, and head trauma.
GCSE is obvious when the patient is having overt 
convulsions. However, after 30–45 min of uninter-
rupted seizures, the signs may become increasingly 
subtle. Patients may have mild clonic movements of 
only the ﬁngers or ﬁne, rapid movements of the eyes. 
There may be paroxysmal episodes of tachycardia, 
hypertension, and pupillary dilation. In such cases, the 
EEG may be the only method of establishing the diag-
nosis. Thus, if the patient stops having overt seizures, 
yet remains comatose, an EEG should be performed to 
rule out ongoing status epilepticus. This is obviously 
also essential when a patient with GCSE has been par-
alyzed with neuromuscular blockade in the process of 
protecting the airway.
The ﬁrst steps in the management of a patient in GCSE 
are to attend to any acute cardiorespiratory problems or 
hyperthermia, perform a brief medical and neurologic 
examination, establish venous access, and send samples 
for laboratory studies to identify metabolic abnormalities. 
Anticonvulsant therapy should then begin without delay; a 
treatment approach is shown in Fig. 26-3.
The treatment of nonconvulsive status epilepticus is 
thought to be less urgent than GCSE, since the ongo-
ing seizures are not accompanied by the severe meta-
bolic disturbances seen with GCSE. However, evidence 
suggests that nonconvulsive status epilepticus, espe-
cially that caused by ongoing, focal seizure activity, is 
associated with cellular injury in the region of the sei-
zure focus; therefore this condition should be treated 
as promptly as possible using the general approach 
described for GCSE.
STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Status epilepticus refers to continuous seizures or 
repetitive, discrete seizures with impaired conscious-
ness in the interictal period. Status epilepticus has 
numerous subtypes, including generalized convulsive 
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
253
BEYOND SEIZURES: OTHER 
MANAGEMENT ISSUES
INTERICTAL BEHAVIOR
The adverse effects of epilepsy often go beyond the 
occurrence of clinical seizures, and the extent of these 
effects largely depends on the etiology of the seizure 
disorder, the degree to which the seizures are con-
trolled, and the presence of side effects from antiepilep-
tic therapy. Many patients with epilepsy are completely 
normal between seizures and able to live highly suc-
cessful and productive lives. In contrast, patients with 
seizures secondary to developmental abnormalities or 
acquired brain injury may have impaired cognitive 
function and other neurologic deﬁcits. Frequent inter-
ictal EEG abnormalities have been shown to be associ-
ated with subtle dysfunction of memory and attention. 
Patients with many seizures, especially those emanating 
from the temporal lobe, often note an impairment of 
short-term memory that may progress over time.
Patients with epilepsy are at risk of developing a vari-
ety of psychiatric problems, including depression, anxi-
ety, and psychosis. This risk varies considerably depend-
ing on many factors, including the etiology, frequency, 
and severity of seizures and the patient’s age and previ-
ous history. Depression occurs in ∼20% of patients, and 
the incidence of suicide is higher in epileptic patients 
than in the general population. Depression should be 
treated through counseling or medication. The selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) typically have no 
effect on seizures, while high doses of tricyclic anti-
depressants may lower the seizure threshold. Anxiety 
can appear as a manifestation of a seizure, and anx-
ious or psychotic behavior can sometimes be observed 
as part of a postictal delirium. Postictal psychosis is a 
rare phenomenon that typically occurs after a period 
of increased seizure frequency. There is usually a brief 
lucid interval lasting up to a week, followed by days 
to weeks of agitated, psychotic behavior. The psycho-
sis will usually resolve spontaneously but frequently will 
require short-term treatment with antipsychotic or anx-
iolytic medications.
There is ongoing controversy as to whether some 
patients with epilepsy (especially temporal lobe epilepsy) 
have a stereotypical “interictal personality.” The pre-
dominant view is that the unusual or abnormal person-
ality traits observed in such patients are, in most cases, 
not due to epilepsy but result from an underlying struc-
tural brain lesion, the effects of antiepileptic drugs, or 
psychosocial factors related to suffering from a chronic 
disease.
MORTALITY OF EPILEPSY
Patients with epilepsy have a risk of death that is 
roughly two to three times greater than expected in 
a matched population without epilepsy. Most of the 
increased mortality is due to the underlying etiology 
Lorazepam 0.1–0.15 mg/kg IV over 1–2 min
(repeat x 1 if no response after 5 min)
Additional emergent drug therapy
may not be required if seizures
stop and the etiology of status
epilepticus is rapidly corrected 
Fosphenytoin 20 mg/kg PE IV 150 mg/min
or phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV 50 mg/min
Fosphenytoin 7–10 mg/kg PE IV 150 mg/min
or phenytoin 7–10 mg/kg IV 50 mg/min
Consider valproate
25 mg/kg IV
Phenobarbital 20 mg/kg IV 60 mg/min
Phenobarbital 10 mg/kg IV 60 mg/min
IV anesthesia with propofol or
midazolam or pentobarbital
Consider valproate
25 mg/kg IV in pts.
normally taking
valproate and who may 
be subtherapeutic
Seizures continuing
Seizures continuing
Seizures continuing
No immediate access to ICU
Admit 
to ICU
TREATMENT OF GENERALIZED TONIC-CLONIC STATUS EPILEPTICUS IN ADULTS
FIGURE 26-3 
Pharmacologic treatment of generalized tonic-clonic status epilepticus in adults. The horizontal bars indicate the approxi-
mate duration of drug infusions. IV, intravenous; PE, phenytoin equivalents.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
254
of epilepsy (e.g., tumors or strokes in older adults). 
However, a signiﬁcant number of patients die from 
accidents, status epilepticus, and a syndrome known 
as sudden unexpected death in epileptic patients (SUDEP), 
which usually affects young people with convulsive 
seizures and tends to occur at night. The cause of 
SUDEP is unknown; it may result from brainstem-
mediated effects of seizures on cardiac rhythms or pul-
monary function.
PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES
There continues to be a cultural stigma about epilepsy, 
although it is slowly declining in societies with effec-
tive health education programs. Many patients with epi-
lepsy harbor fears such as the fear of becoming mentally 
retarded or dying during a seizure. These issues need to 
be carefully addressed by educating the patient about 
epilepsy and by ensuring that family members, teachers, 
fellow employees, and other associates are equally well 
informed. The Epilepsy Foundation of America (www
.epilepsyfoundation.org) is a patient advocacy organiza-
tion and a useful source of educational material, as is the 
Web site www.epilepsy.com.
EMPLOYMENT, DRIVING, AND OTHER 
ACTIVITIES
Many patients with epilepsy face difﬁculty in obtain-
ing or maintaining employment, even when their sei-
zures are well controlled. Federal and state legislation 
is designed to prevent employers from discriminating 
against patients with epilepsy, and patients should be 
encouraged to understand and claim their legal rights. 
Patients in these circumstances also beneﬁt greatly from 
the assistance of health providers who act as strong 
patient advocates.
Loss of driving privileges is one of the most disrup-
tive social consequences of epilepsy. Physicians should 
be very clear about local regulations concerning driving 
and epilepsy, since the laws vary considerably among 
states and countries. In all cases, it is the physician’s 
responsibility to warn patients of the danger imposed 
on themselves and others while driving if their seizures 
are uncontrolled (unless the seizures are not associated 
with impairment of consciousness or motor control). 
In general, most states allow patients to drive after a 
seizure-free interval (on or off medications) of between 
3 months and 2 years.
Patients with incompletely controlled seizures must 
also contend with the risk of being in situations where 
an impairment of consciousness or loss of motor con-
trol could lead to major injury or death. Thus, depend-
ing on the type and frequency of seizures, many patients 
need to be instructed to avoid working at heights or 
with machinery, or to have someone close by for activi-
ties such as bathing and swimming.
SPECIAL ISSUES RELATED TO WOMEN 
AND EPILEPSY
CATAMENIAL EPILEPSY
Some women experience a marked increase in seizure 
frequency around the time of menses. This is believed 
to be mediated by either the effects of estrogen and pro-
gesterone on neuronal excitability or changes in anti-
epileptic drug levels due to altered protein binding or 
metabolism. Some patients may beneﬁt from increases 
in antiepileptic drug dosages during menses. Natural 
progestins or intramuscular medroxyprogesterone may 
be of beneﬁt to a subset of women.
PREGNANCY
Most women with epilepsy who become pregnant will 
have an uncomplicated gestation and deliver a normal 
baby. However, epilepsy poses some important risks 
to a pregnancy. Seizure frequency during pregnancy 
will remain unchanged in ∼50% of women, increase 
in 30%, and decrease in 20%. Changes in seizure fre-
quency are attributed to endocrine effects on the CNS, 
variations in antiepileptic drug pharmacokinetics (such 
as acceleration of hepatic drug metabolism or effects 
on plasma protein binding), and changes in medication 
compliance. It is useful to see patients at frequent inter-
vals during pregnancy and monitor serum antiepileptic 
drug levels. Measurement of the unbound drug concen-
trations may be useful if there is an increase in seizure 
frequency or worsening of side effects of antiepileptic 
drugs.
The overall incidence of fetal abnormalities in chil-
dren born to mothers with epilepsy is 5–6%, compared 
to 2–3% in healthy women. Part of the higher inci-
dence is due to teratogenic effects of antiepileptic drugs, 
and the risk increases with the number of medications 
used (e.g., 10–20% risk of malformations with three 
drugs) and possibly with higher doses. A recent meta-
analysis of published pregnancy registries and cohorts 
found that the most common malformations were 
defects in the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal system 
(1.4–1.8%). Valproic acid is strongly associated with an 
increased risk of adverse fetal outcomes (7–20%). Little 
is currently known about the safety of newer drugs, 
although reports suggest a higher than expected inci-
dence of cleft lip or palate with the use of lamotrigine 
during pregnancy.
 
CHAPTER 26
Seizures and Epilepsy
255
Since the potential harm of uncontrolled convulsive 
seizures on the mother and fetus is considered greater 
than the teratogenic effects of antiepileptic drugs, it is 
currently recommended that pregnant women be main-
tained on effective drug therapy. When possible, it 
seems prudent to have the patient on monotherapy at 
the lowest effective dose, especially during the ﬁrst tri-
mester. For some women, however, the type and fre-
quency of their seizures may allow for them to safely 
wean off antiepileptic drugs prior to conception. 
Patients should also take folate (1–4 mg/d), since the 
antifolate effects of anticonvulsants are thought to play a 
role in the development of neural tube defects, although 
the beneﬁts of this treatment remain unproved in this 
setting.
Enzyme-inducing drugs such as phenytoin, carbam-
azepine, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, phenobarbital, and 
primidone cause a transient and reversible deﬁciency of 
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors in ∼50% of new-
born infants. Although neonatal hemorrhage is uncom-
mon, the mother should be treated with oral vitamin K 
(20 mg/d, phylloquinone) in the last 2 weeks of preg-
nancy, and the infant should receive intramuscular vita-
min K (1 mg) at birth.
CONTRACEPTION
Special care should be taken when prescribing antiepi-
leptic medications for women who are taking oral con-
traceptive agents. Drugs such as carbamazepine, phe-
nytoin, phenobarbital, and topiramate can signiﬁcantly 
decrease the efﬁcacy of oral contraceptives via enzyme 
induction and other mechanisms. Patients should be 
advised to consider alternative forms of contraception, 
or their contraceptive medications should be modiﬁed 
to offset the effects of the antiepileptic medications.
BREAST-FEEDING
Antiepileptic medications are excreted into breast milk 
to a variable degree. The ratio of drug concentration in 
breast milk relative to serum ranges from ∼5% (valproic 
acid) to 300% (levetiracetam). Given the overall bene-
ﬁts of breast-feeding and the lack of evidence for long-
term harm to the infant by being exposed to antiepi-
leptic drugs, mothers with epilepsy can be encouraged 
to breast-feed. This should be reconsidered, however, if 
there is any evidence of drug effects on the infant such 
as lethargy or poor feeding.
 Wade S. Smith  ■   Joey D. English  ■   S. Claiborne Johnston 
256
 Cerebrovascular diseases include some of the most com-
mon and devastating disorders: ischemic stroke, hem-
orrhagic stroke, and cerebrovascular anomalies such as 
intracranial aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations 
(AVMs). They cause ∼200,000 deaths each year in the 
United States and are a major cause of disability. The 
incidence of cerebrovascular diseases increases with age, 
and the number of strokes is projected to increase as 
the elderly population grows, with a doubling in stroke 
deaths in the United States by 2030. Most cerebrovas-
cular diseases are manifest by the abrupt onset of a focal 
neurologic deﬁ cit, as if the patient was “struck by the 
hand of God.” A stroke, or cerebrovascular accident, 
is deﬁ ned by this abrupt onset of a neurologic deﬁ cit 
that is attributable to a focal vascular cause. Thus, the 
deﬁ nition of stroke is clinical, and laboratory studies 
including brain imaging are used to support the diag-
nosis. The clinical manifestations of stroke are highly 
variable because of the complex anatomy of the brain 
and its vasculature.  Cerebral ischemia is caused by a 
reduction in blood ﬂ ow that lasts longer than several 
seconds. Neurologic symptoms are manifest within 
seconds because neurons lack glycogen, so energy fail-
ure is rapid. If the cessation of ﬂ ow lasts for more than 
a few minutes,  infarction or death of brain tissue results. 
When blood ﬂ ow is quickly restored, brain tissue can 
recover fully and the patient’s symptoms are only tran-
sient: This is called a  transient ischemic attack (TIA). The 
standard deﬁ nition of TIA requires that all neurologic 
signs and symptoms resolve within 24 h regardless of 
whether there is imaging evidence of new permanent 
brain injury; stroke has occurred if the neurologic signs 
and symptoms last for >24 h. However, a newly pro-
posed deﬁ nition classiﬁ es those with new brain infarc-
tion as ischemic strokes regardless of whether symptoms 
persist. A generalized reduction in cerebral blood ﬂ ow 
due to systemic hypotension (e.g., cardiac arrhythmia, 
myocardial infarction, or hemorrhagic shock) usually 
produces syncope ( Chap. 10 ). If low cerebral blood 
 CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 
 CHAPTER 27 
ﬂ ow persists for a longer duration, then infarction in the 
border zones between the major cerebral artery distri-
butions may develop. In more severe instances,  global 
hypoxia-ischemia causes widespread brain injury; the 
constellation of cognitive sequelae that ensues is called 
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy ( Chap. 28 ).  Focal ischemia
or infarction, conversely, is usually caused by thrombo-
sis of the cerebral vessels themselves or by emboli from 
a proximal arterial source or the heart.  Intracranial hemor-
rhage is caused by bleeding directly into or around the 
brain; it produces neurologic symptoms by producing a 
mass effect on neural structures, from the toxic effects of 
blood itself, or by increasing intracranial pressure. 
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
 Cerebrovascular Disease 
 Rapid evaluation is essential for use of time-sensitive 
treatments such as thrombolysis. However, patients 
with acute stroke often do not seek medical assistance 
on their own, both because they are rarely in pain, as 
well as because they may lose the appreciation that 
something is wrong (anosognosia); it is often a family 
member or a bystander who calls for help. Therefore, 
patients and their family members should be counseled 
to call emergency medical services immediately if they 
experience or witness the sudden onset of any of the 
following: loss of sensory and/or motor function on one 
side of the body (nearly 85% of ischemic stroke patients 
have hemiparesis); change in vision, gait, or ability to 
speak or understand; or if they experience a sudden, 
severe headache. 
 There are several common causes of sudden-onset 
neurologic symptoms that may mimic stroke, includ-
ing seizure, intracranial tumor, migraine, and metabolic 
encephalopathy. An adequate history from an observer 
that no convulsive activity occurred at the onset rea-
sonably excludes seizure; however, ongoing com-
plex partial seizures without tonic-clonic activity may 
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
257
mimic stroke. Tumors may present with acute neuro-
logic symptoms due to hemorrhage, seizure, or hydro-
cephalus. Surprisingly, migraine can mimic stroke, even 
in patients without a significant migraine history. When 
it develops without head pain (acephalgic migraine), the 
diagnosis may remain elusive. Patients without any prior 
history of migraine may develop acephalgic migraine 
even after age 65. A sensory disturbance is often promi-
nent, and the sensory deficit, as well as any motor defi-
cits, tends to migrate slowly across a limb over minutes 
rather than seconds as with stroke. The diagnosis of 
migraine becomes more secure as the cortical distur-
bance begins to cross vascular boundaries or if typical 
visual symptoms are present such as scintillating scoto-
mata (Chap. 8). At times it may be difficult to make the 
diagnosis until multiple episodes have occurred leaving 
behind no residual symptoms and with a normal MRI 
study of the brain. Classically, metabolic encephalopa-
thies produce fluctuating mental status without focal 
neurologic findings. However, in the setting of prior 
stroke or brain injury, a patient with fever or sepsis may 
manifest hemiparesis, which clears rapidly when the 
infection is remedied. The metabolic process serves to 
“unmask” a prior deficit.
Once the diagnosis of stroke is made, a brain imag-
ing study is necessary to determine if the cause of 
stroke is ischemia or hemorrhage (Fig. 27-1). CT imag-
ing of the brain is the standard imaging modality to 
detect the presence or absence of intracranial hemor-
rhage (see “Imaging Studies”). If the stroke is ischemic, 
administration of recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator (rtPA) or endovascular mechanical thrombec-
tomy may be beneficial in restoring cerebral perfusion 
(see “Treatment: Acute Ischemic Stroke”). Medical man-
agement to reduce the risk of complications becomes 
the next priority, followed by plans for secondary pre-
vention. For ischemic stroke, several strategies can 
reduce the risk of subsequent stroke in all patients, 
while other strategies are effective for patients with 
specific causes of stroke such as cardiac embolus and 
carotid atherosclerosis. For hemorrhagic stroke, aneu-
rysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and hyperten-
sive intracranial hemorrhage are two important causes. 
The treatment and prevention of hypertensive intra-
cranial hemorrhage are discussed later in this chapter. 
SAH is discussed in Chap. 28.
anatomy, the site of occlusion, and likely systemic 
blood pressure. A decrease in cerebral blood ﬂow to 
zero causes death of brain tissue within 4–10 min; val-
ues <16–18 mL/100 g tissue per minute cause infarc-
tion within an hour; and values <20 mL/100 g tissue 
per minute cause ischemia without infarction unless 
prolonged for several hours or days. If blood ﬂow 
is restored prior to a signiﬁcant amount of cell death, 
the patient may experience only transient symptoms, 
and the clinical syndrome is called a TIA. Tissue sur-
rounding the core region of infarction is ischemic but 
reversibly dysfunctional and is referred to as the isch-
emic penumbra. The penumbra may be imaged by using 
perfusion-diffusion imaging with MRI or CT (see later 
and Figs. 27-15 and 27-16). The ischemic penum-
bra will eventually infarct if no change in ﬂow occurs, 
and hence saving the ischemic penumbra is the goal of 
revascularization therapies.
Focal cerebral infarction occurs via two distinct path-
ways (Fig. 27-2): (1) a necrotic pathway in which cel-
lular cytoskeletal breakdown is rapid, due principally to 
energy failure of the cell; and (2) an apoptotic pathway 
in which cells become programmed to die. Ischemia 
produces necrosis by starving neurons of glucose and 
oxygen, which in turn results in failure of mitochondria 
ISCHEMIC STROKE
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
Acute occlusion of an intracranial vessel causes reduc-
tion in blood ﬂow to the brain region it supplies. The 
magnitude of ﬂow reduction is a function of collat-
eral blood ﬂow and this depends on individual vascular 
ALGORITHM FOR STROKE AND TIA MANAGEMENT
Stroke or TIA
ABCs, glucose
Ischemic stroke/ 
TIA, 85%
Hemorrhage 
15%
Consider thrombolysis/ 
thrombectomy
Consider BP 
lowering
Obtain brain 
imaging
Establish cause
Establish cause
Atrial 
fibrillation, 
17%
Carotid 
disease, 
4%
Aneurysmal 
SAH, 4%
Hyperten-
sive ICH, 7%
Other, 
64%
Other, 
4%
Consider 
warfarin
Consider 
CEA or 
stent
Clip or coil 
(Chap. 28)
Consider 
surgery
Treat 
specific 
cause
Treat 
specific 
cause
Deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis
Physical, occupational, speech therapy
Evaluate for rehab, discharge planning
Secondary prevention based on disease
FIGURE 27-1 
Medical management of stroke and TIA. Rounded boxes 
are diagnoses; rectangles are interventions. Numbers are 
percentages of stroke overall. ABCs, airway, breathing, cir-
culation; BP, blood pressure; CEA, carotid endarterectomy; 
ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage; SAH, subarachnoid hemor-
rhage; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
258
to produce ATP. Without ATP, membrane ion pumps 
stop functioning and neurons depolarize, allowing intra-
cellular calcium to rise. Cellular depolarization also 
causes glutamate release from synaptic terminals; excess 
extracellular glutamate produces neurotoxicity by acti-
vating postsynaptic glutamate receptors that increase 
neuronal calcium inﬂux. Free radicals are produced by 
membrane lipid degradation and mitochondrial dys-
function. Free radicals cause catalytic destruction of 
membranes and likely damage other vital functions of 
cells. Lesser degrees of ischemia, as are seen within the 
ischemic penumbra, favor apoptotic cellular death caus-
ing cells to die days to weeks later. Fever dramatically 
worsens brain injury during ischemia, as does hypergly-
cemia (glucose >11.1 mmol/L [200 mg/dL]), so it is 
reasonable to suppress fever and prevent hyperglycemia 
as much as possible. Induced moderate hypothermia 
to mitigate stroke is the subject of continuing clinical 
research.
TREATMENT 
Acute Ischemic Stroke
After the clinical diagnosis of stroke is made, an orderly 
process of evaluation and treatment should follow (Fig. 
27-1). The first goal is to prevent or reverse brain injury. 
Attend to the patient’s airway, breathing, and circula-
tion (ABC’s), and treat hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia if 
identified. Perform an emergency noncontrast head CT 
Glutamate
receptors
Energy failure
Proteolysis
Cell Death
Ca2+/Na+ influx
Ischemia
Reperfusion
PARP
Arterial Occlusion
Glutamate
release
Thrombolysis
Thrombectomy
Mitochondrial
damage
Free radical
formation
Inflammatory
response
Arachidonic acid
production
Membrane and
cytoskeletal breakdown
Apoptosis
Phospholipase
iNOS
Leukocyte
adhesion
Lipolysis
CASCADE OF CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA
FIGURE 27-2 
Major steps in the cascade of cerebral ischemia. See text for details. iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; PARP, poly-A 
ribose polymerase.
scan to differentiate between ischemic stroke and hem-
orrhagic stroke; there are no reliable clinical findings 
that conclusively separate ischemia from hemorrhage, 
although a more depressed level of consciousness, 
higher initial blood pressure, or worsening of symptoms 
after onset favor hemorrhage, and a deficit that is maxi-
mal at onset, or remits, suggests ischemia. Treatments 
designed to reverse or lessen the amount of tissue 
infarction and improve clinical outcome fall within six 
categories: (1) medical support, (2) IV thrombolysis, (3) 
endovascular techniques, (4) antithrombotic treatment, 
(5) neuroprotection, and (6) stroke centers and rehabili-
tation.
MEDICAL SUPPORT When ischemic stroke occurs, 
the immediate goal is to optimize cerebral perfusion in 
the surrounding ischemic penumbra. Attention is also 
directed toward preventing the common complications 
of bedridden patients—infections (pneumonia, urinary, 
and skin) and deep venous thrombosis (DVT) with pul-
monary embolism. Many physicians use pneumatic com-
pression stockings to prevent DVT; subcutaneous heparin 
(unfractionated and low-molecular weight) is safe and 
more effective and can be used concomitantly.
Because collateral blood flow within the ischemic 
brain is blood pressure dependent, there is contro-
versy about whether blood pressure should be low-
ered acutely. Blood pressure should be lowered if there 
is malignant hypertension or concomitant myocardial 
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
259
ischemia or if blood pressure is >185/110 mmHg and 
thrombolytic therapy is anticipated. When faced with 
the competing demands of myocardium and brain, low-
ering the heart rate with a β1-adrenergic blocker (such 
as esmolol) can be a first step to decrease cardiac work 
and maintain blood pressure. Fever is detrimental and 
should be treated with antipyretics and surface cooling. 
Serum glucose should be monitored and kept at <6.1 
mmol/L (110 mg/dL) using an insulin infusion if neces-
sary.
Between 5 and 10% of patients develop enough 
cerebral edema to cause obtundation or brain hernia-
tion. Edema peaks on the second or third day but can 
cause mass effect for ∼10 days. The larger the infarct, the 
greater the likelihood that clinically significant edema will 
develop. Water restriction and IV mannitol may be used 
to raise the serum osmolarity, but hypovolemia should be 
avoided as this may contribute to hypotension and wors-
ening infarction. Combined analysis of three randomized 
European trials of hemicraniectomy (craniotomy and 
temporary removal of part of the skull) shows that hemi-
craniectomy markedly reduces mortality, and the clinical 
outcomes of survivors are acceptable.
Special vigilance is warranted for patients with cer-
ebellar infarction. Such strokes may mimic labyrinthitis 
because of prominent vertigo and vomiting; the pres-
ence of head or neck pain should alert the physician 
to consider cerebellar stroke from vertebral artery dis-
section. Even small amounts of cerebellar edema can 
acutely increase intracranial pressure (ICP) or directly 
compress the brainstem. The resulting brainstem com-
pression can result in coma and respiratory arrest and 
require emergency surgical decompression. Prophy-
lactic suboccipital decompression of large cerebellar 
infarcts before brainstem compression, although not 
tested rigorously in a clinical trial, is practiced at most 
stroke centers.
INTRAVENOUS THROMBOLYSIS The National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) 
recombinant tPA (rtPA) Stroke Study showed a clear 
benefit for IV rtPA in selected patients with acute stroke. 
The NINDS study used IV rtPA (0.9 mg/kg to a 90-mg 
max; 10% as a bolus, then the remainder over 60 min) 
versus placebo in patients with ischemic stroke within 
3 h of onset. One-half of the patients were treated 
within 90 min. Symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage 
occurred in 6.4% of patients on rtPA and 0.6% on pla-
cebo. There was a nonsignificant 4% reduction in mor-
tality in patients on rtPA (21% on placebo and 17% on 
rtPA); there was a significant 12% absolute increase in 
the number of patients with only minimal disability 
(32% on placebo and 44% on rtPA). Thus, despite an 
increased incidence of symptomatic intracerebral hem-
orrhage, treatment with IV rtPA within 3 h of the onset 
of ischemic stroke improved clinical outcome.
Three subsequent trials of IV rtPA did not confirm 
this benefit, perhaps because of the dose of rtPA 
used, the timing of its delivery, and small sample size. 
When data from all randomized IV rtPA trails were 
combined, however, efficacy was confirmed in the 
<3-h time window, and efficacy likely extended to 
4.5 h if not 6 h. Based on these combined results, the 
European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study (ECASS) III 
study explored the safety and efficacy of rtPA in the 
3- to 4.5-h time window. Unlike the NINDS study, 
patients older than 85 years of age and diabetic 
patients were excluded. In this 821-patient, random-
ized study efficacy was again confirmed, although 
less robust than in the 0–3 h time window. In the 
rtPA group, 52.4% achieved a good outcome while 
45.2% of the placebo group had a good outcome at 
90 days (OR 1.34, p = 0.04). The symptomatic intracra-
nial hemorrhage rate was 2.4% in the rtPA group and 
0.2% in the placebo group (p = 0.008).
Based on these data, rtPA is being reviewed for 
approval in the 3–4.5-h window in Europe, but is only 
approved for 0–3 h in the United States and Canada. 
Use of IV tPA is now considered a central component of 
primary stroke centers (see later) as the first treatment 
proven to improve clinical outcomes in ischemic stroke 
and is cost-effective and cost-saving. One may be able 
to select patients beyond the 4.5-h window, who will 
benefit from thrombolysis using advanced neuroim-
aging (see neuroimaging section), but this is currently 
investigational. The time of stroke onset is defined as 
the time the patient’s symptoms began or the time the 
patient was last seen as normal. Patients who awaken 
with stroke have the onset defined as when they went 
to bed. Table 27-1 summarizes eligibility criteria and 
instructions for administration of IV rtPA.
ENDOVASCULAR TECHNIQUES Ischemic stro ke 
from large-vessel intracranial occlusion results in high rates 
of mortality and morbidity. Occlusions in such large ves-
sels (middle cerebral artery [MCA], internal carotid artery, 
and the basilar artery) generally involve a large clot volume 
and often fail to open with IV rtPA alone. Therefore, there 
is growing interest in using thrombolytics via an intraarte-
rial route to increase the concentration of drug at the clot 
and minimize systemic bleeding complications. The Pro-
lyse in Acute Cerebral Thromboembolism (PROACT) II trial 
found benefit for intraarterial pro urokinase for acute MCA 
occlusions up to the sixth hour following onset of stroke. 
Intraarterial treatment of basilar artery occlusions may also 
be beneficial for selected patients. Intraarterial administra-
tion of a thrombolytic agent for acute ischemic stroke (AIS) 
is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
260
(FDA); however, many stroke centers offer this treatment 
based on these data.
Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy has rec-
ently shown promise as an alternative or adjunc-
tive treatment of acute stroke in patients who are 
ineligible for, or have contraindications to, throm-
bolytics or in those who have failed to have vas-
cular recanalization with IV thrombolytics (see Fig. 
27-15). The Mechanical Embolus Removal in Cere-
bral Ischemia (MERCI) and multi-MERCI single-arm 
trials investigated the ability of a novel endovas-
cular thrombectomy device to restore patency of 
occluded intracranial vessels within 8 h of ischemic 
stroke symptoms. Recanalization of the target ves-
sel occurred in 48–58% of treated patients and in 
60–69% following use of adjuvant endovascular 
methods, and successful recanalization at 90 days 
correlated well with favorable outcomes. Based upon 
these nonrandomized data, the FDA approved this 
device as the first device for revascularization of 
occluded vessels in acute ischemic stroke even if 
the patient has been given rtPA and that therapy 
has failed. The Penumbra Pivotal Stroke trial tested 
another mechanical device that showed even higher 
rates of recanalization and led to FDA clearance of 
the tested device as well. Because use of endovas-
cular devices in combination with rtPA appears safe, 
primary stroke centers may administer rtPA to eli-
gible patients, and then rapidly refer such patients to 
comprehensive stroke centers that have endovascu-
lar capability for further intervention. Such a design 
allows centralization of resource-intensive endo-
vascular centers in order to serve larger populations 
of patients. Use of mechanical techniques to restore 
blood flow have not as yet been studied in a random-
ized trial so the clinical efficacy of these treatments 
remain unproven and the focus of active investiga-
tion.
ANTITHROMBOTIC TREATMENT
Platelet Inhibition Aspirin is the only antiplatelet 
agent that has been proven effective for the acute treat-
ment of ischemic stroke; there are several antiplatelet 
agents proven for the secondary prevention of stroke 
(see later). Two large trials, the International Stroke 
Trial (IST) and the Chinese Acute Stroke Trial (CAST), 
found that the use of aspirin within 48 h of stroke onset 
reduced both stroke recurrence risk and mortality mini-
mally. Among 19,435 patients in IST, those allocated 
to aspirin, 300 mg/d, had slightly fewer deaths within 
14 days (9.0 versus 9.4%), significantly fewer recurrent 
ischemic strokes (2.8 versus 3.9%), no excess of hem-
orrhagic strokes (0.9 versus 0.8%), and a trend toward 
a reduction in death or dependence at 6 months (61.2 
versus 63.5%). In CAST, 21,106 patients with ischemic 
stroke received 160 mg/d of aspirin or a placebo for 
up to 4 weeks. There were very small reductions in the 
aspirin group in early mortality (3.3 versus 3.9%), recur-
rent ischemic strokes (1.6 versus 2.1%), and dependency 
at discharge or death (30.5 versus 31.6%). These trials 
demonstrate that the use of aspirin in the treatment of 
AIS is safe and produces a small net benefit. For every 
1000 acute strokes treated with aspirin, about 9 deaths 
TABLE 27-1
ADMINISTRATION OF INTRAVENOUS RECOMBINANT 
TISSUE PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR (rtPA) FOR 
ACUTE ISCHEMIC STROKE (AIS)a
INDICATION
CONTRAINDICATION
Clinical diagnosis of stroke
Onset of symptoms to time of 
drug administration f3 h
CT scan showing no hemor-
rhage or edema of >1/3 of 
the MCA territory
Age v18 years
Consent by patient or sur-
rogate
Sustained BP >185/110 
mmHg despite treatment
Platelets <100,000; HCT 
<25%; glucose <50 or 
>400 mg/dL
Use of heparin within 48 
h and prolonged PTT, or 
elevated INR
Rapidly improving symp-
toms
Prior stroke or head injury 
within 3 months; prior 
intracranial hemorrhage
Major surgery in preceding 
14 days
Minor stroke symptoms
Gastrointestinal bleeding 
in preceding 21 days
Recent myocardial infarc-
tion
Coma or stupor
Administration of rtPA
Intravenous access with two peripheral IV lines (avoid arte-
rial or central line placement)
Review eligibility for rtPA
Administer 0.9 mg/kg IV (maximum 90 mg) IV as 10% of 
total dose by bolus, followed by remainder of total dose 
over 1 h
Frequent cuff blood pressure monitoring
No other antithrombotic treatment for 24 h
For decline in neurologic status or uncontrolled blood 
pressure, stop infusion, give cryoprecipitate, and reimage 
brain emergently
Avoid urethral catheterization for v2 h
aSee Activase (tissue plasminogen activator) package insert for 
complete list of contraindications and dosing.
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; HCT, hematocrit; INR, interna-
tional normalized ratio; MCA, middle cerebral artery; PTT, partial 
thromboplastin time.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
261
or nonfatal stroke recurrences will be prevented in the 
first few weeks and ∼13 fewer patients will be dead or 
dependent at 6 months.
The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitor abciximab 
was found to cause excess intracranial hemorrhage and 
should be avoided in acute stroke. Clopidogrel is being 
tested as a way to prevent stroke following TIA and 
minor ischemic stroke.
Anticoagulation Numerous clinical trials have 
failed to demonstrate any benefit of anticoagulation 
in the primary treatment of atherothrombotic cere-
bral ischemia. Several trials have investigated anti-
platelet versus anticoagulant medications given within 
12–24 h of the initial event. The U.S. Trial of Organon 
10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST), an investi-
gational low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), failed 
to show any benefit over aspirin. Use of SC unfraction-
ated heparin versus aspirin was tested in IST. Heparin 
given SC afforded no additional benefit over aspirin 
and increased bleeding rates. Several trials of LMWHs 
have also shown no consistent benefit in AIS. Further-
more, trials generally have shown an excess risk of brain 
and systemic hemorrhage with acute anticoagulation. 
Therefore, trials do not support the routine use of hep-
arin or other anticoagulants for patients with athero-
thrombotic stroke.
NEUROPROTECTION Neuroprotection is the con-
cept of providing a treatment that prolongs the brain’s 
tolerance to ischemia. Drugs that block the excitatory 
amino acid pathways have been shown to protect neu-
rons and glia in animals, but despite multiple human 
trials, they have not yet been proven to be beneficial. 
Hypothermia is a powerful neuroprotective treatment in 
patients with cardiac arrest (Chap. 28) and is neuroprotec-
tive in animal models of stroke, but it has not been ade-
quately studied in patients with ischemic stroke.
STROKE 
CENTERS 
AND 
REHABILITA-
TION Patient care in comprehensive stroke units 
followed by rehabilitation services improves neuro-
logic outcomes and reduces mortality. Use of clinical 
pathways and staff dedicated to the stroke patient can 
improve care. Stroke teams that provide emergency 
24-h evaluation of acute stroke patients for acute medi-
cal management and consideration of thrombolysis or 
endovascular treatments are essential components of 
primary and comprehensive stroke centers, respectively.
Proper rehabilitation of the stroke patient includes 
early physical, occupational, and speech therapy. It 
is directed toward educating the patient and family 
about the patient’s neurologic deficit, preventing the 
complications of immobility (e.g., pneumonia, DVT and 
pulmonary embolism, pressure sores of the skin, and 
muscle contractures), and providing encouragement 
and instruction in overcoming the deficit. The goal of 
rehabilitation is to return the patient to home and to 
maximize recovery by providing a safe, progressive regi-
men suited to the individual patient. Additionally, the 
use of restraint therapy (immobilizing the unaffected 
side) has been shown to improve hemiparesis following 
stroke, even years following the stroke, suggesting that 
physical therapy can recruit unused neural pathways. 
This finding suggests that the human nervous system is 
more adaptable than originally thought and has stimu-
lated active research into physical and pharmacologic 
strategies that can enhance long-term neural recovery.
ETIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
(Figs. 27-1 and 27-3 and Table 27-2) Although the 
initial management of AIS often does not depend on 
the etiology, establishing a cause is essential in reduc-
ing the risk of recurrence. Particular focus should be 
on atrial ﬁbrillation and carotid atherosclerosis, as these 
etiologies have proven secondary prevention strategies. 
The clinical presentation and examination ﬁndings often 
establish the cause of stroke or narrow the possibilities 
to a few. Judicious use of laboratory testing and imag-
ing studies completes the initial evaluation. Neverthe-
less, nearly 30% of strokes remain unexplained despite 
extensive evaluation.
Clinical examination should focus on the periph-
eral and cervical vascular system (carotid auscultation for 
bruits, blood pressure, and pressure comparison between 
arms), the heart (dysrhythmia, murmurs), extremities 
(peripheral emboli), and retina (effects of hypertension 
and cholesterol emboli [Hollenhorst plaques]). A com-
plete neurologic examination is performed to localize 
the site of stroke. An imaging study of the brain is nearly 
always indicated and is required for patients being con-
sidered for thrombolysis; it may be combined with CT- 
or MRI-based angiography to interrogate the neck and 
intracranial vessels (see “Imaging Studies”). A chest x-ray, 
electrocardiogram (ECG), urinalysis, complete blood 
count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), serum elec-
trolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, blood 
sugar, serologic test for syphilis, serum lipid proﬁle, pro-
thrombin time (PT), and partial thromboplastin time 
(PTT) are often useful and should be considered in all 
patients. An ECG may demonstrate arrhythmias or reveal 
evidence of recent myocardial infarction (MI).
Cardioembolic stroke
Cardioembolism is responsible for ∼20% of all ischemic 
strokes. Stroke caused by heart disease is primarily due 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
262
to embolism of thrombotic material forming on the 
atrial or ventricular wall or the left heart valves. These 
thrombi then detach and embolize into the arterial cir-
culation. The thrombus may fragment or lyse quickly, 
producing only a TIA. Alternatively, the arterial occlu-
sion may last longer, producing stroke. Embolic strokes 
tend to be sudden in onset, with maximum neuro-
logic deﬁcit at once. With reperfusion following more 
prolonged ischemia, petechial hemorrhage can occur 
within the ischemic territory. This is usually of no clini-
cal signiﬁcance and should be distinguished from frank 
intracranial hemorrhage into a region of ischemic stroke 
where the mass effect from the hemorrhage can cause a 
decline in neurologic function.
Emboli from the heart most often lodge in the 
MCA, the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), or one of 
their branches; infrequently, the anterior cerebral artery 
(ACA) territory is involved. Emboli large enough to 
occlude the stem of the MCA (3–4 mm) lead to large 
infarcts that involve both deep gray and white matter 
and some portions of the cortical surface and its under-
lying white matter. A smaller embolus may occlude 
a small cortical or penetrating arterial branch. The 
location and size of an infarct within a vascular territory 
depend on the extent of the collateral circulation.
The most signiﬁcant causes of cardioembolic stroke 
in most of the world are nonrheumatic (often called 
nonvalvular) atrial ﬁbrillation, MI, prosthetic valves, 
rheumatic heart disease, and ischemic cardiomyopathy 
(Table  27-2). Cardiac disorders causing brain embolism 
are discussed in the respective chapters on heart diseases. 
A few pertinent aspects are highlighted here.
Nonrheumatic atrial ﬁbrillation is the most com-
mon cause of cerebral embolism overall. The presumed 
stroke mechanism is thrombus formation in the ﬁbrillat-
ing atrium or atrial appendage, with subsequent embo-
lization. Patients with atrial ﬁbrillation have an average 
annual risk of stroke of ∼5%. The risk of stroke can be 
estimated by calculating the CHADS2 score (see Table 
27-3). Left atrial enlargement is an additional risk factor 
for formation of atrial thrombi. Rheumatic heart dis-
ease usually causes ischemic stroke when there is promi-
nent mitral stenosis or atrial ﬁbrillation. Recent MI may 
be a source of emboli, especially when transmural and 
involving the anteroapical ventricular wall, and prophy-
lactic anticoagulation following MI has been shown to 
Left ventricular
thrombi
Valve disease
Atrial fibrillation
Flow
reducing
carotid
stenosis
External
carotid
Common
carotid
Internal
carotid
Cardiogenic
emboli
Carotid
plaque with
arteriogenic
emboli
Intracranial
atherosclerosis
Penetrating
artery disease
A
B
C
FIGURE 27-3 
Pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. A. Diagram illus-
trating the three major mechanisms that underlie ischemic 
stroke: (1) occlusion of an intracranial vessel by an embolus 
that arises at a distant site (e.g., cardiogenic sources such 
as atrial ﬁbrillation or artery-to-artery emboli from carotid 
atherosclerotic plaque), often affecting the large intracranial 
vessels; (2) in situ thrombosis of an intracranial vessel, typi-
cally affecting the small penetrating arteries that arise from 
the major intracranial arteries; and (3) hypoperfusion caused 
by ﬂow-limiting stenosis of a major extracranial (e.g., internal 
carotid) or intracranial vessel, often producing “watershed” 
ischemia. B and C. Diagram and reformatted CT angiogram 
of the common, internal, and external carotid arteries. High-
grade stenosis of the internal carotid artery, which may be 
associated with either cerebral emboli or ﬂow-limiting isch-
emia, was identiﬁed in this patient.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
263
reduce stroke risk. Mitral valve prolapse is not usually a 
source of emboli unless the prolapse is severe.
Paradoxical embolization occurs when venous thrombi 
migrate to the arterial circulation, usually via a patent 
foramen ovale or atrial septal defect. Bubble-contrast echo-
cardiography (IV injection of agitated saline coupled with 
either transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiography) 
can demonstrate a right-to-left cardiac shunt, revealing 
the conduit for paradoxical embolization. Alternatively, 
a right-to-left shunt is implied if immediately following 
IV injection of agitated saline, the ultrasound signature of 
bubbles is observed during transcranial Doppler insonation 
of the MCA; pulmonary AVMs should be considered if 
this test is positive yet an echocardiogram fails to reveal 
an intracardiac shunt. Both techniques are highly sensitive 
for detection of right-to-left shunts. Besides venous clot, 
fat and tumor emboli, bacterial endocarditis, IV air, and 
amniotic ﬂuid emboli at childbirth may occasionally be 
responsible for paradoxical embolization. The importance 
of right-to-left shunt as a cause of stroke is debated, partic-
ularly because such shunts are present in ∼15% of the gen-
eral population. Some studies have suggested that the risk 
is only elevated in the presence of a coexisting atrial septal 
aneurysm. The presence of a venous source of embolus, 
most commonly a deep venous thrombus, may provide 
conﬁrmation of the importance of a right-to-left shunt in 
a particular case.
Bacterial endocarditis can cause valvular vegetations 
that can give rise to septic emboli. The appearance of 
multifocal symptoms and signs in a patient with stroke 
makes bacterial endocarditis more likely. Infarcts of 
microscopic size occur, and large septic infarcts may 
evolve into brain abscesses or cause hemorrhage into 
the infarct, which generally precludes use of antico-
agulation or thrombolytics. Mycotic aneurysms caused 
by septic emboli give rise to SAH or intracerebral 
hemorrhage.
Artery-to-artery embolic stroke
Thrombus formation on atherosclerotic plaques may 
embolize to intracranial arteries producing an artery-to-
artery embolic stroke. Less commonly, a diseased vessel 
may acutely thrombose. Unlike the myocardial vessels, 
artery-to-artery embolism, rather than local thrombosis, 
appears to be the dominant vascular mechanism causing 
brain ischemia. Any diseased vessel may be an embolic 
source, including the aortic arch, common carotid, 
internal carotid, vertebral, and basilar arteries. Carotid 
bifurcation atherosclerosis is the most common source 
of artery-to-artery embolus, and speciﬁc treatments 
have proven efﬁcacy in reducing risk.
Carotid atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis within the carotid artery occurs most 
frequently within the common carotid bifurcation 
and proximal internal carotid artery. Additionally, the 
carotid siphon (portion within the cavernous sinus) is 
TABLE 27-2
CAUSES OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
COMMON CAUSES
UNCOMMON CAUSES
Thrombosis
 Lacunar stroke (small 
vessel)
 Large vessel thrombosis
 Dehydration
Embolic occlusion
 Artery-to-artery
  Carotid bifurcation
  Aortic arch
  Arterial dissection
 Cardioembolic
  Atrial ﬁbrillation
  Mural thrombus
  Myocardial infarction
  Dilated cardiomyopathy
  Valvular lesions
   Mitral stenosis
   Mechanical valve
   Bacterial endocarditis
  Paradoxical embolus
   Atrial septal defect
   Patent foramen ovale
  Atrial septal aneurysm
  Spontaneous echo 
contrast
Hypercoagulable disorders
 Protein C deﬁciency
 Protein S deﬁciency
 Antithrombin III deﬁciency
 Antiphospholipid syndrome
 Factor V Leiden mutationa
 Prothrombin G20210 
mutationa
 Systemic malignancy
 Sickle cell anemia
 β-Thalassemia
 Polycythemia vera
 Systemic lupus erythema-
tosus
 Homocysteinemia
 Thrombotic thrombocyto-
penic purpura
 Disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation
 Dysproteinemias
 Nephrotic syndrome
 Inﬂammatory bowel dis-
ease
 Oral contraceptives
Venous sinus thrombosisb
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Vasculitis
 Systemic vasculitis (PAN, 
granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis [Wegener’s], 
Takayasu’s, giant cell 
arteritis)
 Primary CNS vasculitis
 Meningitis (syphilis, tuber-
culosis, fungal, bacte-
rial, zoster)
Cardiogenic
 Mitral valve calciﬁcation
 Atrial myxoma
 Intracardiac tumor
 Marantic endocarditis
 Libman-Sacks endocarditis
Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
vasospasm
Drugs: cocaine, amphet-
amine
Moyamoya disease
Eclampsia
aChieﬂy cause venous sinus thrombosis.
bMay be associated with any hypercoagulable disorder.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; PAN, polyarteritis 
nodosa.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
264
TABLE 27-3
RECOMMENDATIONS ON CHRONIC USE OF ANTITHROMBOTICS FOR VARIOUS CARDIAC CONDITIONS
CONDITION
RECOMMENDATION
Nonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation
Calculate CHADS2a score
• CHADS2 score 0
Aspirin or no antithrombotic
• CHADS2 score 1
Aspirin or VKA
• CHADS2 score >1
VKA
Rheumatic mitral valve disease
•  With atrial ﬁbrillation, previous embolization, or atrial appendage 
thrombus, or left atrial diameter >55 mm
VKA
• Embolization or appendage clot despite INR 2–3
VKA plus aspirin
Mitral valve prolapse
• Asymptomatic
No therapy
• With otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aspirin
• Atrial ﬁbrillation
VKA
Mitral annular calciﬁcation
•  Without atrial ﬁbrillation but systemic embolization, or otherwise  
cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aspirin
• Recurrent embolization despite aspirin
VKA
• With atrial ﬁbrillation
VKA
Aortic valve calciﬁcation
• Asymptomatic
No therapy
• Otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aspirin
Aortic arch mobile atheroma
• Otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aspirin or VKA
Patent foramen ovale
• Otherwise cryptogenic ischemic stroke or TIA
Aspirin
• Indication for VKA (deep venous thrombosis or hypercoagulable state)
VKA
Mechanical heart value
•  Aortic position, bileaﬂet or Medtronic Hall tilting disk with normal left 
atrial size and sinus rhythm
VKA INR 2.5, range 2–3
• Mitral position tilting disk or bileaﬂet valve
VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5
•  Mitral or aortic position, anterior-apical myocardial infarct or left atrial 
enlargement
VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5
•  Mitral or aortic position, with atrial ﬁbrillation, or hypercoagulable state, 
or low ejection fraction, or atherosclerotic vascular disease
Aspirin plus VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5
• Systemic embolization despite target INR
Add aspirin and/or increase INR: prior target was
2.5 increase to 3.0, range 2.5–3.5; prior target was
3.0 increase to 3.5, range 3–4
Bioprosthetic valve
• No other indication for VKA therapy
Aspirin
Infective endocarditis
Avoid antithrombotic agents
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis
• With systemic embolization
Full-dose unfractionated heparin or SC LMWH
aCHADS2 score calculated as follows: 1 point for age >75 years, 1 point for hypertension, 1 point for congestive heart failure, 1 point for diabe-
tes, and 2 points for stroke or TIA; sum of points is the total CHADS2 score.
Abbreviations: Dose of aspirin is 50–325 mg/d; target INR for VKA is 2.5 unless otherwise speciﬁed. INR, international normalized ratio; LMWH, 
low-molecular-weight heparin; TIA, transient ischemic attack; VKA, vitamin K antagonist.
Sources: Modiﬁed from DE Singer et al: Chest 133:546S, 2008; DN Salem et al: Chest 133:593S, 2008.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
265
also vulnerable to atherosclerosis. Male gender, older 
age, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and hypercholes-
terolemia are risk factors for carotid disease, as they are 
for stroke in general (Table 27-4). Carotid atheroscle-
rosis produces an estimated 10% of ischemic stroke. 
Carotid disease can be classiﬁed by whether the ste-
nosis is symptomatic or asymptomatic and by the degree 
of stenosis (percent narrowing of the narrowest segment 
compared to a more distal internal carotid segment). 
Symptomatic carotid disease implies that the patient has 
experienced a stroke or TIA within the vascular distri-
bution of the artery, and it is associated with a greater 
risk of subsequent stroke than asymptomatic stenosis, 
in which the patient is symptom free and the stenosis is 
detected through screening. Greater degrees of arterial 
narrowing are generally associated with a greater risk 
of stroke, except that those with near occlusions are at 
lower risk of stroke.
Other causes of artery-to-artery embolic stroke
Intracranial atherosclerosis produces stroke either by an 
embolic mechanism or by in situ thrombosis of a dis-
eased vessel. It is more common in patients of Asian 
and African-American descent. Recurrent stroke risk 
is ∼15% per year, similar to symptomatic untreated 
carotid atherosclerosis.
Dissection of the internal carotid or vertebral arter-
ies or even vessels beyond the circle of Willis is a com-
mon source of embolic stroke in young (age <60 years) 
patients. The dissection is usually painful and precedes 
the stroke by several hours or days. Extracranial dissec-
tions do not cause hemorrhage because of the tough 
adventitia of these vessels. Intracranial dissections, con-
versely, may produce SAH because the adventitia of 
intracranial vessels is thin and pseudoaneurysms may 
form, requiring urgent treatment to prevent rerupture. 
Treating asymptomatic pseudoaneurysms following dis-
section is controversial. The cause of dissection is usu-
ally unknown and recurrence is rare. Ehlers-Danlos 
type IV, Marfan’s disease, cystic medial necrosis, and 
ﬁbromuscular dysplasia are associated with dissections. 
Trauma (usually a motor vehicle accident or a sports 
injury) can cause carotid and vertebral artery dissections. 
Spinal manipulative therapy is independently associated 
with vertebral artery dissection and stroke. Most dissec-
tions heal spontaneously, and stroke or TIA is uncom-
mon beyond 2 weeks. Although there are no trials 
comparing anticoagulation to antiplatelet agents, many 
physicians treat acutely with anticoagulants then convert 
to antiplatelet therapy after demonstration of satisfactory 
vascular recanalization.
SMALL-VESSEL STROKE
The term lacunar infarction refers to infarction follow-
ing atherothrombotic or lipohyalinotic occlusion of a 
small artery (30–300 μm) in the brain. The term small-
vessel stroke denotes occlusion of such a small penetrat-
ing artery and is now the preferred term. Small-vessel 
strokes account for ∼20% of all strokes.
Pathophysiology
The MCA stem, the arteries comprising the circle of 
Willis (A1 segment, anterior and posterior communicat-
ing arteries, and P1 segment), and the basilar and ver-
tebral arteries all give rise to 30- to 300-μm branches 
that penetrate the deep gray and white matter of the 
cerebrum or brainstem (Fig. 27-4). Each of these 
small branches can occlude either by atherothrom-
botic disease at its origin or by the development of 
TABLE 27-4
RISK FACTORS FOR STROKE
RISK FACTOR
RELATIVE 
RISK
RELATIVE RISK REDUCTION WITH 
TREATMENT
NUMBER NEEDED TO TREATa
PRIMARY 
PREVENTION
SECONDARY 
PREVENTION
Hypertension
2–5
38%
100–300
50–100
Atrial ﬁbrillation
1.8–2.9
68% warfarin, 21% aspirin
20–83
13
Diabetes
1.8–6
No proven effect
Smoking
1.8
50% at 1 year, baseline risk at 5 years’ 
postcessation
Hyperlipidemia
1.8–2.6
16–30%
560
230
Asymptomatic carotid stenosis
2.0
53%
85
N/A
Symptomatic carotid stenosis (70–99%)
65% at 2 years
N/A
12
Symptomatic carotid stenosis (50–69%)
29% at 5 years
N/A
77
aNumber needed to treat to prevent one stroke annually. Prevention of other cardiovascular outcomes is not considered here.
Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
266
lipohyalinotic thickening. Thrombosis of these vessels 
causes small infarcts that are referred to as lacunes (Latin 
for “lake” of ﬂuid noted at autopsy). These infarcts 
range in size from 3 mm to 2 cm in diameter. Hyper-
tension and age are the principal risk factors.
Clinical manifestations
The most common lacunar syndromes are the following: (1) 
pure motor hemiparesis from an infarct in the posterior limb 
of the internal capsule or basis pontis; the face, arm, and 
leg are almost always involved; (2) pure sensory stroke from 
an infarct in the ventral thalamus; (3) ataxic hemiparesis from 
an infarct in the ventral pons or internal capsule; and (4) 
dysarthria and a clumsy hand or arm due to infarction in the 
ventral pons or in the genu of the internal capsule.
Transient symptoms (small-vessel TIAs) may herald 
a small-vessel infarct; they may occur several times a 
day and last only a few minutes. Recovery from small-
vessel strokes tends to be more rapid and complete than 
recovery from large-vessel strokes; in some cases, how-
ever, there is severe permanent disability. Often, insti-
tution of combined antithrombotic treatments does not 
prevent eventual stroke in “stuttering lacunes.”
A large-vessel source (either thrombosis or embo-
lism) may manifest initially as a lacunar syndrome 
with small-vessel infarction. Therefore, the search for 
embolic sources (carotid and heart) should not be com-
pletely abandoned in the evaluation of these patients. 
Secondary prevention of lacunar stroke involves risk 
factor modiﬁcation, speciﬁcally reduction in blood 
Anterior cerebral a.
Anterior cerebral a.
Internal carotid a.
Basilar a.
Basilar a.
Vertebral a.
Vertebral a.
Internal
carotid a.
Middle cerebral a.
Deep branches
of the basilar a.
Middle cerebral a.
Deep branches of the
middle cerebral a.
FIGURE 27-4 
Diagrams and reformatted CT angiograms in the coronal 
section illustrating the deep penetrating arteries involved in 
small-vessel strokes. In the anterior circulation, small pen-
etrating arteries called lenticulostriates arise from the proxi-
mal portion of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries and 
supply deep subcortical structures (upper panels). In the 
posterior circulation, similar arteries arise directly from the 
vertebral and basilar arteries to supply the brainstem (lower 
panels). Occlusion of a single penetrating artery gives rise to 
a discrete area of infarct (pathologically termed a “lacune,” or 
lake). Note that these vessels are too small to be visualized 
on CT angiography.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
267
pressure (see “Primary and Secondary Prevention of 
Stroke and TIA”).
LESS COMMON CAUSES OF STROKE
(Table  27-2) Hypercoagulable disorders primarily cause 
increased risk of venous thrombosis and therefore may 
cause venous sinus thrombosis. Protein S deﬁciency and 
homocysteinemia may cause arterial thromboses as well. 
Systemic lupus erythematosus with Libman-Sacks endo-
carditis can be a cause of embolic stroke. These con-
ditions overlap with the antiphospholipid syndrome, 
which probably requires long-term anticoagulation to 
prevent further stroke.
Venous sinus thrombosis of the lateral or sagittal sinus 
or of small cortical veins (cortical vein thrombosis) 
occurs as a complication of oral contraceptive use, 
pregnancy and the postpartum period, inﬂammatory 
bowel disease, intracranial infections (meningitis), and 
dehydration. It is also seen with increased incidence 
in patients with laboratory-conﬁrmed thrombophilia 
(Table  27-2) including polycythemia, sickle cell ane-
mia, deﬁciencies of proteins C and S, factor V Leiden 
mutation (resistance to activated protein C), anti-
thrombin III deﬁciency, homocysteinemia, and the 
prothrombin G20210 mutation. Women who take 
oral contraceptives and have the prothrombin G20210 
mutation may be at particularly high risk for sinus 
thrombosis. Patients present with headache and may 
also have focal neurologic signs (especially parapare-
sis) and seizures. Often, CT imaging is normal unless 
an intracranial venous hemorrhage has occurred, but 
the venous sinus occlusion is readily visualized using 
MR- or CT-venography or conventional x-ray angi-
ography. With greater degrees of sinus thrombosis, 
the patient may develop signs of increased ICP and 
coma. Intravenous heparin, regardless of the presence 
of intracranial hemorrhage, has been shown to reduce 
morbidity and mortality, and the long-term outcome 
is generally good. Heparin prevents further thrombosis 
and reduces venous hypertension and ischemia. If an 
underlying hypercoagulable state is not found, many 
physicians treat with vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) 
for 3–6 months then convert to aspirin, depending on 
the degree of resolution of the venous sinus throm-
bus. Anticoagulation is often continued indeﬁnitely if 
thrombophilia is diagnosed.
Sickle cell anemia (SS disease) is a common cause of 
stroke in children. A subset of homozygous carriers of 
this hemoglobin mutation develop stroke in child-
hood, and this may be predicted by documenting high-
velocity blood ﬂow within the MCAs using transcranial 
Doppler ultrasonography. In children who are identi-
ﬁed to have high velocities, treatment with aggressive 
exchange transfusion dramatically reduces risk of stroke, 
and if exchange transfusion is ceased, their stroke rate 
increases again along with MCA velocities.
Fibromuscular dysplasia affects the cervical arteries 
and occurs mainly in women. The carotid or vertebral 
arteries show multiple rings of segmental narrowing 
alternating with dilatation. Occlusion is usually incom-
plete. The process is often asymptomatic but occasion-
ally is associated with an audible bruit, TIAs, or stroke. 
Involvement of the renal arteries is common and may 
cause hypertension. The cause and natural history of 
ﬁbromuscular dysplasia are unknown. TIA or stroke 
generally occurs only when the artery is severely nar-
rowed or dissects. Anticoagulation or antiplatelet ther-
apy may be helpful.
Temporal (giant cell) arteritis is a relatively com-
mon afﬂiction of elderly persons in which the exter-
nal carotid system, particularly the temporal arteries, 
undergo subacute granulomatous inﬂammation with 
giant cells. Occlusion of posterior ciliary arteries derived 
from the ophthalmic artery results in blindness in one or 
both eyes and can be prevented with glucocorticoids. It 
rarely causes stroke as the internal carotid artery is usu-
ally not inﬂamed. Idiopathic giant cell arteritis involving 
the great vessels arising from the aortic arch (Takayasu’s 
arteritis) may cause carotid or vertebral thrombosis; it is 
rare in the Western hemisphere.
Necrotizing (or granulomatous) arteritis, occurring alone 
or in association with generalized polyarteritis nodosa or 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), involves 
the distal small branches (<2 mm diameter) of the main 
intracranial arteries and produces small ischemic infarcts 
in the brain, optic nerve, and spinal cord. The cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid (CSF) often shows pleocytosis, and the pro-
tein level is elevated. Primary central nervous system vas-
culitis is rare; small or medium-sized vessels are usually 
affected, without apparent systemic vasculitis. The dif-
ferential diagnosis includes other inﬂammatory causes of 
vascular caliber change including infection (tubercular, 
fungal), sarcoidosis, angiocentric lymphoma, carcinoma-
tous meningitis, as well as noninﬂammatory causes such 
as atherosclerosis, emboli, connective tissue disease, 
vasospasm, migraine-associated vasculopathy, and drug-
associated causes. Some cases follow the postpartum 
period and are self-limited.
Patients with any form of vasculopathy may present 
with insidious progression of combined white and gray 
matter infarctions, prominent headache, and cognitive 
decline. Brain biopsy or high-resolution conventional 
x-ray angiography is usually required to make the diag-
nosis (Fig. 27-5). An inﬂammatory proﬁle found on 
lumbar puncture favors an inﬂammatory cause. In cases 
where inﬂammation is conﬁrmed, aggressive immu-
nosuppression with glucocorticoids, and often cyclo-
phosphamide, is usually necessary to prevent progres-
sion; a diligent investigation for infectious causes such 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
268
as tuberculosis is essential prior to immunosuppression. 
With prompt recognition and treatment, many patients 
can make an excellent recovery.
Drugs, in particular amphetamines and perhaps 
cocaine, may cause stroke on the basis of acute hyper-
tension or drug-induced vasculopathy. No data exist 
on the value of any treatment. Phenylpropanolamine 
has been linked with intracranial hemorrhage, as has 
cocaine and methamphetamine, perhaps related to a 
drug-induced vasculopathy. Moyamoya disease is a poorly 
understood occlusive disease involving large intracranial 
arteries, especially the distal internal carotid artery and 
the stem of the MCA and ACA. Vascular inﬂammation 
is absent. The lenticulostriate arteries develop a rich col-
lateral circulation around the occlusive lesion, which 
gives the impression of a “puff of smoke” (moyamoya 
in Japanese) on conventional x-ray angiography. Other 
collaterals include transdural anastomoses between the 
cortical surface branches of the meningeal and scalp 
arteries. The disease occurs mainly in Asian children 
or young adults, but the appearance may be identi-
cal in adults who have atherosclerosis, particularly in 
association with diabetes. Because of the occurrence of 
intracranial hemorrhage from rupture of the transdural 
and pial anastomotic channels, anticoagulation is risky. 
Breakdown of dilated lenticulostriate arteries may pro-
duce parenchymal hemorrhage, and progressive occlu-
sion of large surface arteries can occur, producing large-
artery distribution strokes. Surgical bypass of extracranial 
carotid arteries to the dura or MCAs may prevent stroke 
and hemorrhage.
Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy can occur in 
head injury, seizure, migraine, sympathomimetic drug 
use, eclampsia, and the postpartum period. The patho-
physiology is uncertain but likely involves widespread 
cerebral segmental vasoconstriction and cerebral edema. 
Patients complain of headache and manifest ﬂuctuat-
ing neurologic symptoms and signs, especially visual 
symptoms. Sometimes cerebral infarction ensues, but 
typically the clinical and imaging ﬁndings suggest that 
ischemia reverses completely. MRI ﬁndings are charac-
teristic, and conventional x-ray angiography may also be 
helpful in establishing the diagnosis.
Leukoaraiosis, or periventricular white matter disease, is 
the result of multiple small-vessel infarcts within the 
subcortical white matter. It is readily seen on CT or 
MRI scans as areas of white matter injury surrounding 
the ventricles and within the corona radiata. Areas of 
lacunar infarction are often seen also. The pathophysi-
ologic basis of the disease is lipohyalinosis of small pene-
trating arteries within the white matter, likely produced 
by chronic hypertension. Patients with periventricular 
white matter disease may develop a subcortical demen-
tia syndrome, depending on the amount of white mat-
ter infarction, and it is likely that this common form of 
dementia may be delayed or prevented with antihyper-
tensive medications (Chap. 29).
CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopa-
thy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopa-
thy) is an inherited disorder that presents as small-vessel 
strokes, progressive dementia, and extensive symmet-
ric white matter changes visualized by MRI. Approxi-
mately 40% of patients have migraine with aura, often 
manifest as transient motor or sensory deﬁcits. Onset is 
usually in the fourth or ﬁfth decade of life. This auto-
somal dominant condition is caused by one of several 
mutations in Notch-3, a member of a highly conserved 
gene family characterized by epidermal growth fac-
tor repeats in its extracellular domain. Other mono-
genic ischemic stroke syndromes include cerebral auto-
somal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts 
and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) and hereditary 
endotheliopathy, retinopathy, nephropathy, and stroke 
(HERNS). Fabry’s disease also produces both large-ves-
sel arteriopathy and small-vessel infarcts by an unknown 
mechanism.
TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACKS
TIAs are episodes of stroke symptoms that last only 
brieﬂy; the standard deﬁnition of duration is <24 h, 
but most TIAs last <1 h. The causes of TIA are simi-
lar to the causes of ischemic stroke, but because TIAs 
may herald stroke they are an important risk factor 
that should be considered separately. TIAs may arise 
from emboli to the brain or from in situ thrombosis of 
an intracranial vessel. With a TIA, the occluded blood 
vessel reopens and neurologic function is restored. 
However, infarcts of the brain do occur in 15–50% of 
TIAs even though neurologic signs and symptoms are 
absent. Newer deﬁnitions of TIA categorize those with 
FIGURE 27-5 
Cerebral angiogram from a 32-year-old male with central 
nervous system vasculopathy. Dramatic beading (arrows) 
typical of vasculopathy is seen.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
269
new infarct as having ischemic stroke rather than TIA 
regardless of symptom duration, but the vast majority of 
studies have used the standard, time-based deﬁnition.
In addition to the stroke syndromes discussed later, 
one speciﬁc TIA symptom should receive special 
notice. Amaurosis fugax, or transient monocular blind-
ness, occurs from emboli to the central retinal artery of 
one eye. This may indicate carotid stenosis as the cause 
or local ophthalmic artery disease.
The risk of stroke after a TIA is ∼10–15% in the 
ﬁrst 3 months, with most events occurring in the ﬁrst 
2 days. This risk can be directly estimated using the 
well-validated ABCD2 method (Table 27-5). There-
fore, urgent evaluation and treatment are justiﬁed. 
Since etiologies for stroke and TIA are identical, evalu-
ation for TIA should parallel that of stroke (Figs. 27-1 
and 27-3). The improvement characteristic of TIA 
is a contraindication to thrombolysis. However, since 
the risk of subsequent stroke in the ﬁrst few days after 
a TIA is high, the opportunity to give rtPA rapidly if 
a stroke occurs probably justiﬁes hospital admission for 
most patients. Acute antiplatelet therapy has not been 
tested speciﬁcally after TIA but is likely to be effective 
and is recommended. A large-scale trial of acute anti-
thrombotic treatment to prevent stroke following TIA 
is ongoing.
TREATMENT 
 Primary and Secondary Prevention of 
Stroke and TIA
GENERAL PRINCIPLES A number of medical 
and surgical interventions, as well as lifestyle modifica-
tions, are available for preventing stroke. Some of these 
can be widely applied because of their low cost and 
minimal risk; others are expensive and carry substantial 
risk but may be valuable for selected high-risk patients. 
Identification and control of modifiable risk factors is 
the best strategy to reduce the burden of stroke, and 
the total number of strokes could be reduced substan-
tially by these means (Table 27-4).
ATHEROSCLEROSIS RISK FACTORS Older 
age, family history of thrombotic stroke, diabetes mel-
litus, hypertension, tobacco smoking, abnormal blood 
cholesterol (particularly, low high-density lipoprotein 
[HDL] and/or high low-density lipoprotein [LDL]), and 
other factors are either proven or probable risk factors 
for ischemic stroke, largely by their link to atherosclerosis. 
Risk of stroke is much greater in those with prior stroke 
or TIA. Many cardiac conditions predispose to stroke, 
including atrial fibrillation and recent MI. Oral contracep-
tives and hormone replacement therapy increase stroke 
risk, and certain inherited and acquired hypercoagulable 
states predispose to stroke. Hypertension is the most 
significant of the risk factors; in general, all hypertension 
should be treated. The presence of known cerebrovascu-
lar disease is not a contraindication to treatment aimed 
at achieving normotension. Also, the value of treating 
systolic hypertension in older patients has been clearly 
established. Lowering blood pressure to levels below 
those traditionally defining hypertension appears to 
reduce the risk of stroke even further. Data are particu-
larly strong in support of thiazide diuretics and angioten-
sin-converting enzyme inhibitors.
Several trials have confirmed that statin drugs reduce 
the risk of stroke even in patients without elevated 
LDL or low HDL. The Stroke Prevention by Aggressive 
Reduction in Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) trial showed 
benefit in secondary stroke reduction for patients with 
recent stroke or TIA, who were prescribed atorvastatin, 
80 mg/d. The primary prevention trial, Justification for 
the Use of Statins in Prevention: An Intervention Trial 
Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JUPITER), found that patients 
TABLE 27-5
RISK OF STROKE FOLLOWING TIA: THE ABCD2 
SCORE
CLINICAL FACTOR
SCORE
A: Age v60 years
1
B: SBP >140 mmHg or DBP 
>90 mmHg
1
C: Clinical symptoms
Unilateral weakness
2
Speech disturbance with-
out weakness
1
D: Duration
  >60 min
2
  10–59 min
1
D: Diabetes (oral medica-
tions or insulin)
1
Total Score
Sum Each Category
ABCD2 Score Total
3-Month Rate of Stroke (%)a
0
0
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
8
5
12
6
17
7
22
aData ranges are from 5 cohorts.
Abbreviations: DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood 
pressure.
Source: SC Johnston et al: Validation and reﬁnement of score to 
predict very early stroke risk after transient ischaemic attack. Lancet 
369: 283, 2007.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
270
with low LDL (<130 mg/dL) caused by elevated C-reac-
tive protein benefitted by daily use of this statin. Pri-
mary stroke occurrence was reduced by 51% (hazard 
ratio 0.49, p = 0.004) and there was no increase in the 
rates of intracranial hemorrhage. Therefore, a statin 
should be considered in all patients with prior ischemic 
stroke. Tobacco smoking should be discouraged in all 
patients. Tight control of blood sugar in patients with 
type 2 diabetes lowers stroke risk MI and death of any 
cause, but no trial sufficiently powered to detect a sig-
nificant reduction in stroke has yet been performed. 
Statins, more aggressive blood pressure control, and 
pioglitazone (an agonist of peroxisome proliferator-acti-
vated receptor gamma) are effective.
ANTIPLATELET 
AGENTS Platelet antiaggre-
gation agents can prevent atherothrombotic events, 
including TIA and stroke, by inhibiting the formation of 
intraarterial platelet aggregates. These can form on dis-
eased arteries, induce thrombus formation, and occlude 
the artery or embolize into the distal circulation. Aspi-
rin, clopidogrel, and the combination of aspirin plus 
extended-release dipyridamole are the antiplatelet 
agents most commonly used for this purpose. Ticlopi-
dine has been largely abandoned because of its adverse 
effects but may be used as an alternative to clopidogrel.
Aspirin is the most widely studied antiplatelet 
agent. Aspirin acetylates platelet cyclooxygenase, 
which irreversibly inhibits the formation in platelets of 
thromboxane A2, a platelet aggregating and vasocon-
stricting prostaglandin. This effect is permanent and 
lasts for the usual 8-day life of the platelet. Paradoxi-
cally, aspirin also inhibits the formation in endothelial 
cells of prostacyclin, an antiaggregating and vasodi-
lating prostaglandin. This effect is transient. As soon 
as aspirin is cleared from the blood, the nucleated 
endothelial cells again produce prostacyclin. Aspirin 
in low doses given once daily inhibits the production 
of thromboxane A2 in platelets without substantially 
inhibiting prostacyclin formation. Higher doses of aspi-
rin have not been proven to be more effective than 
lower doses, and 50–325 mg/d of aspirin is generally 
recommended for stroke prevention.
Ticlopidine and clopidogrel block the adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP) receptor on platelets and thus pre-
vent the cascade resulting in activation of the glyco-
protein IIb/IIIa receptor that leads to fibrinogen binding 
to the platelet and consequent platelet aggregation. 
Ticlopidine is more effective than aspirin; however, it 
has the disadvantage of causing diarrhea, skin rash, and, 
in rare instances, neutropenia and thrombotic thrombo-
cytopenic purpura (TTP). Clopidogrel rarely causes TTP 
but does not cause neutropenia. The Clopidogrel versus 
Aspirin in Patients at Risk of Ischemic Events (CAPRIE) 
trial, which led to FDA approval, found that it was only 
marginally more effective than aspirin in reducing risk 
of stroke. The Management of Atherothrombosis with 
Clopidogrel in High-Risk Patients (MATCH) trial was a 
large multicenter, randomized double-blind study that 
compared clopidogrel in combination with aspirin to 
clopidogrel alone in the secondary prevention of TIA 
or stroke. The MATCH trial found no difference in TIA or 
stroke prevention with this combination, but did show 
a small but significant increase in major bleeding com-
plications (3% versus 1%). In the Clopidogrel for High 
Atherothrombotic Risk and Ischemic Stabilization, 
Management, and Avoidance (CHARISMA) trial, which 
included a subgroup of patients with prior stroke or TIA 
along with other groups at high risk of cardiovascular 
events, there was no benefit of clopidogrel combined 
with aspirin compared to aspirin alone. Thus, the use of 
clopidogrel in combination with aspirin is not recom-
mended for stroke prevention. However, these trials did 
not enroll patients immediately after the stroke or TIA, 
and the benefits of combination therapy were greater 
among those treated earlier, so it is possible that clopi-
dogrel combined with aspirin may be beneficial in this 
acute period. Ongoing studies are currently addressing 
this question.
Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet agent that inhibits 
the uptake of adenosine by a variety of cells, includ-
ing those of the vascular endothelium. The accumu-
lated adenosine is an inhibitor of aggregation. At least 
in part through its effects on platelet and vessel wall 
phosphodiesterases, dipyridamole also potentiates the 
antiaggregatory effects of prostacyclin and nitric oxide 
produced by the endothelium and acts by inhibiting 
platelet phosphodiesterase, which is responsible for 
the breakdown of cyclic AMP. The resulting elevation 
in cyclic AMP inhibits aggregation of platelets. Dipyri-
damole is erratically absorbed depending on stomach 
pH, but a newer formulation combines timed-release 
dipyridamole, 200 mg, with aspirin, 25 mg, and has 
better oral bioavailability. This combination drug was 
studied in three trials. The European Stroke Prevention 
Study (ESPS) II showed efficacy of both 50 mg/d of aspi-
rin and extended-release dipyridamole in preventing 
stroke, and a significantly better risk reduction when 
the two agents were combined. The ESPRIT (European/
Australasian Stroke Prevention in Reversible Ischaemia 
Trial) trial confirmed the ESPS-II results. This was an 
open-label, academic trial in which 2739 patients with 
stroke or TIA treated with aspirin were randomized to 
dipyridamole, 200 mg twice daily, or no dipyridamole. 
Primary outcome was the composite of death from all 
vascular causes, nonfatal stroke, nonfatal MI, or major 
bleeding complication. After 3.5 years of follow-up, 13% 
of patients on aspirin and dipyridamole and 16% on 
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
271
aspirin alone (hazard ratio 0.80, 95% confidence index 
[CI] 0.66–0.98) met the primary outcome. In the Preven-
tion Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes 
(PRoFESS) trial, the combination of extended-release 
dipyridamole and aspirin was compared directly with 
clopidogrel with and without the angiotensin receptor 
blocker telmisartan in a study of 20,332 patients. There 
were no differences in the rates of second stroke (9% 
each) or degree of disability in patients with median 
follow-up of 2.4 years. Telmisartan also had no effect 
on these outcomes. This suggests that these antiplate-
let regimens are similar, and also raises questions about 
default prescription of agents to block the angiotensin 
pathway in all stroke patients. The principal side effect 
of dipyridamole is headache. The combination cap-
sule of extended-release dipyridamole and aspirin is 
approved for prevention of stroke.
Many large clinical trials have demonstrated clearly 
that most antiplatelet agents reduce the risk of all 
important vascular atherothrombotic events (i.e., isch-
emic stroke, MI, and death due to all vascular causes) 
in patients at risk for these events. The overall relative 
reduction in risk of nonfatal stroke is about 25–30% and 
of all vascular events is about 25%. The absolute reduc-
tion varies considerably, depending on the particular 
patient’s risk. Individuals at very low risk for stroke seem 
to experience the same relative reduction, but their risks 
may be so low that the “benefit” is meaningless. Con-
versely, individuals with a 10–15% risk of vascular events 
per year experience a reduction to about 7.5–11%.
Aspirin is inexpensive, can be given in low doses, 
and could be recommended for all adults to prevent 
both stroke and MI. However, it causes epigastric dis-
comfort, gastric ulceration, and gastrointestinal hem-
orrhage, which may be asymptomatic or life threaten-
ing. Consequently, not every 40- or 50-year-old should 
be advised to take aspirin regularly because the risk of 
atherothrombotic stroke is extremely low and is out-
weighed by the risk of adverse side effects. Conversely, 
every patient who has experienced an atherothrom-
botic stroke or TIA and has no contraindication should 
be taking an antiplatelet agent regularly because the 
average annual risk of another stroke is 8–10%; another 
few percent will experience an MI or vascular death. 
Clearly, the likelihood of benefit far outweighs the risks 
of treatment.
The choice of antiplatelet agent and dose must bal-
ance the risk of stroke, the expected benefit, and the risk 
and cost of treatment. However, there are no definitive 
data, and opinions vary. Many authorities believe low-
dose (30–75 mg/d) and high-dose (650–1300 mg/d) 
aspirin are about equally effective. Some advocate very 
low doses to avoid adverse effects, and still others advo-
cate very high doses to be sure the benefit is maximal. 
Most physicians in North America recommend 81–325 
mg/d, while most Europeans recommend 50–100 mg. 
Clopidogrel or extended-release dipyridamole plus aspi-
rin are being increasingly recommended as first-line 
drugs for secondary prevention. Similarly, the choice of 
aspirin, clopidogrel, or dipyridamole plus aspirin must 
balance the fact that the latter are more effective than 
aspirin but the cost is higher, and this is likely to affect 
long-term patient adherence. The use of platelet aggre-
gation studies in individual patients taking aspirin is 
controversial because of limited data.
ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY AND EMBO-
LIC STROKE Several trials have shown that anti-
coagulation (INR range, 2–3) in patients with chronic 
nonvalvular (nonrheumatic) atrial fibrillation prevents 
cerebral embolism and is safe. For primary prevention 
and for patients who have experienced stroke or TIA, 
anticoagulation with a VKA reduces the risk by about 
67%, which clearly outweighs the 1–3% risk per year of 
a major bleeding complication. A recent randomized 
trial compared the new oral thrombin inhibitor dabi-
gatran to VKAs in a noninferiority trial to prevent stroke 
or systemic embolization in nonvalvular atrial fibrilla-
tion. Two doses of dabigatran were used: 110 mg/d and 
150 mg/d. Both dose tiers of dabigatran were noninfe-
rior to VKAs in preventing second stroke and systemic 
embolization, and the higher dose tier was superior 
(relative risk 0.66; 95% CI, 0.53 to 0.82; P < 0.001) and the 
rate of major bleeding was lower in the lower dose tier 
of dabigatran compared to VKAs. This drug is likely more 
convenient to take as no blood monitoring is required 
to titrate the dose and its effect is independent of oral 
intake of vitamin K. For patients who cannot take anti-
coagulant medications, clopidogrel plus aspirin was 
compared to aspirin alone in the Atrial Fibrillation Clopi-
dogrel Trial with Irbesartan for Prevention of Vascular 
Events (ACTIVE-A). Clopidogrel combined with aspirin 
was more effective than aspirin alone in preventing vas-
cular events, principally stroke, but increases the risk of 
major bleeding (relative risk 1.57, P < 0.001).
The decision to use anticoagulation for primary pre-
vention is based primarily on risk factors (Table 27-3). 
The history of a TIA or stroke tips the balance in favor 
of anticoagulation regardless of other risk factors. Since 
this risk factor is so important, many clinicians are per-
forming extended ambulatory monitoring to detect 
intermittent atrial fibrillation in otherwise cryptogenic 
stroke since its detection would shift toward prescrip-
tion of oral anticoagulation long term.
Because of the high annual stroke risk in untreated 
rheumatic heart disease with atrial fibrillation, primary 
prophylaxis against stroke has not been studied in a 
double-blind fashion. These patients generally should 
receive long-term anticoagulation.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
272
Anticoagulation also reduces the risk of embolism in 
acute MI. Most clinicians recommend a 3-month course 
of anticoagulation when there is anterior Q-wave infarc-
tion, substantial left ventricular dysfunction, congestive 
heart failure, mural thrombosis, or atrial fibrillation. VKAs 
are recommended long-term if atrial fibrillation persists.
Stroke secondary to thromboembolism is one of the 
most serious complications of prosthetic heart valve 
implantation. The intensity of anticoagulation and/or 
antiplatelet therapy is dictated by the type of prosthetic 
valve and its location.
If the embolic source cannot be eliminated, anticoag-
ulation should in most cases be continued indefinitely. 
Many neurologists recommend combining antiplatelet 
agents with anticoagulants for patients who “fail” anti-
coagulation (i.e., have another stroke or TIA).
ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY AND NON-
CARDIOGENIC STROKE Data do not support 
the use of long-term VKAs for preventing atherothrom-
botic stroke for either intracranial or extracranial cere-
brovascular disease. The Warfarin-Aspirin Reinfarction 
Stroke Study (WARSS) study found no benefit of war-
farin sodium (INR, 1.4–2.8) over aspirin, 325 mg, for 
secondary prevention of stroke but did find a slightly 
higher bleeding rate in the warfarin group. A recent 
European study confirmed this finding. The Warfarin-
Aspirin Symptomatic Intracranial Disease (WASID) study 
(see later) demonstrated no benefit of warfarin (INR, 
2–3) over aspirin in patients with symptomatic intra-
cranial atherosclerosis, and also found higher bleeding 
complications.
TREATMENT 
Carotid Atherosclerosis
Carotid atherosclerosis can be removed surgically (end-
arterectomy) or mitigated with endovascular stenting 
with or without balloon angioplasty. Anticoagulation 
has not been directly compared with antiplatelet ther-
apy for carotid disease.
SURGICAL THERAPY Symptomatic carotid stenosis 
was studied in the North American Symptomatic Carotid 
Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET) and the European Carotid 
Surgery Trial (ECST). Both showed a substantial benefit for 
surgery in patients with a stenosis of ≥70%. In NASCET, the 
average cumulative ipsilateral stroke risk at 2 years was 26% 
for patients treated medically and 9% for those receiving 
the same medical treatment plus a carotid endarterectomy. 
This 17% absolute reduction in the surgical group is a 65% 
relative risk reduction favoring surgery (Table 27-4). NASCET 
also showed a significant, although less robust, benefit 
for patients with 50–70% stenosis. ECST found harm for 
patients with stenosis <30% treated surgically.
A patient’s risk of stroke and possible benefit from 
surgery are related to the presence of retinal ver-
sus hemispheric symptoms, degree of arterial steno-
sis, extent of associated medical conditions (of note, 
NASCET and ECST excluded “high-risk” patients with 
significant cardiac, pulmonary, or renal disease), insti-
tutional surgical morbidity and mortality, timing of sur-
gery relative to symptoms, and other factors. A recent 
meta-analysis of the NASCET and ECST trials demon-
strated that endarterectomy is most beneficial when 
performed within 2 weeks of symptom onset. In addi-
tion, benefit is more pronounced in patients >75 years, 
and men appear to benefit more than women.
In summary, a patient with recent symptomatic 
hemispheric ischemia, high-grade stenosis in the appro-
priate internal carotid artery, and an institutional peri-
operative morbidity and mortality rate of ≤6% generally 
should undergo carotid endarterectomy. If the periop-
erative stroke rate is >6% for any particular surgeon, 
however, the benefits of carotid endarterectomy are 
questionable.
The indications for surgical treatment of asymptom-
atic carotid disease have been clarified by the results of 
the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS) 
and the Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST). 
ACAS randomized asymptomatic patients with ≥60% 
stenosis to medical treatment with aspirin or the same 
medical treatment plus carotid endarterectomy. The sur-
gical group had a risk over 5 years for ipsilateral stroke 
(and any perioperative stroke or death) of 5.1%, com-
pared to a risk in the medical group of 11%. While this 
demonstrates a 53% relative risk reduction, the absolute 
risk reduction is only 5.9% over 5 years, or 1.2% annually 
(Table 27-4). Nearly one-half of the strokes in the sur-
gery group were caused by preoperative angiograms. 
The recently published ACST randomized 3120 asymp-
tomatic patients with >60% carotid stenosis to endar-
terectomy or medical therapy. The 5-year risk of stroke 
in the surgical group (including perioperative stroke or 
death) was 6.4%, compared to 11.8% in the medically 
treated group (46% relative risk reduction and 5.4% 
absolute risk reduction).
In both ACAS and ACST, the perioperative complica-
tion rate was higher in women, perhaps negating any 
benefit in the reduction of stroke risk within 5 years. It 
is possible that with longer follow-up, a clear benefit 
in women will emerge. At present, carotid endarterec-
tomy in asymptomatic women remains particularly 
controversial.
In summary, the natural history of asymptomatic 
stenosis is a ∼2% per year stroke rate, while symptom-
atic patients experience a 13% per year risk of stroke. 
Whether to recommend carotid revascularization for 
an asymptomatic patient is somewhat controversial 
and depends on many factors, including patient prefer-
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
273
ence, degree of stenosis, age, gender, and comorbidi-
ties. Medical therapy for reduction of atherosclerosis 
risk factors, including cholesterol-lowering agents and 
antiplatelet medications, is generally recommended for 
patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis. As with 
atrial fibrillation, it is imperative to counsel the patient 
about TIAs so that therapy can be revised if symptoms 
develop.
ENDOVASCULAR THERAPY Balloon angioplasty 
coupled with stenting is being used with increasing fre-
quency to open stenotic carotid arteries and maintain their 
patency. These techniques can treat carotid stenosis not 
only at the bifurcation but also near the skull base and in 
the intracranial segments. The Stenting and Angioplasty 
with Protection in Patients at High Risk for Endarterectomy 
(SAPPHIRE) trial randomized high-risk patients (defined as 
patients with clinically significant coronary or pulmonary 
disease, contralateral carotid occlusion, restenosis after 
endarterectomy, contralateral laryngeal-nerve palsy, prior 
radical neck surgery or radiation, or age >80) with symp-
tomatic carotid stenosis >50% or asymptomatic stenosis 
>80% to either stenting combined with a distal emboli-
protection device or endarterectomy. The risk of death, 
stroke, or MI within 30 days and ipsilateral stroke or death 
within 1 year was 12.2% in the stenting group and 20.1% 
in the endarterectomy group (p = .055), suggesting that 
stenting is at the very least comparable to endarterectomy 
as a treatment option for this patient group at high risk of 
surgery. However, the outcomes with both interventions 
may not have been better than leaving the carotid stenoses 
untreated, particularly for the asymptomatic patients, and 
much of the benefit seen in the stenting group was due to 
a reduction in periprocedure MI. In 2010, the results of two 
randomized trials comparing stents to endarterectomy in 
low-risk patients were published. The Carotid Revasculariza-
tion Endarterectomy versus Stenting Trial (CREST) enrolled 
2502 patients with either asymptomatic or symptomatic 
stenosis. The 30-day risk of stroke was 4.1% in the stent 
group and 2.3% in the surgical group, but the 30-day risk 
of MI was 1.1% in the stent group and 2.3% in the surgery 
group, suggesting relative equivalence of risk between the 
procedures. At median follow-up of 2.5 years, the combined 
endpoint of stroke, MI, and death was the same (7.2% stent 
versus 6.8% surgery). The International Carotid Stenting 
(ICSS) trial randomized 1713 symptomatic patients to stents 
versus endarterectomy and found a different result: At 120 
days, the incidence of stroke, MI, or death was 8.5% in the 
stenting group versus 5.2% in the endarterectomy group 
(p = 0.006), and longer term follow-up is currently under 
way. Differences between trial designs, selection of stent, 
and operator experience may explain these important dif-
ferences. Until more data are available on both trials, there 
remains controversy as to who should receive a stent or 
have endarterectomy; it is likely that the procedures carry 
similar risks if performed by experienced physicians.
BYPASS SURGERY Extracranial-to-intracranial (EC-
IC) bypass surgery has been proven ineffective for athero-
sclerotic stenoses that are inaccessible to conventional 
carotid endarterectomy. However, a trial is under way to 
evaluate whether patients with decreased brain perfusion 
based on positron emission tomography (PET) imaging will 
benefit from EC-IC bypass.
INTRACRANIAL 
ATHEROSCLEROSIS The 
WASID trial randomized patients with symptomatic ste-
nosis (50–99%) of a major intracranial vessel to either 
high-dose aspirin (1300 mg/d) or warfarin (target INR, 
2.0–3.0), with a combined primary endpoint of ischemic 
stroke, brain hemorrhage, or death from vascular cause 
other than stroke. The trial was terminated early because 
of an increased risk of adverse events related to warfarin 
anticoagulation. With a mean follow-up of 1.8 years, the 
primary endpoint was seen in 22.1% in the aspirin group 
and 21.8% of the warfarin group. Death from any cause 
was seen in 4.3% of the aspirin group and 9.7% of the 
warfarin group; 3.2% of patients on aspirin experienced 
major hemorrhage, compared to 8.3% of patients taking 
warfarin.
Given the worrisome natural history of symptomatic 
intracranial atherosclerosis (in the aspirin arm of the 
WASID trial, 15% of patients experienced a stroke within 
the first year, despite current standard aggressive medi-
cal therapy), some centers treat symptomatic lesions 
with intracranial angioplasty and stenting. This inter-
vention is currently being compared to aspirin therapy 
in a prospective, randomized trial. It is unclear whether 
EC-IC bypass, or other grafting procedures of extracra-
nial blood supply to the pial arteries, are of value in such 
patients.
Dural Sinus Thrombosis Limited evidence exists 
to support short-term usage of anticoagulants, regard-
less of the presence of intracranial hemorrhage, for venous 
infarction following sinus thrombosis.
STROKE SYNDROMES
A careful history and neurologic examination can often 
localize the region of brain dysfunction; if this region 
corresponds to a particular arterial distribution, the pos-
sible causes responsible for the syndrome can be nar-
rowed. This is of particular importance when the 
patient presents with a TIA and a normal examination. 
For example, if a patient develops language loss and a 
right homonymous hemianopia, a search for causes 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
274
of left middle cerebral emboli should be performed. 
A ﬁnding of an isolated stenosis of the right internal 
carotid artery in that patient, for example, suggests an 
asymptomatic carotid stenosis, and the search for other 
causes of stroke should continue. The following sections 
describe the clinical ﬁndings of cerebral ischemia associ-
ated with cerebral vascular territories depicted in Figs. 
27-4, and 27-6 through 27-14. Stroke syndromes are 
divided into: (1) large-vessel stroke within the anterior 
circulation, (2) large-vessel stroke within the posterior 
circulation, and (3) small-vessel disease of either vascular 
bed.
Stroke within the anterior circulation
The internal carotid artery and its branches comprise 
the anterior circulation of the brain. These vessels can 
be occluded by intrinsic disease of the vessel (e.g., ath-
erosclerosis or dissection) or by embolic occlusion 
from a proximal source as discussed earlier. Occlusion 
of each major intracranial vessel has distinct clinical 
manifestations.
Middle cerebral artery
Occlusion of the proximal MCA or one of its major 
branches is most often due to an embolus (artery-to-
artery, cardiac, or of unknown source) rather than 
intracranial atherothrombosis. Atherosclerosis of the 
proximal MCA may cause distal emboli to the middle 
cerebral territory or, less commonly, may produce low-
ﬂow TIAs. Collateral formation via leptomeningeal 
vessels often prevents MCA stenosis from becoming 
symptomatic.
The cortical branches of the MCA supply the lateral 
surface of the hemisphere except for (1) the frontal pole 
and a strip along the superomedial border of the fron-
tal and parietal lobes supplied by the ACA, and (2) the 
lower temporal and occipital pole convolutions supplied 
by the PCA (Figs. 27-6, 27-7, 27-8, and 27-9).
The proximal MCA (M1 segment) gives rise to pen-
etrating branches (termed lenticulostriate arteries) that sup-
ply the putamen, outer globus pallidus, posterior limb 
of the internal capsule, the adjacent corona radiata, and 
most of the caudate nucleus (Fig.  27-6). In the sylvian 
ﬁssure, the MCA in most patients divides into superior 
and inferior divisions (M2 branches). Branches of the 
inferior division supply the inferior parietal and tempo-
ral cortex, and those from the superior division supply 
the frontal and superior parietal cortex (Fig.  27-7).
If the entire MCA is occluded at its origin (block-
ing both its penetrating and cortical branches) and the 
distal collaterals are limited, the clinical ﬁndings are 
contralateral hemiplegia, hemianesthesia, homonymous 
hemianopia, and a day or two of gaze preference to the 
ipsilateral side. Dysarthria is common because of facial 
weakness. When the dominant hemisphere is involved, 
global aphasia is present also, and when the nondomi-
nant hemisphere is affected, anosognosia, constructional 
apraxia, and neglect are found (Chap. 18).
Complete MCA syndromes occur most often when 
an embolus occludes the stem of the artery. Cortical 
collateral blood ﬂow and differing arterial conﬁgurations 
are probably responsible for the development of many 
partial syndromes. Partial syndromes may also be due to 
emboli that enter the proximal MCA without complete 
occlusion, occlude distal MCA branches, or fragment 
and move distally.
Partial syndromes due to embolic occlusion of a sin-
gle branch include hand, or arm and hand, weakness 
alone (brachial syndrome) or facial weakness with non-
ﬂuent (Broca) aphasia (Chap. 18), with or without arm 
weakness (frontal opercular syndrome). A combination 
of sensory disturbance, motor weakness, and nonﬂu-
ent aphasia suggests that an embolus has occluded the 
proximal superior division and infarcted large portions 
of the frontal and parietal cortices (Fig.  27-7). If a ﬂuent 
(Wernicke’s) aphasia occurs without weakness, the infe-
rior division of the MCA supplying the posterior part 
(temporal cortex) of the dominant hemisphere is prob-
ably involved. Jargon speech and an inability to com-
prehend written and spoken language are prominent 
features, often accompanied by a contralateral, hom-
onymous superior quadrantanopia. Hemineglect or spa-
tial agnosia without weakness indicates that the inferior 
Putamen
Internal 
capsule
Uncus
Claustrum
Caudate
Postcerebral a.
Deep branches of ant. cerebral a.
Deep branches of middle cerebral a.
Middle cerebral a.
Anterior cerebral a.
KEY
Anterior
cerebral a.
Internal carotid a.
Middle cerebral a.
FIGURE 27-6 
Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere in coronal section 
showing the territories of the major cerebral vessels that 
branch from the internal carotid arteries.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
275
division of the MCA in the nondominant hemisphere is 
involved.
Occlusion of a lenticulostriate vessel produces small-
vessel (lacunar) stroke within the internal capsule 
(Fig.  27-6). This produces pure motor stroke or sen-
sory-motor stroke contralateral to the lesion. Ischemia 
within the genu of the internal capsule causes primar-
ily facial weakness followed by arm then leg weakness 
as the ischemia moves posterior within the capsule. 
Alternatively, the contralateral hand may become ataxic 
and dysarthria will be prominent (clumsy hand, dysar-
thria lacunar syndrome). Lacunar infarction affecting 
the globus pallidus and putamen often has few clinical 
signs, but parkinsonism and hemiballismus have been 
reported.
Anterior cerebral artery
The ACA is divided into two segments: the precom-
munal (A1) circle of Willis, or stem, which connects the 
internal carotid artery to the anterior communicating 
KEY
Rolandic a.
Prerolandic a.
Sup. division
middle cerebral a.
Lateral 
orbitofrontal a.
Temporopolar a.
Inf. division
middle cerebral a.
Ant. temporal a.
Post. temporal a.
Angular a.
Post. parietal a.
Ant. parietal a.
Visual radiation
Broca's area
Sensory cortex
Auditory area
Contraversive
eye center
Wernicke's
aphasia area
Visual cortex
Motor cortex
FIGURE 27-7 
Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere, lateral aspect, show-
ing the branches and distribution of the middle cerebral 
artery and the principal regions of cerebral localization. Note 
the bifurcation of the middle cerebral artery into a superior 
and inferior division.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 Paralysis of the contralateral face, arm, and leg; sensory 
impairment over the same area (pinprick, cotton touch, vibra-
tion, position, two-point discrimination, stereognosis, tactile 
localization, barognosis, cutaneographia): Somatic motor 
area for face and arm and the ﬁbers descending from the leg 
area to enter the corona radiata and corresponding somatic 
sensory system
 Motor aphasia: Motor speech area of the dominant hemi-
sphere
 Central aphasia, word deafness, anomia, jargon speech, 
sensory agraphia, acalculia, alexia, ﬁnger agnosia, right-left 
confusion (the last four comprise the Gerstmann syndrome): 
Central, suprasylvian speech area and parietooccipital cortex 
of the dominant hemisphere
 Conduction aphasia: Central speech area (parietal operculum)
 Apractagnosia of the nondominant hemisphere, anosog-
nosia, hemiasomatognosia, unilateral neglect, agnosia for 
the left half of external space, dressing “apraxia,” con-
structional “apraxia,” distortion of visual coordinates, inac-
curate localization in the half ﬁeld, impaired ability to judge 
distance, upside-down reading, visual illusions (e.g., it may 
appear that another person walks through a table): Non-
dominant parietal lobe (area corresponding to speech area in 
dominant hemisphere); loss of topographic memory is usually 
due to a nondominant lesion, occasionally to a dominant one
 Homonymous hemianopia (often homonymous inferior 
quadrantanopia): Optic radiation deep to second temporal 
convolution
 Paralysis of conjugate gaze to the opposite side: Frontal 
contraversive eye ﬁeld or projecting ﬁbers
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
276
artery, and the postcommunal (A2) segment distal to 
the anterior communicating artery (Figs. 27-4, 27-6, 
and 27-8). The A1 segment gives rise to several deep 
penetrating branches that supply the anterior limb of the 
internal capsule, the anterior perforate substance, amyg-
dala, anterior hypothalamus, and the inferior part of the 
head of the caudate nucleus (Fig.  27-6).
Occlusion of the proximal ACA is usually well toler-
ated because of collateral ﬂow through the anterior com-
municating artery and collaterals through the MCA and 
PCA. Occlusion of a single A2 segment results in the 
contralateral symptoms noted in Fig. 27-8. If both A2 
segments arise from a single anterior cerebral stem (con-
tralateral A1 segment atresia), the occlusion may affect 
both hemispheres. Profound abulia (a delay in verbal and 
motor response) and bilateral pyramidal signs with para-
paresis or quadriparesis and urinary incontinence result.
Anterior choroidal artery
This artery arises from the internal carotid artery and 
supplies the posterior limb of the internal capsule and 
the white matter posterolateral to it, through which pass 
some of the geniculocalcarine ﬁbers (Fig.  27-9). The 
complete syndrome of anterior choroidal artery occlu-
sion consists of contralateral hemiplegia, hemianesthesia 
(hypesthesia), and homonymous hemianopia. However, 
because this territory is also supplied by penetrating ves-
sels of the proximal MCA and the posterior communi-
cating and posterior choroidal arteries, minimal deﬁcits 
may occur, and patients frequently recover substantially. 
Anterior choroidal strokes are usually the result of in 
situ thrombosis of the vessel, and the vessel is particu-
larly vulnerable to iatrogenic occlusion during surgical 
clipping of aneurysms arising from the internal carotid 
artery.
Internal carotid artery
The clinical picture of internal carotid occlusion varies 
depending on whether the cause of ischemia is propa-
gated thrombus, embolism, or low ﬂow. The cortex 
supplied by the MCA territory is affected most often. 
With a competent circle of Willis, occlusion may go 
Secondary
motor area
Medial
prerolandic a.
Callosomarginal a.
Frontopolar a.
Medial orbitofrontal a.
Ant. cerebral a.
Post. communicating a.
Penetrating
thalamosubthalamic
paramedian As.
Calcarine a.
Parietooccipital a. 
Medial posterior choroidal a.
Pericallosal a.
Post. 
parietal a.
Splenial a.
Post. thalamic a.
Lateral posterior
choroidal a.
Post. temporal a.
Ant.
temporal a.
Post. 
cerebral 
stem
Visual
cortex
Sensory
cortex
Motor
cortex
Hippocampal As.
Medial 
rolandic a.
Striate area 
along calcarine
sulcus
FIGURE 27-8 
Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere, medial aspect, show-
ing the branches and distribution of the anterior cerebral 
artery and the principal regions of cerebral localization.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 Paralysis of opposite foot and leg: Motor leg area
 A lesser degree of paresis of opposite arm: Arm area of 
cortex or ﬁbers descending to corona radiata
 Cortical sensory loss over toes, foot, and leg: Sensory area 
for foot and leg
 Urinary incontinence: Sensorimotor area in paracentral 
lobule
 Contralateral grasp reﬂex, sucking reﬂex, gegenhalten 
(paratonic rigidity): Medial surface of the posterior frontal 
lobe; likely supplemental motor area
 Abulia (akinetic mutism), slowness, delay, intermittent 
interruption, lack of spontaneity, whispering, reﬂex distrac-
tion to sights and sounds: Uncertain localization—probably 
cingulate gyrus and medial inferior portion of frontal, parietal, 
and temporal lobes
 Impairment of gait and stance (gait apraxia): Frontal cortex 
near leg motor area
 Dyspraxia of left limbs, tactile aphasia in left limbs: Corpus 
callosum
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
277
unnoticed. If the thrombus propagates up the internal 
carotid artery into the MCA or embolizes it, symptoms 
are identical to proximal MCA occlusion (see earlier). 
Sometimes there is massive infarction of the entire deep 
white matter and cortical surface. When the origins of 
both the ACA and MCA are occluded at the top of the 
carotid artery, abulia or stupor occurs with hemiplegia, 
hemianesthesia, and aphasia or anosognosia. When the 
PCA arises from the internal carotid artery (a conﬁgu-
ration called a fetal posterior cerebral artery), it may also 
become occluded and give rise to symptoms referable to 
its peripheral territory (Figs. 27-8 and 27-9).
In addition to supplying the ipsilateral brain, the inter-
nal carotid artery perfuses the optic nerve and retina via 
the ophthalmic artery. In ∼25% of symptomatic internal 
carotid disease, recurrent transient monocular blindness 
(amaurosis fugax) warns of the lesion. Patients typically 
describe a horizontal shade that sweeps down or up across 
the ﬁeld of vision. They may also complain that their 
vision was blurred in that eye or that the upper or lower 
half of vision disappeared. In most cases, these symptoms 
last only a few minutes. Rarely, ischemia or infarction of 
the ophthalmic artery or central retinal arteries occurs at 
the time of cerebral TIA or infarction.
A high-pitched prolonged carotid bruit fading into 
diastole is often associated with tightly stenotic lesions. 
As the stenosis grows tighter and ﬂow distal to the ste-
nosis becomes reduced, the bruit becomes fainter and 
may disappear when occlusion is imminent.
Common carotid artery
All symptoms and signs of internal carotid occlusion 
may also be present with occlusion of the common 
carotid artery. Jaw claudication may result from low 
ﬂow in the external carotid branches. Bilateral common 
carotid artery occlusions at their origin may occur in 
Takayasu’s arteritis.
Stroke within the posterior circulation
The posterior circulation is composed of the paired ver-
tebral arteries, the basilar artery, and the paired poste-
rior cerebral arteries. The vertebral arteries join to form 
the basilar artery at the pontomedullary junction. The 
basilar artery divides into two posterior cerebral arter-
ies in the interpeduncular fossa (Figs. 27-4, 27-8, and 
27-9). These major arteries give rise to long and short 
circumferential branches and to smaller deep penetrat-
ing branches that supply the cerebellum, medulla, pons, 
midbrain, subthalamus, thalamus, hippocampus, and 
medial temporal and occipital lobes. Occlusion of each 
vessel produces its own distinctive syndrome.
Posterior cerebral artery
In 75% of cases, both PCAs arise from the bifurcation 
of the basilar artery; in 20%, one has its origin from 
Ant. cerebral a.
Post. 
communicating a.
Post. cerebral a.
Medial posterior
choroidal a.
Ant. temporal a.
Hippocampal a.
Post. temporal a.
Post. thalamic a.
Lateral posterior 
choroidal a. 
Visual
cortex
Internal 
carotid a.
Ant. 
choroidal a.
Mesencephalic
paramedian As.
Splenial a.
Parietooccipital a.
Calcarine a.
FIGURE 27-9 
Inferior aspect of the brain with the branches and distribution 
of the posterior cerebral artery and the principal anatomic struc-
tures shown.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 Peripheral territory (see also Fig. 27-12). Homonymous hemi-
anopia (often upper quadrantic): Calcarine cortex or optic radia-
tion nearby. Bilateral homonymous hemianopia, cortical blindness, 
awareness or denial of blindness; tactile naming, achromatopia 
(color blindness), failure to see to-and-fro movements, inability 
to perceive objects not centrally located, apraxia of ocular move-
ments, inability to count or enumerate objects, tendency to run into 
things that the patient sees and tries to avoid: Bilateral occipital 
lobe with possibly the parietal lobe involved. Verbal dyslexia with-
out agraphia, color anomia: Dominant calcarine lesion and poste-
rior part of corpus callosum. Memory defect: Hippocampal lesion 
bilaterally or on the dominant side only. Topographic disorientation 
and prosopagnosia: Usually with lesions of nondominant, calcarine, 
and lingual gyrus. Simultanagnosia, hemivisual neglect: Dominant 
visual cortex, contralateral hemisphere. Unformed visual hallucina-
tions, peduncular hallucinosis, metamorphopsia, teleopsia, illusory 
visual spread, palinopsia, distortion of outlines, central photopho-
bia: Calcarine cortex. Complex hallucinations: Usually nondominant 
hemisphere.
 Central territory. Thalamic syndrome: sensory loss (all modali-
ties), spontaneous pain and dysesthesias, choreoathetosis, inten-
tion tremor, spasms of hand, mild hemiparesis: Posteroventral 
nucleus of thalamus; involvement of the adjacent subthalamus 
body or its afferent tracts. Thalamoperforate syndrome: crossed 
cerebellar ataxia with ipsilateral third nerve palsy (Claude’s syn-
drome): Dentatothalamic tract and issuing third nerve. Weber’s 
syndrome: third nerve palsy and contralateral hemiplegia: Third 
nerve and cerebral peduncle. Contralateral hemiplegia: Cerebral 
peduncle. Paralysis or paresis of vertical eye movement, skew 
deviation, sluggish pupillary responses to light, slight miosis and 
ptosis (retraction nystagmus and “tucking” of the eyelids may be 
associated): Supranuclear ﬁbers to third nerve, interstitial nucleus 
of Cajal, nucleus of Darkschewitsch, and posterior commissure. 
Contralateral rhythmic, ataxic action tremor; rhythmic postural or 
“holding” tremor (rubral tremor): Dentatothalamic tract.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
278
the ipsilateral internal carotid artery via the posterior 
communicating artery; in 5%, both originate from the 
respective ipsilateral internal carotid arteries (Figs. 27-8 
and 27-9). The precommunal, or P1, segment of the 
true posterior cerebral artery is atretic in such cases.
PCA syndromes usually result from atheroma forma-
tion or emboli that lodge at the top of the basilar artery; 
posterior circulation disease may also be caused by dis-
section of either vertebral artery and ﬁbromuscular 
dysplasia.
Two clinical syndromes are commonly observed 
with occlusion of the PCA: (1) P1 syndrome: midbrain, 
subthalamic, and thalamic signs, which are due to dis-
ease of the proximal P1 segment of the PCA or its pen-
etrating branches (thalamogeniculate, Percheron, and 
posterior choroidal arteries); and (2) P2 syndrome: corti-
cal temporal and occipital lobe signs, due to occlusion 
of the P2 segment distal to the junction of the PCA 
with the posterior communicating artery.
P1 syndromes
Infarction usually occurs in the ipsilateral subthala-
mus and medial thalamus and in the ipsilateral cerebral 
peduncle and midbrain (Figs. 27-9 and 27-14). A third 
nerve palsy with contralateral ataxia (Claude’s syn-
drome) or with contralateral hemiplegia (Weber’s syn-
drome) may result. The ataxia indicates involvement 
of the red nucleus or dentatorubrothalamic tract; the 
hemiplegia is localized to the cerebral peduncle (Fig. 
2 7-14). If the subthalamic nucleus is involved, con-
tralateral hemiballismus may occur. Occlusion of the 
artery of Percheron produces paresis of upward gaze 
and drowsiness, and often abulia. Extensive infarction in 
the midbrain and subthalamus occurring with bilateral 
proximal PCA occlusion presents as coma, unreactive 
pupils, bilateral pyramidal signs, and decerebrate rigidity.
Occlusion of the penetrating branches of thalamic 
and thalamogeniculate arteries produces less extensive 
thalamic and thalamocapsular lacunar syndromes. The 
thalamic Déjérine-Roussy syndrome consists of contralateral 
hemisensory loss followed later by an agonizing, searing 
or burning pain in the affected areas. It is persistent and 
responds poorly to analgesics. Anticonvulsants (carbam-
azepine or gabapentin) or tricyclic antidepressants may 
be beneﬁcial.
P2 syndromes
(See also Figs. 27-8 and 27-9.) Occlusion of the dis-
tal PCA causes infarction of the medial temporal and 
occipital lobes. Contralateral homonymous hemiano-
pia with macula sparing is the usual manifestation. 
Occasionally, only the upper quadrant of visual ﬁeld is 
involved. If the visual association areas are spared and 
only the calcarine cortex is involved, the patient may be 
aware of visual defects. Medial temporal lobe and hip-
pocampal involvement may cause an acute disturbance 
in memory, particularly if it occurs in the dominant 
hemisphere. The defect usually clears because memory 
has bilateral representation. If the dominant hemisphere 
is affected and the infarct extends to involve the sple-
nium of the corpus callosum, the patient may demon-
strate alexia without agraphia. Visual agnosia for faces, 
objects, mathematical symbols, and colors and ano-
mia with paraphasic errors (amnestic aphasia) may also 
occur in this setting, even without callosal involvement. 
Occlusion of the posterior cerebral artery can produce 
peduncular hallucinosis (visual hallucinations of brightly 
colored scenes and objects).
Bilateral infarction in the distal PCAs produces cor-
tical blindness (blindness with preserved pupillary light 
reaction). The patient is often unaware of the blindness 
or may even deny it (Anton’s syndrome). Tiny islands 
of vision may persist, and the patient may report that 
vision ﬂuctuates as images are captured in the preserved 
portions. Rarely, only peripheral vision is lost and cen-
tral vision is spared, resulting in “gun-barrel” vision. 
Bilateral visual association area lesions may result in 
Balint’s syndrome, a disorder of the orderly visual scan-
ning of the environment (Chap. 18), usually resulting 
from infarctions secondary to low ﬂow in the “water-
shed” between the distal PCA and MCA territories, as 
occurs after cardiac arrest. Patients may experience per-
sistence of a visual image for several minutes despite 
gazing at another scene (palinopsia) or an inability to 
synthesize the whole of an image (asimultanagnosia). 
Embolic occlusion of the top of the basilar artery can 
produce any or all of the central or peripheral territory 
symptoms. The hallmark is the sudden onset of bilateral 
signs, including ptosis, pupillary asymmetry or lack of 
reaction to light, and somnolence.
 Vertebral and posterior inferior cerebellar 
arteries
The vertebral artery, which arises from the innominate 
artery on the right and the subclavian artery on the left, 
consists of four segments. The ﬁrst (V1) extends from 
its origin to its entrance into the sixth or ﬁfth transverse 
vertebral foramen. The second segment (V2) traverses 
the vertebral foramina from C6 to C2. The third (V3) 
passes through the transverse foramen and circles around 
the arch of the atlas to pierce the dura at the foramen 
magnum. The fourth (V4) segment courses upward to 
join the other vertebral artery to form the basilar artery; 
only the fourth segment gives rise to branches that sup-
ply the brainstem and cerebellum. The posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery (PICA) in its proximal segment sup-
plies the lateral medulla and, in its distal branches, the 
inferior surface of the cerebellum.
Atherothrombotic lesions have a predilection for 
V1 and V4 segments of the vertebral artery. The ﬁrst 
segment may become diseased at the origin of the ves-
sel and may produce posterior circulation emboli; 
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
279
collateral ﬂow from the contralateral vertebral artery or 
the ascending cervical, thyrocervical, or occipital arter-
ies is usually sufﬁcient to prevent low-ﬂow TIAs or 
stroke. When one vertebral artery is atretic and an ath-
erothrombotic lesion threatens the origin of the other, 
the collateral circulation, which may also include retro-
grade ﬂow down the basilar artery, is often insufﬁcient 
(Figs. 27-4 and 27-9). In this setting, low-ﬂow TIAs 
may occur, consisting of syncope, vertigo, and alternat-
ing hemiplegia; this state also sets the stage for throm-
bosis. Disease of the distal fourth segment of the verte-
bral artery can promote thrombus formation manifest as 
embolism or with propagation as basilar artery throm-
bosis. Stenosis proximal to the origin of the PICA can 
threaten the lateral medulla and posterior inferior sur-
face of the cerebellum.
If the subclavian artery is occluded proximal to the 
origin of the vertebral artery, there is a reversal in the 
direction of blood ﬂow in the ipsilateral vertebral artery. 
Exercise of the ipsilateral arm may increase demand on 
vertebral ﬂow, producing posterior circulation TIAs, or 
“subclavian steal.”
Although atheromatous disease rarely narrows the 
second and third segments of the vertebral artery, this 
region is subject to dissection, ﬁbromuscular dysplasia, 
and, rarely, encroachment by osteophytic spurs within 
the vertebral foramina.
Embolic occlusion or thrombosis of a V4 segment 
causes ischemia of the lateral medulla. The constellation 
of vertigo, numbness of the ipsilateral face and contra-
lateral limbs, diplopia, hoarseness, dysarthria, dysphagia, 
and ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome is called the lateral 
medullary (or Wallenberg’s) syndrome (Fig. 27-10). Most 
cases result from ipsilateral vertebral artery occlusion; in 
the remainder, PICA occlusion is responsible. Occlu-
sion of the medullary penetrating branches of the ver-
tebral artery or PICA results in partial syndromes. Hemi-
paresis is not a feature of vertebral artery occlusion; however, 
quadriparesis may result from occlusion of the anterior spinal 
artery.
Rarely, a medial medullary syndrome occurs with infarc-
tion of the pyramid and contralateral hemiparesis of the 
arm and leg, sparing the face. If the medial lemniscus and 
emerging hypoglossal nerve ﬁbers are involved, contra-
lateral loss of joint position sense and ipsilateral tongue 
weakness occur.
Cerebellar infarction with edema can lead to sud-
den respiratory arrest due to raised ICP in the posterior 
fossa. Drowsiness, Babinski signs, dysarthria, and bifacial 
weakness may be absent, or present only brieﬂy, before 
respiratory arrest ensues. Gait unsteadiness, headache, 
dizziness, nausea, and vomiting may be the only early 
symptoms and signs and should arouse suspicion of this 
impending complication, which may require neurosur-
gical decompression, often with an excellent outcome. 
Separating these symptoms from those of viral labyrin-
thitis can be a challenge, but headache, neck stiffness, 
and unilateral dysmetria favor stroke.
Basilar artery
Branches of the basilar artery supply the base of the pons 
and superior cerebellum and fall into three groups: (1) 
paramedian, 7–10 in number, which supply a wedge of 
pons on either side of the midline; (2) short circumfer-
ential, 5–7 in number, that supply the lateral two-thirds 
of the pons and middle and superior cerebellar peduncles; 
and (3) bilateral long circumferential (superior cerebel-
lar and anterior inferior cerebellar arteries), which course 
around the pons to supply the cerebellar hemispheres.
Atheromatous lesions can occur anywhere along 
the basilar trunk but are most frequent in the proximal 
basilar and distal vertebral segments. Typically, lesions 
occlude either the proximal basilar and one or both 
vertebral arteries. The clinical picture varies depend-
ing on the availability of retrograde collateral ﬂow from 
the posterior communicating arteries. Rarely, dissection 
of a vertebral artery may involve the basilar artery and, 
depending on the location of true and false lumen, may 
produce multiple penetrating artery strokes.
Although atherothrombosis occasionally occludes the 
distal portion of the basilar artery, emboli from the heart 
or proximal vertebral or basilar segments are more com-
monly responsible for “top of the basilar” syndromes.
Because the brainstem contains many structures in 
close apposition, a diversity of clinical syndromes may 
emerge with ischemia, reﬂecting involvement of the 
corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts, ascending sensory 
tracts, and cranial nerve nuclei (Figs. 27-11, 27-12, 
27-13, and 27-14).
The symptoms of transient ischemia or infarction in 
the territory of the basilar artery often do not indicate 
whether the basilar artery itself or one of its branches 
is diseased, yet this distinction has important implica-
tions for therapy. The picture of complete basilar occlusion, 
however, is easy to recognize as a constellation of bilateral long 
tract signs (sensory and motor) with signs of cranial nerve and 
cerebellar dysfunction. A “locked-in” state of preserved 
consciousness with quadriplegia and cranial nerve signs 
suggests complete pontine and lower midbrain infarc-
tion. The therapeutic goal is to identify impending basilar 
occlusion before devastating infarction occurs. A series 
of TIAs and a slowly progressive, ﬂuctuating stroke are 
extremely signiﬁcant, as they often herald an athero-
thrombotic occlusion of the distal vertebral or proximal 
basilar artery.
TIAs in the proximal basilar distribution may pro-
duce vertigo (often described by patients as “swimming,” 
“swaying,” “moving,” “unsteadiness,” or “light-headed-
ness”). Other symptoms that warn of basilar thrombosis 
include diplopia, dysarthria, facial or circumoral numbness, 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
280
and hemisensory symptoms. In general, symptoms of basi-
lar branch TIAs affect one side of the brainstem, whereas 
symptoms of basilar artery TIAs usually affect both sides, 
although a “herald” hemiparesis has been emphasized as 
an initial symptom of basilar occlusion. Most often TIAs, 
whether due to impending occlusion of the basilar artery 
or a basilar branch, are short lived (5–30 min) and repeti-
tive, occurring several times a day. The pattern suggests 
12th n. 
nucleus
Vestibular
nucleus
Restiform
body
Olivocerebellar
fibers
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Descending nucleus
and tract - 5th n.
Descending 
sympathetic
tract
Dorsal 
spinocerebellar tract
10th n.
Ventral
spinocerebellar tract
Spinothalamic tract
Medial lemniscus
Inferior olive
Nucleus ambiguus
– motor 9 +10
 Pyramid
12th n.
Medullary syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Tractus solitarius
with nucleus
Medulla
Cerebellum
FIGURE 27-10 
Axial section at the level of the medulla, depicted sche-
matically on the left, with a corresponding MR image on the 
right. Note that in Figs. 27-10 through 27-14, all drawings 
are oriented with the dorsal surface at the bottom, matching 
the orientation of the brainstem that is commonly seen in all 
modern neuroimaging studies. Approximate regions involved 
in medial and lateral medullary stroke syndromes are shown.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 1.  Medial medullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral 
artery or of branch of vertebral or lower basilar artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Paralysis with atrophy of one-half half the tongue: 
Ipsilateral twelfth nerve
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Paralysis of arm and leg, sparing face; impaired 
tactile and proprioceptive sense over one-half the 
body: Contralateral pyramidal tract and medial 
lemniscus
 2.  Lateral medullary syndrome (occlusion of any of ﬁve 
vessels may be responsible—vertebral, posterior infe-
rior cerebellar, superior, middle, or inferior lateral medul-
lary arteries)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Pain, numbness, impaired sensation over one-half 
the face: Descending tract and nucleus ﬁfth nerve
 
 Ataxia of limbs, falling to side of lesion: Uncertain—
restiform body, cerebellar hemisphere, cerebellar 
ﬁbers, spinocerebellar tract (?)
 
 Nystagmus, diplopia, oscillopsia, vertigo, nausea, 
vomiting: Vestibular nucleus
 
 Horner’s syndrome (miosis, ptosis, decreased 
sweating): Descending sympathetic tract
 
 Dysphagia, hoarseness, paralysis of palate, paraly-
sis of vocal cord, diminished gag reﬂex: Issuing 
ﬁbers ninth and tenth nerves
 
Loss of taste: Nucleus and tractus solitarius
 
 Numbness of ipsilateral arm, trunk, or leg: Cuneate 
and gracile nuclei
 
 Weakness of lower face: Genuﬂected upper motor 
neuron ﬁbers to ipsilateral facial nucleus
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Impaired pain and thermal sense over half the body, 
sometimes face: Spinothalamic tract
3.  Total unilateral medullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral 
artery): Combination of medial and lateral syndromes
4.  Lateral pontomedullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral 
artery): Combination of lateral medullary and lateral infe-
rior pontine syndrome
5.  Basilar artery syndrome (the syndrome of the lone ver-
tebral artery is equivalent): A combination of the various 
brainstem syndromes plus those arising in the posterior 
cerebral artery distribution.
 
 Bilateral long tract signs (sensory and motor; cerebellar 
and peripheral cranial nerve abnormalities): Bilateral long 
tract; cerebellar and peripheral cranial nerves
 
 Paralysis or weakness of all extremities, plus all bulbar 
musculature: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts bilat-
erally
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
281
intermittent reduction of ﬂow. Many neurologists treat 
with heparin to prevent clot propagation.
Atherothrombotic occlusion of the basilar artery with 
infarction usually causes bilateral brainstem signs. A gaze 
paresis or internuclear ophthalmoplegia associated with 
ipsilateral hemiparesis may be the only manifestation of 
bilateral brainstem ischemia. More often, unequivocal 
signs of bilateral pontine disease are present. Complete 
basilar thrombosis carries a high mortality.
Occlusion of a branch of the basilar artery usually causes 
unilateral symptoms and signs involving motor, sensory, and 
cranial nerves. As long as symptoms remain unilateral, con-
cern over pending basilar occlusion should be reduced.
Occlusion of the superior cerebellar artery results in 
severe ipsilateral cerebellar ataxia, nausea and vomiting, 
dysarthria, and contralateral loss of pain and temperature 
sensation over the extremities, body, and face (spino- 
and trigeminothalamic tracts). Partial deafness, ataxic 
Inferior pontine syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Vestibular nucleus
Spinothalamic
tract
 7th n.
6th n.
 8th n.
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
 Restiform body
6th n. nucleus
complex
Corticospinal and
corticobulbar tract
 7th n. nucleus
Dorsal
cochlear 
nucleus
Descending tract
and nucleus of
5th n.
Medial lemniscus
Inferior pons
Cerebellum
7th and 8th
cranial
nerves
FIGURE 27-11 
Axial section at the level of the inferior pons, depicted 
schematically on the left, with a corresponding MR image on 
the right. Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral 
inferior pontine stroke syndromes are shown.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 1.  Medial inferior pontine syndrome (occlusion of parame-
dian branch of basilar artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Paralysis of conjugate gaze to side of lesion (preser-
vation of convergence): Center for conjugate lateral 
gaze
 
Nystagmus: Vestibular nucleus
 
 Ataxia of limbs and gait: Likely middle cerebellar 
peduncle
 
Diplopia on lateral gaze: Abducens nerve
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and 
corticospinal tract in lower pons
 
 Impaired tactile and proprioceptive sense over one-
half of the body: Medial lemniscus
2.  Lateral inferior pontine syndrome (occlusion of anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Horizontal and vertical nystagmus, vertigo, nausea, 
vomiting, oscillopsia: Vestibular nerve or nucleus
 
Facial paralysis: Seventh nerve
 
 Paralysis of conjugate gaze to side of lesion: Center 
for conjugate lateral gaze
 
 Deafness, tinnitus: Auditory nerve or cochlear 
nucleus
 
 Ataxia: Middle cerebellar peduncle and cerebellar 
hemisphere
 
 Impaired sensation over face: Descending tract and 
nucleus ﬁfth nerve
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Impaired pain and thermal sense over one-half the 
body (may include face): Spinothalamic tract
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
282
tremor of the ipsilateral upper extremity, Horner’s syn-
drome, and palatal myoclonus may occur rarely. Partial 
syndromes occur frequently (Fig.  27-13). With large 
strokes, swelling and mass effects may compress the 
midbrain or produce hydrocephalus; these symptoms 
may evolve rapidly. Neurosurgical intervention may be 
lifesaving in such cases.
Occlusion of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery 
produces variable degrees of infarction because the size 
of this artery and the territory it supplies vary inversely 
with those of the PICA. The principal symptoms 
include: (1) ipsilateral deafness, facial weakness, vertigo, 
nausea and vomiting, nystagmus, tinnitus, cerebellar 
ataxia, Horner’s syndrome, and paresis of conjugate lat-
eral gaze; and (2) contralateral loss of pain and tempera-
ture sensation. An occlusion close to the origin of the 
artery may cause corticospinal tract signs (Fig.  27-11).
Occlusion of one of the short circumferential 
branches of the basilar artery affects the lateral two-
thirds of the pons and middle or superior cerebellar 
peduncle, whereas occlusion of one of the paramedian 
branches affects a wedge-shaped area on either side of 
the medial pons (Figs. 27-11 through 27-13).
IMAGING STUDIES
See also Chap. 4.
CT scans
CT radiographic images identify or exclude hemorrhage 
as the cause of stroke, and they identify extraparenchy-
mal hemorrhages, neoplasms, abscesses, and other con-
ditions masquerading as stroke. Brain CT scans obtained 
Temporal lobe
Mid-pons
5th cranial
nerve
Cerebellum
Midpontine syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
5th n. sensory nucleus
5th n. motor nucleus
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Lateral
lemniscus
Corticospinal and
corticopontine tracts
Spinothalamic
tract
5th n. 
Medial
lemniscus
FIGURE 27-12 
Axial section at the level of the midpons, depicted sche-
matically on the left, with a corresponding MR image on the 
right. Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral 
midpontine stroke syndromes are shown.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 1.  Medial midpontine syndrome (paramedian branch of 
midbasilar artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Ataxia of limbs and gait (more prominent in bilateral 
involvement): Pontine nuclei
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and 
corticospinal tract
 
 Variable impaired touch and proprioception when 
lesion extends posteriorly: Medial lemniscus
 2.  Lateral midpontine syndrome (short circumferential artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
Ataxia of limbs: Middle cerebellar peduncle
 
 Paralysis of muscles of mastication: Motor ﬁbers or 
nucleus of ﬁfth nerve
 
 Impaired sensation over side of face: Sensory ﬁbers 
or nucleus of ﬁfth nerve
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Impaired pain and thermal sense on limbs and 
trunk: Spinothalamic tract
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
283
in the ﬁrst several hours after an infarction generally 
show no abnormality, and the infarct may not be seen 
reliably for 24–48 h. CT may fail to show small isch-
emic strokes in the posterior fossa because of bone arti-
fact; small infarcts on the cortical surface may also be 
missed.
Contrast-enhanced CT scans add speciﬁcity by 
showing contrast enhancement of subacute infarcts and 
allow visualization of venous structures. Coupled with 
newer generation multidetector scanners, CT angiogra-
phy (CTA) can be performed with administration of IV 
iodinated contrast allowing visualization of the cervical 
and intracranial arteries, intracranial veins, aortic arch, 
and even the coronary arteries in one imaging session. 
Carotid disease and intracranial vascular occlusions are 
readily identiﬁed with this method (Fig.  27-3). After 
an IV bolus of contrast, deﬁcits in brain perfusion pro-
duced by vascular occlusion can also be demonstrated 
(Fig. 27-15) and used to predict the region of infarcted 
brain and the brain at risk of further infarction (i.e., the 
ischemic penumbra, see “Pathophysiology of Ischemic 
Stroke”). CT imaging is also sensitive for detecting 
SAH (though by itself does not rule it out), and CTA 
can readily identify intracranial aneurysms (Chap. 28). 
Superior pontine syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Lateral
lemniscus
 Spinothalamic 
 tract
Pontine nuclei and
pontocerebellar fibers
 Corticospinal tract
Medial
lemniscus
Central
tegmental
bundle
Superior cerebellar 
peduncle
Basilar artery
Temporal lobe
Superior
pons
FIGURE 27-13 
Axial section at the level of the superior pons, depicted 
schematically on the left, with a corresponding MR image on 
the right. Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral 
superior pontine stroke syndromes are shown.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 1.  Medial superior pontine syndrome (paramedian branches 
of upper basilar artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Cerebellar ataxia (probably): Superior and/or middle 
cerebellar peduncle
 
 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia: Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
 
 Myoclonic syndrome, palate, pharynx, vocal cords, 
respiratory apparatus, face, oculomotor apparatus, 
etc.: Localization uncertain—central tegmental bun-
dle, dentate projection, inferior olivary nucleus
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and 
corticospinal tract
 
 Rarely touch, vibration, and position are affected: 
Medial lemniscus
 2.  Lateral superior pontine syndrome (syndrome of supe-
rior cerebellar artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Ataxia of limbs and gait, falling to side of lesion: 
Middle and superior cerebellar peduncles, superior 
surface of cerebellum, dentate nucleus
 
 Dizziness, nausea, vomiting; horizontal nystagmus: 
Vestibular nucleus
 
 Paresis of conjugate gaze (ipsilateral): Pontine con-
tralateral gaze
 
Skew deviation: Uncertain
 
 Miosis, ptosis, decreased sweating over face (Horn-
er’s syndrome): Descending sympathetic ﬁbers
 
 Tremor: Localization unclear—Dentate nucleus, 
superior cerebellar peduncle
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Impaired pain and thermal sense on face, limbs, 
and trunk: Spinothalamic tract
 
 Impaired touch, vibration, and position sense, more in 
leg than arm (there is a tendency to incongruity of pain 
and touch deﬁcits): Medial lemniscus (lateral portion)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
284
Because of its speed and wide availability, noncontrast 
head CT is the imaging modality of choice in patients 
with acute stroke (Fig.  27-1), and CTA and CT per-
fusion imaging may also be useful and convenient 
adjuncts.
MRI
MRI reliably documents the extent and location of 
infarction in all areas of the brain, including the pos-
terior fossa and cortical surface. It also identiﬁes intra-
cranial hemorrhage and other abnormalities but is less 
sensitive than CT for detecting acute blood. MRI 
scanners with magnets of higher ﬁeld strength produce 
more reliable and precise images. Diffusion-weighted 
imaging is more sensitive for early brain infarction 
than standard MR sequences or CT (Fig. 27-16), as 
is ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging 
(Chap. 4). Using IV administration of gadolinium con-
trast, MR perfusion studies can be performed. Brain 
regions showing poor perfusion but no abnormality on 
diffusion are equivalent measure of the ischemic pen-
umbra (see “Pathophysiology of Ischemic Stroke” and 
Fig. 27-16), and patients showing large regions of mis-
match may be better candidates for acute revasculariza-
tion. MR angiography is highly sensitive for stenosis of 
extracranial internal carotid arteries and of large intra-
cranial vessels. With higher degrees of stenosis, MR 
angiography tends to overestimate the degree of steno-
sis when compared to conventional x-ray angiography. 
MRI with fat saturation is an imaging sequence used 
to visualize extra or intracranial arterial dissection. This 
sensitive technique images clotted blood within the 
dissected vessel wall.
MRI is less sensitive for acute blood products than CT 
and is more expensive and time consuming and less read-
ily available. Claustrophobia also limits its application. 
Most acute stroke protocols use CT because of these 
limitations. However, MRI is useful outside the acute 
period by more clearly deﬁning the extent of tissue injury 
and discriminating new from old regions of brain infarc-
tion. MRI may have particular utility in patients with 
Midbrain syndrome:
Lateral
Medial
3rd n.
Superior colliculus
Cerebral aqueduct
3rd nerve
nucleus
Medial
lemniscus
Spinothalamic
tract
Red nucleus
Substantia
nigra
Crus cerebri
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Basilar artery
Internal
carotid
artery
Midbrain
FIGURE 27-14 
Axial section at the level of the midbrain, depicted sche-
matically on the left, with a corresponding MR image on the 
right. Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral 
midbrain stroke syndromes are shown.
 Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
 1.  Medial midbrain syndrome (paramedian branches of 
upper basilar and proximal posterior cerebral arteries)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Eye “down and out” secondary to unopposed 
action of fourth and sixth cranial nerves, with dilated 
and unresponsive pupil: Third nerve ﬁbers
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and 
corticospinal tract descending in crus cerebri
 2.  Lateral midbrain syndrome (syndrome of small pene-
trating arteries arising from posterior cerebral artery)
 
On side of lesion
 
 Eye “down and out” secondary to unopposed 
action of fourth and sixth cranial nerves, with dilated 
and unresponsive pupil: Third nerve ﬁbers and/or 
third nerve nucleus
 
On side opposite lesion
 
 Hemiataxia, hyperkinesias, tremor: Red nucleus, 
dentatorubrothalamic pathway
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
285
TIA. It is also more likely to identify new infarction, 
which is a strong predictor of subsequent stroke.
Cerebral angiography
Conventional x-ray cerebral angiography is the gold 
standard for identifying and quantifying atherosclerotic 
stenoses of the cerebral arteries and for identifying and 
characterizing other pathologies, including aneurysms, 
vasospasm, intraluminal thrombi, ﬁbromuscular dyspla-
sia, arteriovenous ﬁstula, vasculitis, and collateral chan-
nels of blood ﬂow. Endovascular techniques, which are 
evolving rapidly, can be used to deploy stents within 
delicate intracranial vessels, to perform balloon angio-
plasty of stenotic lesions, to treat intracranial aneurysms 
by embolization, and to open occluded vessels in acute 
stroke with mechanical thrombectomy devices. Ran-
domized trials support use of thrombolytic agents deliv-
ered intraarterially in patients with acute MCA stroke 
by showing that vessels are effectively recanalized and 
clinical outcomes are improved at 90 days. Cerebral 
angiography coupled with endovascular techniques for 
cerebral revascularization are becoming routine in the 
United States and Europe and likely soon in Japan. 
Centers capable of these techniques are termed compre-
hensive stroke centers to distinguish them from primary 
stroke centers that can administer IV rtPA but not per-
form endovascular therapy. Conventional angiogra-
phy carries risks of arterial damage, groin hemorrhage, 
embolic stroke, and renal failure from contrast nephrop-
athy, so it should be reserved for situations where less 
invasive means are inadequate.
FIGURE 27-15 
Acute left middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke with right 
hemiplegia but preserved language. A. CT perfusion 
mean-transit time map showing delayed perfusion of the left 
MCA distribution (blue). B. Predicted region of infarct (red) 
and penumbra (green) based on CT perfusion data. C. Con-
ventional angiogram showing occlusion of the left internal 
carotid–MCA bifurcation (left panel), and revascularization 
of the vessels following successful thrombectomy 8 h after 
stroke symptom onset (right panel). D. The clot removed with 
a thrombectomy device (L5, Concentric Medical, Inc.). E. CT 
scan of the brain 2 days later; note infarction in the region 
predicted in B but preservation of the penumbral region by 
successful revascularization.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
286
Ultrasound techniques
Stenosis at the origin of the internal carotid artery can 
be identiﬁed and quantiﬁed reliably by ultrasonography 
that combines a B-mode ultrasound image with a Dop-
pler ultrasound assessment of ﬂow velocity (“duplex” 
ultrasound). Transcranial Doppler (TCD) assessment of 
MCA, ACA, and PCA ﬂow and of vertebrobasilar ﬂow 
is also useful. This latter technique can detect stenotic 
lesions in the large intracranial arteries because such 
lesions increase systolic ﬂow velocity. Furthermore, 
TCD can assist thrombolysis and improve large artery 
recanalization following rtPA administration; the poten-
tial clinical beneﬁt of this treatment is the subject of 
ongoing study. In many cases, MR angiography com-
bined with carotid and transcranial ultrasound studies 
eliminates the need for conventional x-ray angiography 
in evaluating vascular stenosis. Alternatively, CT angi-
ography of the entire head and neck can be performed 
during the initial imaging of acute stroke. Because this 
images the entire arterial system relevant to stroke, 
with the exception of the heart, much of the clinician’s 
stroke workup can be completed with this single imag-
ing study.
Perfusion techniques
Both xenon techniques (principally xenon-CT) and 
PET can quantify cerebral blood ﬂow. These tools are 
generally used for research (Chap.4) but can be useful 
for determining the signiﬁcance of arterial stenosis and 
planning for revascularization surgery. Single-photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT) and MR per-
fusion techniques report relative cerebral blood ﬂow. 
Since CT imaging is used as the initial imaging modality 
for acute stroke, some centers combine both CT angi-
ography and CT perfusion imaging together with the 
noncontrast CT scan. CT perfusion imaging increases 
the sensitivity for detecting ischemia, and can measure 
the ischemic penumbra (Fig.  27-15). Alternatively, MR 
perfusion can be combined with MR diffusion imag-
ing to identify the ischemic penumbra as the mismatch 
between these two imaging sequences (Fig. 27-16). 
The ability to image the ischemic penumbra allows 
more judicious selection of patients who may or may 
not beneﬁt from acute interventions such as thromboly-
sis, thrombectomy, or investigational neuroprotective 
strategies.
INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
Hemorrhages are classiﬁed by their location and the 
underlying vascular pathology. Bleeding into sub-
dural and epidural spaces is principally produced by 
trauma. SAHs are produced by trauma and rupture of 
intracranial aneurysms (Chap. 28). Intraparenchymal 
and intraventricular hemorrhage will be considered 
here.
DIAGNOSIS
Intracranial hemorrhage is often discovered on noncon-
trast CT imaging of the brain during the acute evalu-
ation of stroke. Since CT is more sensitive than rou-
tine MRI for acute blood, CT imaging is the preferred 
method for acute stroke evaluation (Fig.  27-1). The 
location of the hemorrhage narrows the differential 
diagnosis to a few entities. Table 27-6 lists the causes 
and anatomic spaces involved in hemorrhages.
FIGURE 27-16 
MRI of acute stroke. A. MRI diffusion-weighted image (DWI) 
of an 82-year-old woman 2.5 h after onset of right-sided 
weakness and aphasia reveals restricted diffusion within 
the left basal ganglia and internal capsule (colored regions). 
B. Perfusion defect within the left hemisphere (colored sig-
nal) imaged after administration of an IV bolus of gadolinium 
contrast. The discrepancy between the region of poor perfu-
sion shown in B and the diffusion deﬁcit shown in A is called 
diffusion-perfusion mismatch and provides an estimate of the 
ischemic penumbra. Without speciﬁc therapy the region of 
infarction will expand into much or all of the perfusion deﬁcit. 
C. Cerebral angiogram of the left internal carotid artery in this 
patient before (left) and after (right) successful endovascular 
embolectomy. The occlusion is within the carotid terminus. 
D. FLAIR image obtained 3 days later showing a region of 
infarction (coded as white) that corresponds to the initial DWI 
image in A, but not the entire area at risk shown in B, sug-
gesting that successful embolectomy saved a large region of 
brain tissue from infarction. (Courtesy of Gregory Albers, MD, 
Stanford University; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
287
TABLE 27-6
CAUSES OF INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
CAUSE
LOCATION
COMMENTS
Head trauma
Intraparenchymal: frontal lobes, anterior 
temporal lobes; subarachnoid
Coup and contrecoup injury during brain 
deceleration
Hypertensive hemorrhage
Putamen, globus pallidus, thalamus, 
cerebellar hemisphere, pons
Chronic hypertension produces hemor-
rhage from small (∼100 μm) vessels in 
these regions
Transformation of prior ischemic infarc-
tion
Basal ganglion, subcortical regions, 
lobar
Occurs in 1–6% of ischemic strokes 
with predilection for large hemispheric 
infarctions
Metastatic brain tumor
Lobar
Lung, choriocarcinoma, melanoma, renal 
cell carcinoma, thyroid, atrial myxoma
Coagulopathy
Any
Uncommon cause; often associated 
with prior stroke or underlying vascular 
anomaly
Drug
Lobar, subarachnoid
Cocaine, amphetamine, phenylpropa-
nolamine
Arteriovenous malformation
Lobar, intraventricular, subarachnoid
Risk is ∼2–4% per year for bleeding
Aneurysm
Subarachnoid, intraparenchymal, rarely 
subdural
Mycotic and nonmycotic forms of aneu-
rysms
Amyloid angiopathy
Lobar
Degenerative disease of intracranial ves-
sels; linkage to Alzheimer’s disease, 
rare in patients <60 years
Cavernous angioma
Intraparenchymal
Multiple cavernous angiomas linked 
to mutations in KRIT1, CCM2, and 
PDCD10 genes
Dural arteriovenous ﬁstula
Lobar, subarachnoid
Produces bleeding by venous hyperten-
sion
Capillary telangiectasias
Usually brainstem
Rare cause of hemorrhage
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Close attention should be paid to airway management 
since a reduction in the level of consciousness is com-
mon and often progressive. The initial blood pressure 
should be maintained until the results of the CT scan 
are reviewed. Expansion of hemorrhage volume is 
associated with elevated blood pressure, but it remains 
unclear if lowering of blood pressure reduces hema-
toma growth. A recent feasibility trial of 60 patients 
showed that blood pressure could be safely lowered 
in acute spontaneous intraparenchymal (intracerebral) 
hemorrhage (ICH) using nicardipine and forms the 
basis for a planned pivotal trial powered for detecting 
improved clinical outcome. Another trial (Intensive 
Blood Pressure Reduction in Acute Cerebral Hemor-
rhage Trial [INTERACT]) randomized hypertensive, 
spontaneous ICH patients to maintain systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) <180 mmHg versus SBP <140 mmHg 
using IV antihypertensives. There was a statisti-
cal decrease in hematoma growth and a reduction in 
perihematoma edema in the patients assigned to the 
lower blood pressure goal. Whether these reductions 
in hematoma growth will translate to clinical beneﬁt 
is unclear. Until more results are available it is rec-
ommended to keep mean arterial pressure (MAP) 
<130 mmHg, unless an increase in ICP is suspected. 
In patients who have ICP monitors in place, cur-
rent recommendations are to keep the cerebral perfu-
sion pressure (MAP-ICP) above 60 mmHg (i.e., one 
should lower MAP to this target if blood pressure is 
elevated). Blood pressure should be lowered with non-
vasodilating IV drugs such as nicardipine, labetalol, or 
esmolol. Patients with cerebellar hemorrhages or with 
depressed mental status and radiographic evidence of 
hydrocephalus should undergo urgent neurosurgi-
cal evaluation. Based on the clinical examination and 
CT ﬁndings, further imaging studies may be necessary, 
including MRI or conventional x-ray angiography. 
Stuporous or comatose patients generally are treated 
presumptively for elevated ICP, with tracheal intuba-
tion and hyperventilation, mannitol administration, 
and elevation of the head of the bed while surgical 
consultation is obtained (Chap. 28).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
288
INTRAPARENCHYMAL HEMORRHAGE
ICH is the most common type of intracranial hemor-
rhage. It accounts for ∼10% of all strokes and is asso-
ciated with a 50% case fatality rate. Incidence rates are 
particularly high in Asians and blacks. Hypertension, 
trauma, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy cause the 
majority of these hemorrhages. Advanced age and heavy 
alcohol consumption increase the risk, and cocaine and 
methamphetamine use is one of the most important 
causes in the young.
Hypertensive intraparenchymal hemorrhage
Pathophysiology
Hypertensive intraparenchymal hemorrhage (hyper-
tensive hemorrhage or hypertensive intracerebral hem-
orrhage) usually results from spontaneous rupture of a 
small penetrating artery deep in the brain. The most 
common sites are the basal ganglia (especially the puta-
men), thalamus, cerebellum, and pons. When hemor-
rhages occur in other brain areas or in nonhypertensive 
patients, greater consideration should be given to hem-
orrhagic disorders, neoplasms, vascular malformations, 
and other causes. The small arteries in these areas seem 
most prone to hypertension-induced vascular injury. 
The hemorrhage may be small or a large clot may form 
and compress adjacent tissue, causing herniation and 
death. Blood may dissect into the ventricular space, 
which substantially increases morbidity and may cause 
hydrocephalus.
Most hypertensive intraparenchymal hemorrhages 
develop over 30–90 min, whereas those associated 
with anticoagulant therapy may evolve for as long as 
24–48 h. Within 48 h macrophages begin to phago-
cytize the hemorrhage at its outer surface. After 1–6 
months, the hemorrhage is generally resolved to a slit-
like orange cavity lined with glial scar and hemosiderin-
laden macrophages.
Clinical manifestations
Although not particularly associated with exertion, 
ICHs almost always occur while the patient is awake 
and sometimes when stressed. The hemorrhage gen-
erally presents as the abrupt onset of focal neurologic 
deﬁcit. Seizures are uncommon. The focal deﬁcit typi-
cally worsens steadily over 30–90 min and is associated 
with a diminishing level of consciousness and signs of 
increased ICP such as headache and vomiting.
The putamen is the most common site for hyper-
tensive hemorrhage, and the adjacent internal capsule 
is usually damaged (Fig. 27-17). Contralateral hemi-
paresis is therefore the sentinel sign. When mild, the 
face sags on one side over 5–30 min, speech becomes 
slurred, the arm and leg gradually weaken, and the eyes 
deviate away from the side of the hemiparesis. The 
paralysis may worsen until the affected limbs become 
ﬂaccid or extend rigidly. When hemorrhages are large, 
drowsiness gives way to stupor as signs of upper brain-
stem compression appear. Coma ensues, accompanied 
by deep, irregular, or intermittent respiration, a dilated 
and ﬁxed ipsilateral pupil, and decerebrate rigidity. In 
milder cases, edema in adjacent brain tissue may cause 
progressive deterioration over 12–72 h.
Thalamic hemorrhages also produce a contralateral 
hemiplegia or hemiparesis from pressure on, or dissec-
tion into, the adjacent internal capsule. A prominent 
sensory deﬁcit involving all modalities is usually present. 
Aphasia, often with preserved verbal repetition, may 
occur after hemorrhage into the dominant thalamus, 
and constructional apraxia or mutism occurs in some 
cases of nondominant hemorrhage. There may also be 
a homonymous visual ﬁeld defect. Thalamic hemor-
rhages cause several typical ocular disturbances by virtue 
of extension inferiorly into the upper midbrain. These 
include deviation of the eyes downward and inward 
so that they appear to be looking at the nose, unequal 
pupils with absence of light reaction, skew devia-
tion with the eye opposite the hemorrhage displaced 
downward and medially, ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, 
absence of convergence, paralysis of vertical gaze, and 
retraction nystagmus. Patients may later develop a 
chronic, contralateral pain syndrome (Déjérine-Roussy 
syndrome).
In pontine hemorrhages, deep coma with quadriple-
gia usually occurs over a few minutes. There is often 
prominent decerebrate rigidity and “pinpoint” (1 mm) 
pupils that react to light. There is impairment of reﬂex 
FIGURE 27-17 
Hypertensive hemorrhage. Transaxial noncontrast CT scan 
through the region of the basal ganglia reveals a hematoma 
involving the left putamen in a patient with rapidly progres-
sive onset of right hemiparesis.
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
289
horizontal eye movements evoked by head turning 
(doll’s-head or oculocephalic maneuver) or by irriga-
tion of the ears with ice water (Chap. 17). Hyperpnea, 
severe hypertension, and hyperhidrosis are common. 
Death often occurs within a few hours, but small hem-
orrhages are compatible with survival.
Cerebellar hemorrhages usually develop over sev-
eral hours and are characterized by occipital headache, 
repeated vomiting, and ataxia of gait. In mild cases there 
may be no other neurologic signs other than gait ataxia. 
Dizziness or vertigo may be prominent. There is often 
paresis of conjugate lateral gaze toward the side of the 
hemorrhage, forced deviation of the eyes to the oppo-
site side, or an ipsilateral sixth nerve palsy. Less frequent 
ocular signs include blepharospasm, involuntary closure 
of one eye, ocular bobbing, and skew deviation. Dys-
arthria and dysphagia may occur. As the hours pass, the 
patient often becomes stuporous and then comatose 
from brainstem compression or obstructive hydroceph-
alus; immediate surgical evacuation before brainstem 
compression occurs may be lifesaving. Hydrocephalus 
from fourth ventricle compression can be relieved by 
external ventricular drainage, but deﬁnitive hematoma 
evacuation is essential for survival. If the deep cerebellar 
nuclei are spared, full recovery is common.
Lobar hemorrhage
Symptoms and signs appear over several minutes. Most 
lobar hemorrhages are small and cause a restricted clini-
cal syndrome that simulates an embolus to an artery 
supplying one lobe. For example, the major neuro-
logic deﬁcit with an occipital hemorrhage is hemiano-
pia; with a left temporal hemorrhage, aphasia and delir-
ium; with a parietal hemorrhage, hemisensory loss; and 
with frontal hemorrhage, arm weakness. Large hemor-
rhages may be associated with stupor or coma if they 
compress the thalamus or midbrain. Most patients with 
lobar hemorrhages have focal headaches, and more than 
one-half vomit or are drowsy. Stiff neck and seizures are 
uncommon.
Other causes of intracerebral hemorrhage
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is a disease of the elderly in 
which arteriolar degeneration occurs and amyloid is 
deposited in the walls of the cerebral arteries. Amyloid 
angiopathy causes both single and recurrent lobar hem-
orrhages and is probably the most common cause of 
lobar hemorrhage in the elderly. It accounts for some 
intracranial hemorrhages associated with IV throm-
bolysis given for MI. This disorder can be suspected in 
patients who present with multiple hemorrhages (and 
infarcts) over several months or years, or in patients 
with “micro-bleeds” seen on brain MRI sequences sen-
sitive for hemosiderin, but it is deﬁnitively diagnosed 
by pathologic demonstration of Congo red staining of 
amyloid in cerebral vessels. The ε2 and ε4 allelic varia-
tions of the apolipoprotein E gene are associated with 
increased risk of recurrent lobar hemorrhage and may 
therefore be markers of amyloid angiopathy. Currently, 
there is no speciﬁc therapy, although antiplatelet and 
anticoagulating agents are typically avoided.
Cocaine and methamphetamine are frequent causes of 
stroke in young (age <45 years) patients. ICH, ischemic 
stroke, and SAH are all associated with stimulant use. 
Angiographic ﬁndings vary from completely normal 
arteries to large-vessel occlusion or stenosis, vasospasm, 
or changes consistent with vasculopathy. The mecha-
nism of sympathomimetic-related stroke is not known, 
but cocaine enhances sympathetic activity causing acute, 
sometimes severe, hypertension, and this may lead to 
hemorrhage. Slightly more than one-half of stimulant-
related intracranial hemorrhages are intracerebral, and 
the rest are subarachnoid. In cases of SAH, a saccular 
aneurysm is usually identiﬁed. Presumably, acute hyper-
tension causes aneurysmal rupture.
Head injury often causes intracranial bleeding. The 
common sites are intracerebral (especially temporal and 
inferior frontal lobes) and into the subarachnoid, subdu-
ral, and epidural spaces. Trauma must be considered in 
any patient with an unexplained acute neurologic deﬁ-
cit (hemiparesis, stupor, or confusion), particularly if the 
deﬁcit occurred in the context of a fall (Chap. 36).
Intracranial hemorrhages associated with anticoagulant 
therapy can occur at any location; they are often lobar 
or subdural. Anticoagulant-related ICHs may evolve 
slowly, over 24–48 h. Coagulopathy and thrombocyto-
penia should be reversed rapidly, as discussed later. ICH 
associated with hematologic disorders (leukemia, aplastic 
anemia, thrombocytopenic purpura) can occur at any 
site and may present as multiple ICHs. Skin and mucous 
membrane bleeding is usually evident and offers a diag-
nostic clue.
Hemorrhage into a brain tumor may be the ﬁrst mani-
festation of neoplasm. Choriocarcinoma, malignant 
melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and bronchogenic car-
cinoma are among the most common metastatic tumors 
associated with ICH. Glioblastoma multiforme in adults 
and medulloblastoma in children may also have areas of 
ICH.
Hypertensive encephalopathy is a complication of malig-
nant hypertension. In this acute syndrome, severe 
hypertension is associated with headache, nausea, vom-
iting, convulsions, confusion, stupor, and coma. Focal 
or lateralizing neurologic signs, either transitory or per-
manent, may occur but are infrequent and therefore 
suggest some other vascular disease (hemorrhage, embo-
lism, or atherosclerotic thrombosis). There are reti-
nal hemorrhages, exudates, papilledema (hypertensive 
retinopathy), and evidence of renal and cardiac disease. 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
290
In most cases ICP and CSF protein levels are elevated. 
MRI brain imaging shows a pattern of typically poste-
rior (occipital > frontal) brain edema that is reversible 
and termed reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy. The 
hypertension may be essential or due to chronic renal 
disease, acute glomerulonephritis, acute toxemia of 
pregnancy, pheochromocytoma, or other causes. Low-
ering the blood pressure reverses the process, but stroke 
can occur, especially if blood pressure is lowered too 
rapidly. Neuropathologic examination reveals multifo-
cal to diffuse cerebral edema and hemorrhages of vari-
ous sizes from petechial to massive. Microscopically, 
there are necrosis of arterioles, minute cerebral infarcts, 
and hemorrhages. The term hypertensive encephalopa-
thy should be reserved for this syndrome and not for 
chronic recurrent headaches, dizziness, recurrent TIAs, 
or small strokes that often occur in association with high 
blood pressure.
Primary intraventricular hemorrhage is rare. It usually 
begins within the substance of the brain and dissects 
into the ventricular system without leaving signs of 
intraparenchymal hemorrhage. Alternatively, bleeding 
can arise from periependymal veins. Vasculitis, usually 
polyarteritis nodosa or lupus erythematosus, can pro-
duce hemorrhage in any region of the central nervous 
system; most hemorrhages are associated with hyperten-
sion, but the arteritis itself may cause bleeding by dis-
rupting the vessel wall. Nearly one-half of patients with 
primary intraventricular hemorrhage have identiﬁable 
bleeding sources seen using conventional angiography. 
Sepsis can cause small petechial hemorrhages throughout 
the cerebral white matter. Moyamoya disease, mainly an 
occlusive arterial disease that causes ischemic symptoms, 
may on occasion produce intraparenchymal hemor-
rhage, particularly in the young. Hemorrhages into the 
spinal cord are usually the result of an AVM, cavern-
ous malformation, or metastatic tumor. Epidural spinal 
hemorrhage produces a rapidly evolving syndrome of spi-
nal cord or nerve root compression (Chap. 35). Spinal 
hemorrhages usually present with sudden back pain and 
some manifestation of myelopathy.
Laboratory and imaging evaluation
Patients should have routine blood chemistries and 
hematologic studies. Speciﬁc attention to the platelet 
count and PT/PTT are important to identify coagu-
lopathy. CT imaging reliably detects acute focal hemor-
rhages in the supratentorial space. Small pontine hem-
orrhages may not be identiﬁed because of motion and 
bone-induced artifact that obscure structures in the 
posterior fossa. After the ﬁrst 2 weeks, x-ray attenua-
tion values of clotted blood diminish until they become 
isodense with surrounding brain. Mass effect and 
edema may remain. In some cases, a surrounding rim 
of contrast enhancement appears after 2–4 weeks and 
may persist for months. MRI, although more sensitive 
for delineating posterior fossa lesions, is generally not 
necessary in most instances. Images of ﬂowing blood 
on MRI scan may identify AVMs as the cause of the 
hemorrhage. MRI, CT angiography, and conventional 
x-ray angiography are used when the cause of intracra-
nial hemorrhage is uncertain, particularly if the patient 
is young or not hypertensive and the hematoma is not 
in one of the four usual sites for hypertensive hemor-
rhage. Postcontrast CT imaging may reveal acute hema-
toma enhancement signifying bleeding at the time of 
imaging; this “dot-sign” portends increased mortality. 
Some centers routinely perform CT and CT angiogra-
phy with postcontrast CT imaging in one sitting to rap-
idly identify any macrovascular etiology of the hemor-
rhage and provide prognostic information at the same 
time. Since patients typically have focal neurologic signs 
and obtundation, and often show signs of increased 
ICP, a lumbar puncture should be avoided as it may 
induce cerebral herniation.
TREATMENT 
Intracerebral Hemorrhage
ACUTE MANAGEMENT Nearly 50% of patients 
with a hypertensive ICH die, but others have a good 
to complete recovery if they survive the initial hemor-
rhage. The ICH scoring system (Table 27-7) is a vali-
dated metric that is useful for prediction of mortality 
and clinical outcomes. Any identified coagulopathy 
should be reversed as soon as possible. For patients 
taking VKAs, rapid reversal of coagulopathy can be 
achieved by infusing prothrombin complex concen-
trates which can be administered quickly, followed 
by fresh-frozen plasma and vitamin K. When ICH is 
associated with thrombocytopenia (platelet count 
<50,000/μL), transfusion of fresh platelets is indicated. 
The role of urgent platelet inhibition assays in the deci-
sion to transfuse platelets remains unclear.
At present, little can be done about the hemorrhage 
itself. Hematomas may expand for several hours follow-
ing the initial hemorrhage, so treating severe hyperten-
sion seems reasonable to prevent hematoma progres-
sion. A phase 3 trial of treatment with recombinant 
factor VIIa reduced hematoma expansion; however, 
clinical outcomes were not improved, so use of this drug 
cannot be advocated at present.
Evacuation of supratentorial hematomas does not 
appear to improve outcome. The International Surgical 
Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH) randomized 
1033 patients with supratentorial ICH to either early 
surgical evacuation or initial medical management. No 
benefit was found in the early surgery arm, although 
analysis was complicated by the fact that 26% of 
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
291
patients in the initial medical management group ulti-
mately had surgery for neurologic deterioration. Overall, 
these data do not support routine surgical evacuation 
of supratentorial hemorrhages; however, many centers 
operate on patients with progressive neurologic dete-
rioration. Surgical techniques continue to evolve, and 
minimally invasive endoscopic hematoma evacuation 
may prove beneficial in future trials.
For cerebellar hemorrhages, a neurosurgeon should 
be consulted immediately to assist with the evalua-
tion; most cerebellar hematomas >3 cm in diameter will 
require surgical evacuation. If the patient is alert with-
out focal brainstem signs and if the hematoma is <1 
cm in diameter, surgical removal is usually unnecessary. 
Patients with hematomas between 1 and 3 cm require 
careful observation for signs of impaired consciousness 
and precipitous respiratory failure.
Tissue surrounding hematomas is displaced and 
compressed but not necessarily infarcted. Hence, in 
survivors, major improvement commonly occurs as 
the hematoma is reabsorbed and the adjacent tissue 
regains its function. Careful management of the patient 
during the acute phase of the hemorrhage can lead to 
considerable recovery.
Surprisingly, ICP is often normal even with large 
intraparenchymal hemorrhages. However, if the hema-
toma causes marked midline shift of structures with 
consequent obtundation, coma, or hydrocephalus, 
osmotic agents coupled with induced hyperventilation 
can be instituted to lower ICP (Chap. 28). These maneu-
vers will provide enough time to place a ventricu-
lostomy or ICP monitor. Once ICP is recorded, further 
hyperventilation and osmotic therapy can be tailored 
to the individual patient to keep cerebral perfusion 
pressure (MAP-ICP) above 60 mmHg. For example, if 
ICP is found to be high, CSF can be drained from the 
ventricular space and osmotic therapy continued; per-
sistent or progressive elevation in ICP may prompt sur-
gical evacuation of the clot or withdrawal of support. 
Alternately, if ICP is normal or only mildly elevated, 
induced hyperventilation can be reversed and osmotic 
therapy tapered. Since hyperventilation may actu-
ally produce ischemia by cerebral vasoconstriction, 
induced hyperventilation should be limited to acute 
resuscitation of the patient with presumptive high ICP 
and eliminated once other treatments (osmotic ther-
apy or surgical treatments) have been instituted. Glu-
cocorticoids are not helpful for the edema from intra-
cerebral hematoma.
PREVENTION Hypertension is the leading cause 
of primary ICH. Prevention is aimed at reducing hyper-
tension, eliminating excessive alcohol use, and discon-
tinuing use of illicit drugs such as cocaine and amphet-
amines. Patients with amyloid angiopathy should avoid 
antithrombotic agents.
TABLE 27-7
PROGNOSIS AND CLINICAL OUTCOMES IN 
INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE
CLINICAL OR IMAGING 
FACTOR
POINT SCORE
Age
 <80 years
0
 v80 years
1
Hematoma Volume
 <30 cc
0
 v30 cc
1
Intraventricular Hemorrhage Present
 No
0
 Yes
1
Infratentorial Origin of Hemorrhage
 No
0
 Yes
1
Glasgow Coma Scale Score
 13–15
0
 5–12
1
 3–4
2
Total Score
Sum of each category 
above
ICH SCORE 
TOTAL
OBSERVED 
MORTALITY AT 30 
DAYS (%)
WALK 
INDEPENDENTLY AT 
12 MONTHS (%)
0
  0
70
1
  13
60
2
  26
33
3
  72
 3
4
  97
 8
5
100
None
Although a score of 6 is possible with the scale, no patient was 
observed to present with this combination of ﬁndings, and it is con-
sidered highly likely to be fatal.
Abbreviation: ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage.
Sources: JC Hemphill et al: Stroke 32:891, 2001; JC Hemphill et al: 
Neurology 73:1088, 2009.
VASCULAR ANOMALIES
Vascular anomalies can be divided into congenital vas-
cular malformations and acquired vascular lesions.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
292
CONGENITAL VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
True arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), venous anoma-
lies, and capillary telangiectasias are lesions that usually 
remain clinically silent through life. AVMs are prob-
ably congenital but cases of acquired lesions have been 
reported.
True AVMs are congenital shunts between the arte-
rial and venous systems that may present as headache, 
seizures, and intracranial hemorrhage. AVMs consist of 
a tangle of abnormal vessels across the cortical surface 
or deep within the brain substance. AVMs vary in size 
from a small blemish a few millimeters in diameter to 
a large mass of tortuous channels composing an arte-
riovenous shunt of sufﬁcient magnitude to raise cardiac 
output and precipitate heart failure. Blood vessels form-
ing the tangle interposed between arteries and veins are 
usually abnormally thin and histologically resemble both 
arteries and veins. AVMs occur in all parts of the cere-
bral hemispheres, brainstem, and spinal cord, but the 
largest ones are most frequently in the posterior half of 
the hemispheres, commonly forming a wedge-shaped 
lesion extending from the cortex to the ventricle.
Bleeding, headache, or seizures are most common 
between the ages of 10 and 30, occasionally as late as 
the ﬁfties. AVMs are more frequent in men, and rare 
familial cases have been described. Familial AVM may 
be a part of the autosomal dominant syndrome of 
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-
Weber) syndrome due to mutations in endoglin (chro-
mosome 9) or activin receptor-like kinase 1 (chromo-
some 12).
Headache (without bleeding) may be hemicranial 
and throbbing, like migraine, or diffuse. Focal seizures, 
with or without generalization, occur in ∼30% of cases. 
One-half of AVMs become evident as ICHs. In most, 
the hemorrhage is mainly intraparenchymal with exten-
sion into the subarachnoid space in some cases. Blood 
is usually not deposited in the basal cisterns, and symp-
tomatic cerebral vasospasm is rare. The risk of rerupture 
is ∼2–4% per year and is particularly high in the ﬁrst 
few weeks. Hemorrhages may be massive, leading to 
death, or may be as small as 1 cm in diameter, leading 
to minor focal symptoms or no deﬁcit. The AVM may 
be large enough to steal blood away from adjacent nor-
mal brain tissue or to increase venous pressure signiﬁ-
cantly to produce venous ischemia locally and in remote 
areas of the brain. This is seen most often with large 
AVMs in the territory of the MCA.
Large AVMs of the anterior circulation may be asso-
ciated with a systolic and diastolic bruit (sometimes self-
audible) over the eye, forehead, or neck and a bounding 
carotid pulse. Headache at the onset of AVM rupture is 
not generally as explosive as with aneurysmal rupture. 
MRI is better than CT for diagnosis, although non-
contrast CT scanning sometimes detects calciﬁcation of 
the AVM and contrast may demonstrate the abnormal 
blood vessels. Once identiﬁed, conventional x-ray angi-
ography is the gold standard for evaluating the precise 
anatomy of the AVM.
Surgical treatment of symptomatic AVMs, often with 
preoperative embolization to reduce operative bleeding, 
is usually indicated for accessible lesions. Stereotaxic 
radiation, an alternative to surgery, can produce a slow 
sclerosis of the AVM over 2–3 years.
Patients with asymptomatic AVMs have about an 
∼2–4% per year risk for hemorrhage. Several angio-
graphic features can be used to help predict future 
bleeding risk. Paradoxically, smaller lesions seem to 
have a higher hemorrhage rate. The impact of recur-
rent hemorrhage on disability is relatively modest, so 
the indication for surgery in asymptomatic AVMs is 
debated. A large-scale randomized trial is currently 
addressing this question.
Venous anomalies are the result of development of 
anomalous cerebral, cerebellar, or brainstem venous 
drainage. These structures, unlike AVMs, are functional 
venous channels. They are of little clinical signiﬁcance 
and should be ignored if found incidentally on brain 
imaging studies. Surgical resection of these anoma-
lies may result in venous infarction and hemorrhage. 
Venous anomalies may be associated with cavernous 
malformations (see later), which do carry some bleed-
ing risk. If resection of a cavernous malformation is 
attempted, the venous anomaly should not be disturbed.
Capillary telangiectasias are true capillary malformations 
that often form extensive vascular networks through an 
otherwise normal brain structure. The pons and deep 
cerebral white matter are typical locations, and these cap-
illary malformations can be seen in patients with heredi-
tary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-Weber) 
syndrome. If bleeding does occur, it rarely produces mass 
effect or signiﬁcant symptoms. No treatment options 
exist.
ACQUIRED VASCULAR LESIONS
Cavernous angiomas are tufts of capillary sinusoids that 
form within the deep hemispheric white matter and 
brainstem with no normal intervening neural struc-
tures. The pathogenesis is unclear. Familial cavernous 
angiomas have been mapped to several different chro-
mosomal loci: KRIT1 (7q21-q22), CCM2 (7p13), and 
PDCD10 (3q26.1). Both KRIT1 and CCM2 have roles 
in blood vessel formation while PDCD10 is an apop-
totic gene. Cavernous angiomas are typically <1 cm in 
diameter and are often associated with a venous anom-
aly. Bleeding is usually of small volume, causing slight 
mass effect only. The bleeding risk for single cavernous 
malformations is 0.7–1.5% per year and may be higher 
for patients with prior clinical hemorrhage or multiple 
 
CHAPTER 27
Cerebrovascular Diseases
293
malformations. Seizures may occur if the malformation 
is located near the cerebral cortex. Surgical resection 
eliminates bleeding risk and may reduce seizure risk, but 
it is reserved for those malformations that form near the 
brain surface. Radiation treatment has not been shown 
to be of beneﬁt.
Dural arteriovenous ﬁstulas are acquired connections 
usually from a dural artery to a dural sinus. Patients 
may complain of a pulse-synchronous cephalic bruit 
(“pulsatile tinnitus”) and headache. Depending on 
the magnitude of the shunt, venous pressures may 
rise high enough to cause cortical ischemia or venous 
hypertension and hemorrhage, particularly subarach-
noid hemorrhage. Surgical and endovascular techniques 
are usually curative. These ﬁstulas may form because 
of trauma, but most are idiopathic. There is an associa-
tion between ﬁstulas and dural sinus thrombosis. Fistulas 
have been observed to appear months to years follow-
ing venous sinus thrombosis, suggesting that angiogen-
esis factors elaborated from the thrombotic process may 
cause these anomalous connections to form. Alterna-
tively, dural arteriovenous ﬁstulas can produce venous 
sinus occlusion over time, perhaps from the high pres-
sure and high ﬂow through a venous structure.
 J. Claude Hemphill, III   ■  Wade S. Smith   ■   Daryl R. Gress 
294
 Life-threatening neurologic illness may be caused by a 
primary disorder affecting any region of the neuraxis or 
may occur as a consequence of a systemic disorder such 
as hepatic failure, multisystem organ failure, or cardiac 
arrest  ( Table 28-1 ) . Neurologic critical care focuses on 
preservation of neurologic tissue and prevention of sec-
ondary brain injury caused by ischemia, edema, and ele-
vated intracranial pressure (ICP). Management of other 
organ systems proceeds concurrently and may need to 
be modiﬁ ed in order to maintain the overall focus on 
neurologic issues. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 Brain edema 
 Swelling, or edema, of brain tissue occurs with many 
types of brain injury. The two principal types of edema 
are vasogenic and cytotoxic.  Vasogenic edema refers to 
the inﬂ ux of ﬂ uid and solutes into the brain through an 
incompetent blood-brain barrier (BBB). In the normal 
cerebral vasculature, endothelial tight junctions associ-
ated with astrocytes create an impermeable barrier (the 
BBB), through which access into the brain interstitium 
is dependent upon speciﬁ c transport mechanisms. The 
BBB may be compromised in ischemia, trauma, infec-
tion, and metabolic derangements. Typically, vasogenic 
edema develops rapidly following injury.  Cytotoxic 
edema refers to cellular swelling and occurs in a vari-
ety of settings, including brain ischemia and trauma. 
Early astrocytic swelling is a hallmark of ischemia. Brain 
edema that is clinically signiﬁ cant usually represents 
a combination of vasogenic and cellular components. 
Edema can lead to increased ICP as well as tissue shifts 
and brain displacement from focal processes ( Chap. 17 ). 
These tissue shifts can cause injury by mechanical dis-
tention and compression in addition to the ischemia of 
impaired perfusion consequent to the elevated ICP. 
 Ischemic cascade and cellular injury 
 When delivery of substrates, principally oxygen and 
glucose, is inadequate to sustain cellular function, a 
series of interrelated biochemical reactions known 
as the  ischemic cascade is initiated (see  Fig. 27-2 ). The 
release of excitatory amino acids, especially glutamate, 
leads to inﬂ ux of calcium and sodium ions, which dis-
rupt cellular homeostasis. An increased intracellular cal-
cium concentration may activate proteases and lipases, 
which then lead to lipid peroxidation and free radi-
cal–mediated cell membrane injury. Cytotoxic edema 
ensues, and ultimately necrotic cell death and tissue 
infarction occur. This pathway to irreversible cell death 
is common to ischemic stroke, global cerebral isch-
emia, and traumatic brain injury.  Penumbra refers to 
areas of ischemic brain tissue that have not yet under-
gone irreversible infarction, implying that these regions 
are potentially salvageable if ischemia can be reversed. 
Factors that may exacerbate ischemic brain injury 
include systemic hypotension and hypoxia, which fur-
ther reduce substrate delivery to vulnerable brain tis-
sue, and fever, seizures, and hyperglycemia, which can 
increase cellular metabolism, outstripping compensatory 
processes. Clinically, these events are known as  second-
ary brain insults because they lead to exacerbation of the 
primary brain injury. Prevention, identiﬁ cation, and 
 NEUROLOGIC CRITICAL CARE, INCLUDING 
HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, AND 
SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE 
 CHAPTER 28 
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
295
treatment of secondary brain insults are fundamental 
goals of management.
An alternative pathway of cellular injury is apoptosis. 
This process implies programmed cell death, which may 
occur in the setting of ischemic stroke, global cerebral 
ischemia, traumatic brain injury, and possibly intra-
cerebral hemorrhage. Apoptotic cell death can be dis-
tinguished histologically from the necrotic cell death 
of ischemia and is mediated through a different set of 
biochemical pathways. At present, interventions for pre-
vention and treatment of apoptotic cell death remain 
less well deﬁned than those for ischemia. Excitotoxic-
ity and mechanisms of cell death are discussed in more 
detail in Chap. 25.
Cerebral perfusion and autoregulation
Brain tissue requires constant perfusion in order to 
ensure adequate delivery of substrate. The hemody-
namic response of the brain has the capacity to preserve 
perfusion across a wide range of systemic blood pres-
sures. Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), deﬁned as 
the mean systemic arterial pressure (MAP) minus the 
ICP, provides the driving force for circulation across 
the capillary beds of the brain. Autoregulation refers to 
the physiologic response whereby cerebral blood ﬂow 
(CBF) is regulated via alterations in cerebrovascular 
resistance in order to maintain perfusion over wide 
physiologic changes such as neuronal activation or 
changes in hemodynamic function. If systemic blood 
pressure drops, cerebral perfusion is preserved through 
vasodilation of arterioles in the brain; likewise, arterio-
lar vasoconstriction occurs at high systemic pressures to 
prevent hyperperfusion, resulting in fairly constant per-
fusion across a wide range of systemic blood pressures 
(Fig. 28-1). At the extreme limits of MAP or CPP 
(high or low), ﬂow becomes directly related to perfu-
sion pressure. These autoregulatory changes occur in 
the microcirculation and are mediated by vessels below 
the resolution of those seen on angiography. CBF is also 
strongly inﬂuenced by pH and Paco2. CBF increases 
with hypercapnia and acidosis and decreases with hypo-
capnia and alkalosis. This forms the basis for the use of 
hyperventilation to lower ICP, and this effect on ICP 
is mediated through a decrease in intracranial blood 
volume. Cerebral autoregulation is a complex process 
critical to the normal homeostatic functioning of the 
brain, and this process may be disordered focally and 
unpredictably in disease states such as traumatic brain 
injury and severe focal cerebral ischemia.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid and intracranial pressure
The cranial contents consist essentially of brain, 
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), and blood. CSF is pro-
duced principally in the choroid plexus of each lateral 
TABLE 28-1
NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS IN CRITICAL ILLNESS
LOCALIZATION 
ALONG 
NEUROAXIS
SYNDROME
Central Nervous System
Brain: Cerebral 
hemispheres
Global encephalopathy
 Delirium
 Sepsis
 Organ failure—hepatic, renal
 Medication related—sedatives, hypnot-
ics, analgesics, H2 blockers, antihyper-
tensives
 Drug overdose
 Electrolyte disturbance—hyponatremia, 
hypoglycemia
 Hypotension/hypoperfusion
 Hypoxia
 Meningitis
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage
 Wernicke’s disease
 Seizure—postictal or nonconvulsive  
status
 Hypertensive encephalopathy
 Hypothyroidism—myxedema
Focal deﬁcits
 Ischemic stroke
 Tumor
 Abscess, subdural empyema
 Subdural/epidural hematoma
Brainstem
Mass effect and compression
Ischemic stroke, intraparenchymal  
hemorrhage
Hypoxia
Spinal cord
Mass effect and compression
 Disk herniation
 Epidural hematoma
 Ischemia—hypotension/embolic
 Epidural abscess
Trauma, central cord syndrome
Peripheral Nervous System
Peripheral nerve
 Axonal
Critical illness polyneuropathy
Possible neuromuscular blocking agent 
complication
Metabolic disturbances, uremia,  
hyperglycemia
Medication effects—chemotherapeutic, 
antiretroviral
 Demyelinating
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating  
polyneuropathy
Neuromuscular 
junction
Prolonged effect of neuromuscular  
blockade
Medication effects—aminoglycosides
Myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton sydrome
Muscle
Critical illness myopathy
 Septic myopathy
 Cachectic myopathy—with or without 
disuse atrophy
Electrolyte distubances—hypokalemia/
hyperkalemia, hypophosphatemia
Acute quadriplegic myopathy
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
296
ventricle, exits the brain via the foramens of Luschka 
and Magendi, and ﬂows over the cortex to be absorbed 
into the venous system along the superior sagittal sinus. 
Approximately 150 mL of CSF are contained within 
the ventricles and surrounding the brain and spinal 
cord; the cerebral blood volume is also ∼150 mL. The 
bony skull offers excellent protection for the brain but 
allows little tolerance for additional volume. Signiﬁcant 
increases in volume eventually result in increased ICP. 
Obstruction of CSF outﬂow, edema of cerebral tissue, 
or increases in volume from tumor or hematoma may 
increase ICP. Elevated ICP diminishes cerebral perfu-
sion and can lead to tissue ischemia. Ischemia in turn 
may lead to vasodilation via autoregulatory mechanisms 
designed to restore cerebral perfusion. However, vaso-
dilation also increases cerebral blood volume, which in 
turn then increases ICP, lowers CPP, and provokes fur-
ther ischemia (Fig. 28-2). This vicious cycle is com-
monly seen in traumatic brain injury, massive intrace-
rebral hemorrhage, and large hemispheric infarcts with 
signiﬁcant tissue shifts.
to neurologic assessment in the critical care unit, includ-
ing endotracheal intubation and the use of sedative or 
paralytic agents to facilitate procedures.
An impaired level of consciousness is common in 
critically ill patients. The essential first task in assess-
ment is to determine whether the cause of dysfunc-
tion is related to a diffuse, usually metabolic, process 
or whether a focal, usually structural, process is impli-
cated. Examples of diffuse processes include metabolic 
encephalopathies related to organ failure, drug over-
dose, or hypoxia-ischemia. Focal processes include isch-
emic and hemorrhagic stroke and traumatic brain injury, 
especially with intracranial hematomas. Since these 
two categories of disorders have fundamentally differ-
ent causes, treatments, and prognoses, the initial focus 
is on making this distinction rapidly and accurately. 
The approach to the comatose patient is discussed in 
Chap. 17; etiologies are listed in Table 17-1.
Minor focal deficits may be present on the neuro-
logic examination in patients with metabolic encepha-
lopathies. However, the finding of prominent focal signs 
such as pupillary asymmetry, hemiparesis, gaze palsy, or 
paraplegia should suggest the possibility of a structural 
lesion. All patients with a decreased level of conscious-
ness associated with focal findings should undergo an 
urgent neuroimaging procedure, as should all patients 
with coma of unknown etiology. CT scanning is usu-
ally the most appropriate initial study because it can 
be performed quickly in critically ill patients and dem-
onstrates hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, and intracra-
nial tissue shifts well. MRI may provide more specific 
BP, mmHg
CBF, mL/100g per min
25
25
75
125
PaO2
PaCO2
75
125
175
FIGURE 28-1 
Autoregulation of cerebral blood ﬂow (solid line). Cerebral 
perfusion is constant over a wide range of systemic blood 
pressure. Perfusion is increased in the setting of hypoxia or 
hypercarbia. BP, blood pressure; CBF, cerebral blood ﬂow. 
(Reprinted with permission from HM Shapiro: Anesthesiology 
43:447, 1975. vghghg 1975, Lippincott Company.)
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Severe CNS Dysfunction
Critically ill patients with severe central nervous system 
dysfunction require rapid evaluation and intervention 
in order to limit primary and secondary brain injury. Ini-
tial neurologic evaluation should be performed concur-
rent with stabilization of basic respiratory, cardiac, and 
hemodynamic parameters. Significant barriers may exist 
Spontaneous
Dehydration
Pharmacologic
Mechanical
↓Metabolism
↓SABP
Hypercapnia
Pharmacologic
↑CMR-O2/Metabolism
↑Vasodilation
↑Viscosity
↓O2 delivery
↑Edema
↑ICP
↓CPP
↑CBV
↑CSF
FIGURE 28-2 
Ischemia and vasodilatation. Reduced cerebral perfusion 
pressure (CPP) leads to increased ischemia, vasodilation, 
increased intracranial pressure (ICP), and further reductions 
in CPP, a cycle leading to further neurologic injury. CBV, 
cerebral blood volume; CMR, cerebral metabolic rate; CSF, 
cerebrospinal ﬂuid; SABP, systolic arterial blood pressure. 
(Adapted from MJ Rosner et al: J Neurosurg 83:949, 1995; 
with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
297
information in some situations, such as acute ischemic 
stroke (diffusion-weighted imaging, DWI) and cerebral 
venous sinus thrombosis (magnetic resonance venogra-
phy, MRV). Any suggestion of trauma from the history or 
examination should alert the examiner to the possibility 
of cervical spine injury and prompt an imaging evalua-
tion using plain x-rays, CT, or MRI.
Other diagnostic studies are best utilized in specific 
circumstances, usually when neuroimaging studies 
fail to reveal a structural lesion and the etiology of the 
altered mental state remains uncertain. Electroencepha-
lography (EEG) can be important in the evaluation of 
critically ill patients with severe brain dysfunction. The 
EEG of metabolic encephalopathy typically reveals gen-
eralized slowing. One of the most important uses of EEG 
is to help exclude inapparent seizures, especially non-
convulsive status epilepticus. Untreated continuous or 
frequently recurrent seizures may cause neuronal injury, 
making the diagnosis and treatment of seizures crucial 
in this patient group. Lumbar puncture (LP) may be nec-
essary to exclude infectious processes, and an elevated 
opening pressure may be an important clue to cere-
bral venous sinus thrombosis. In patients with coma or 
profound encephalopathy, it is preferable to perform a 
neuroimaging study prior to LP. If bacterial meningitis is 
suspected, an LP may be performed first or antibiotics 
may be empirically administered before the diagnostic 
studies are completed. Standard laboratory evaluation 
of critically ill patients should include assessment of 
serum electrolytes (especially sodium and calcium), glu-
cose, renal and hepatic function, complete blood count, 
and coagulation. Serum or urine toxicology screens 
should be performed in patients with encephalopathy 
of unknown cause. EEG, LP, and other specific labora-
tory tests are most useful when the mechanism of the 
altered level of consciousness is uncertain; they are not 
routinely performed in clear-cut cases of stroke or trau-
matic brain injury.
Monitoring of ICP can be an important tool in 
selected patients. In general, patients who should be 
considered for ICP monitoring are those with primary 
neurologic disorders, such as stroke or traumatic brain 
injury, who are at significant risk for secondary brain 
injury due to elevated ICP and decreased CPP. Included 
are patients with the following: severe traumatic brain 
injury (Glasgow Coma Scale [GCS] score ≤ 8 [Table 
36-2]); large tissue shifts from supratentorial ischemic 
or hemorrhagic stroke; or hydrocephalus from sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), intraventricular hemor-
rhage, or posterior fossa stroke. An additional disorder 
in which ICP monitoring can add important informa-
tion is fulminant hepatic failure, in which elevated ICP 
may be treated with barbiturates or, eventually, liver 
transplantation. In general, ventriculostomy is prefer-
able to ICP monitoring devices that are placed in the 
brain parenchyma, because ventriculostomy allows CSF 
drainage as a method of treating elevated ICP. However, 
parenchymal ICP monitoring is most appropriate for 
patients with diffuse edema and small ventricles (which 
may make ventriculostomy placement more difficult) 
or any degree of coagulopathy (in which ventriculos-
tomy carries a higher risk of hemorrhagic complications) 
(Fig 28-3).
Treatment of Elevated ICP Elevated ICP may 
occur in a wide range of disorders, including head 
trauma, intracerebral hemorrhage, SAH with hydroceph-
alus, and fulminant hepatic failure. Because CSF and 
blood volume can be redistributed initially, by the time 
elevated ICP occurs, intracranial compliance is severely 
impaired. At this point, any small increase in the volume 
of CSF, intravascular blood, edema, or a mass lesion may 
result in a significant increase in ICP and a decrease in 
cerebral perfusion. This is a fundamental mechanism 
of secondary ischemic brain injury and constitutes an 
emergency that requires immediate attention. In gen-
eral, ICP should be maintained at <20 mmHg and CPP 
should be maintained at ≥60 mmHg.
Interventions to lower ICP are ideally based on the 
underlying mechanism responsible for the elevated 
ICP (Table 28-2). For example, in hydrocephalus from 
SAH, the principal cause of elevated ICP is impairment 
of CSF drainage. In this setting, ventricular drainage of 
CSF is likely to be sufficient and most appropriate. In 
head trauma and stroke, cytotoxic edema may be most 
responsible, and the use of osmotic agents such as 
Ventriculostomy
Fiberoptic
intraparenchymal
ICP monitor
Brain tissue
oxygen probe
Lateral ventricle
FIGURE 28-3 
Intracranial pressure and brain tissue oxygen monitoring. 
A ventriculostomy allows for drainage of cerebrospinal ﬂuid 
to treat elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). Fiberoptic ICP 
and brain tissue oxygen monitors are usually secured using 
a screwlike skull bolt. Cerebral blood ﬂow and microdialysis 
probes (not shown) may be placed in a manner similar to the 
brain tissue oxygen probe.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
298
TABLE 28-2
STEPWISE APPROACH TO TREATMENT OF 
ELEVATED INTRACRANIAL PRESSUREa
Insert ICP monitor—ventriculostomy versus parenchy-
mal device
General goals: maintain ICP <20 mmHg and CPP v60 
mmHg
For ICP >20–25 mmHg for >5 min:
1. Drain CSF via ventriculostomy (if in place)
2.  Elevate head of the bed; midline head position
3.  Osmotherapy—mannitol 25–100 g q4h as needed 
(maintain serum osmolality <320 mosmol) or hyper-
tonic saline (30 mL, 23.4% NaCl bolus)
4.  Glucocorticoids—dexamethasone 4 mg q6h for 
vasogenic edema from tumor, abscess (avoid gluco-
corticoids in head trauma, ischemic and hemorrhagic 
stroke)
5.  Sedation (e.g., morphine, propofol, or midazolam); 
add neuromuscular paralysis if necessary (patient will 
require endotracheal intubation and mechanical ven-
tilation at this point, if not before)
6. Hyperventilation—to PaCO2 30–35 mmHg
7.  Pressor therapy—phenylephrine, dopamine, or 
norepinephrine to maintain adequate MAP to ensure 
CPP v60 mmHg (maintain euvolemia to minimize 
deleterious systemic effects of pressors)
8.  Consider second-tier therapies for refractory ele-
vated ICP
a. High-dose barbiturate therapy (“pentobarb coma”)
b. Aggressive hyperventilation to PaCO2 <30 mmHg
c. Hypothermia
d. Hemicraniectomy
aThroughout ICP treatment algorithm, consider repeat head CT 
to identify mass lesions amenable to surgical evacuation.
Abbreviations: CPP, cerebral perfusion pressure; CSF, cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PaCO2, arterial partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide.
require immediate intervention. Emergent treatment 
of elevated ICP is most quickly achieved by intubation 
and hyperventilation, which causes vasoconstriction 
and reduces cerebral blood volume. In order to avoid 
provoking or worsening cerebral ischemia, hyperventi-
lation is best used for short periods of time until a more 
definitive treatment can be instituted. Furthermore, the 
effects of hyperventilation on ICP are short-lived, often 
lasting only for several hours because of the buffer-
ing capacity of the cerebral interstitium, and rebound 
elevations of ICP may accompany abrupt discontinua-
tion of hyperventilation. As the level of consciousness 
declines to coma, the ability to follow the neurologic 
status of the patient by examination deteriorates and 
measurement of ICP assumes greater importance. If a 
ventriculostomy device is in place, direct drainage of 
CSF to reduce ICP is possible. Finally, high-dose barbi-
turates, decompressive hemicraniectomy, or hypother-
mia are sometimes used for refractory elevations of ICP, 
although these have significant side effects and have 
not been proven to improve outcome.
Secondary Brain Insults Patients with primary 
brain injuries, whether due to trauma or stroke, are at risk 
for ongoing secondary ischemic brain injury. Because 
secondary brain injury can be a major determinant of 
a poor outcome, strategies for minimizing secondary 
brain insults are an integral part of the critical care of all 
patients. While elevated ICP may lead to secondary isch-
emia, most secondary brain injury is mediated through 
other clinical events that exacerbate the ischemic cas-
cade already initiated by the primary brain injury. Epi-
sodes of secondary brain insults are usually not associ-
ated with apparent neurologic worsening. Rather, they 
lead to cumulative injury limiting eventual recovery, 
which manifests as higher mortality rate or worsened 
long-term functional outcome. Thus, close monitoring of 
vital signs is important, as is early intervention to prevent 
secondary ischemia. Avoiding hypotension and hypoxia 
is critical, as significant hypotensive events (systolic 
blood pressure <90 mmHg) as short as 10 min in dura-
tion have been shown to adversely influence outcome 
after traumatic brain injury. Even in patients with stroke 
or head trauma who do not require ICP monitoring, close 
attention to adequate cerebral perfusion is warranted. 
Hypoxia (pulse oximetry saturation <90%), particularly 
in combination with hypotension, also leads to second-
ary brain injury. Likewise, fever and hyperglycemia both 
worsen experimental ischemia and have been associated 
with worsened clinical outcome after stroke and head 
trauma. Aggressive control of fever with a goal of normo-
thermia is warranted but may be difficult to achieve with 
antipyretic medications and cooling blankets. The value 
of newer surface or intravascular temperature control 
devices for the management of refractory fever is under 
mannitol or hypertonic saline becomes an appropriate 
early step. As described earlier, elevated ICP may cause 
tissue ischemia, and, if cerebral autoregulation is intact, 
the resulting vasodilation can lead to a cycle of worsen-
ing ischemia. Paradoxically, administration of vasopres-
sor agents to increase mean arterial pressure may actu-
ally lower ICP by improving perfusion, thereby allowing 
autoregulatory vasoconstriction as ischemia is relieved 
and ultimately decreasing intracranial blood volume.
Early signs of elevated ICP include drowsiness and 
a diminished level of consciousness. Neuroimaging 
studies may reveal evidence of edema and mass effect. 
Hypotonic IV fluids should be avoided, and elevation of 
the head of the bed is recommended. Patients must be 
carefully observed for risk of aspiration and compromise 
of the airway as the level of alertness declines. Coma 
and unilateral pupillary changes are late signs and 
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
299
investigation. The use of IV insulin infusion is encour-
aged for control of hyperglycemia as this allows better 
regulation of serum glucose levels than SC insulin. A 
reasonable goal is to maintain the serum glucose level 
at <7.8 mmol/L (<140 mg/dL), although episodes of 
hypoglycemia appear equally detrimental and the opti-
mal targets remain uncertain. New cerebral monitoring 
tools that allow continuous evaluation of brain tissue 
oxygen tension, CBF, and metabolism (via microdialy-
sis) may further improve the management of secondary 
brain injury.
are grave prognostic signs. A uniformly dismal prog-
nosis from hypoxic-ischemic coma is conveyed by an 
absent pupillary light reﬂex or extensor or absent motor 
response to pain on day 3 following the injury. Electro-
physiologically, the bilateral absence of the N20 com-
ponent of the somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) 
in the ﬁrst several days also conveys a poor prognosis. A 
very elevated serum level (>33 μg/L) of the biochemi-
cal marker neuron-speciﬁc enolase (NSE) is indica-
tive of brain damage after resuscitation from cardiac 
arrest and predicts a poor outcome. However, at pres-
ent, SSEPs and NSE levels may be difﬁcult to obtain in 
a timely fashion, with SSEP testing requiring substan-
tial expertise in interpretation and NSE measurements 
not yet standardized. Whether administration of mild 
hypothermia after cardiac arrest (see “Treatment”) will 
alter the usefulness of these clinical and electrophysi-
ologic predictors is unknown. Long-term consequences 
of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy include persistent 
coma or a vegetative state (Chap. 17), dementia, visual 
agnosia (Chap. 18), parkinsonism, choreoathetosis, 
CRITICAL CARE DISORDERS OF THE 
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
This occurs from lack of delivery of oxygen to the brain 
because of hypotension or respiratory failure. Causes 
include myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, shock, 
asphyxiation, paralysis of respiration, and carbon monox-
ide or cyanide poisoning. In some circumstances, hypoxia 
may predominate. Carbon monoxide and cyanide poi-
soning are termed histotoxic hypoxia since they cause a 
direct impairment of the respiratory chain.
Clinical manifestations
Mild degrees of pure hypoxia, such as occur at high alti-
tudes, cause impaired judgment, inattentiveness, motor 
incoordination, and, at times, euphoria. However, with 
hypoxia-ischemia, such as occurs with circulatory arrest, 
consciousness is lost within seconds. If circulation is 
restored within 3–5 min, full recovery may occur, but 
if hypoxia-ischemia lasts beyond 3–5 min, some degree 
of permanent cerebral damage usually results. Except 
in extreme cases, it may be difﬁcult to judge the pre-
cise degree of hypoxia-ischemia, and some patients 
make a relatively full recovery after even 8–10 min of 
global cerebral ischemia. The distinction between pure 
hypoxia and hypoxia-ischemia is important, since a Pao2 
as low as 20 mmHg (2.7 kPa) can be well tolerated if it 
develops gradually and normal blood pressure is main-
tained, but short durations of very low or absent cere-
bral circulation may result in permanent impairment.
Clinical examination at different time points after 
a hypoxic-ischemic insult (especially cardiac arrest) 
is useful in assessing prognosis for long-term neuro-
logic outcome. The prognosis is better for patients 
with intact brainstem function, as indicated by normal 
pupillary light responses and intact oculocephalic (doll’s 
eyes), oculovestibular (caloric), and corneal reﬂexes 
(Fig. 28-4). Absence of these reﬂexes and the presence 
of persistently dilated pupils that do not react to light 
Coma
Brain death
testing
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Day 1–3
Serum NSE > 33 μg/L∗
Day 3
Absent pupil or corneal
reflexes; extensor or absent
motor response
Indeterminate outcome
FPR
0%
(0–8.8)
FPR
0.7%
(0–3.7)
FPR
0%
(0–3)
FPR
0%
(0–3)
Poor
outcome
Poor
outcome
Poor
outcome
Poor
outcome
or
or
or
or
no
Day 1–3
SSEP
absent N20 responses∗
Day 1
Myoclonus, status epilepticus
No brainstem reflexes at
 any time (pupil, cornea, 
oculocephalic, cough)
Exclude major confounders
PROGNOSTICATION ALGORITHM OF OUTCOME
FIGURE 28-4 
Prognostication of outcome in comatose survivors of 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Numbers in parentheses are 
95% conﬁdence intervals. Confounders could include use 
of sedatives or neuromuscular blocking agents, hypother-
mia therapy, organ failure, or shock. Tests denoted with an 
asterisk (*) may not be available in a timely and standard-
ized manner. SSEP, somatosensory evoked potentials; NSE, 
neuron-speciﬁc enolase; FPR, false-positive rate. (From EFM 
Wijdicks et al: Neurology 67:203, 2006; with permission.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
300
cerebellar ataxia, myoclonus, seizures, and an amnestic 
state, which may be a consequence of selective damage 
to the hippocampus.
Pathology
Principal histologic ﬁndings are extensive multifocal 
or diffuse laminar cortical necrosis (Fig. 28-5), with 
almost invariable involvement of the hippocampus. The 
hippocampal CA1 neurons are vulnerable to even brief 
episodes of hypoxia-ischemia, perhaps explaining why 
selective persistent memory deﬁcits may occur after 
brief cardiac arrest. Scattered small areas of infarction or 
neuronal loss may be present in the basal ganglia, hypo-
thalamus, or brainstem. In some cases, extensive bilat-
eral thalamic scarring may affect pathways that mediate 
arousal, and this pathology may be responsible for the 
persistent vegetative state. A speciﬁc form of hypoxic-
ischemic encephalopathy, so-called watershed infarcts, 
occurs at the distal territories between the major cere-
bral arteries and can cause cognitive deﬁcits, including 
visual agnosia, and weakness that is greater in proximal 
than in distal muscle groups.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based upon the history of a hypoxic-
ischemic event such as cardiac arrest. Blood pres-
sure <70 mmHg systolic or Pao2 <40 mmHg is usu-
ally necessary, although both absolute levels as well as 
duration of exposure are important determinants of 
cellular injury. Carbon monoxide intoxication can be 
conﬁrmed by measurement of carboxyhemoglobin and 
is suggested by a cherry red color of the skin, although 
the latter is an inconsistent clinical ﬁnding.
TREATMENT 
Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy
Treatment should be directed at restoration of nor-
mal cardiorespiratory function. This includes securing 
a clear airway, ensuring adequate oxygenation and 
ventilation, and restoring cerebral perfusion, whether 
by cardiopulmonary resuscitation, fluid, pressors, or 
cardiac pacing. Hypothermia may target the neuronal 
cell injury cascade and has substantial neuroprotec-
tive properties in experimental models of brain injury. 
In two trials, mild hypothermia (33°C) improved func-
tional outcome in patients who remained comatose 
after resuscitation from a cardiac arrest. Treatment was 
initiated within minutes of cardiac resuscitation and 
continued for 12 h in one study and 24 h in the other. 
Potential complications of hypothermia include coagu-
lopathy and an increased risk of infection. Based upon 
these studies, the International Liaison Committee on 
Resuscitation issued the following advisory statement 
in 2003: “Unconscious adult patients with spontaneous 
circulation after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest should be 
cooled to 32°–34°C for 12–24 h when the initial rhythm 
was ventricular fibrillation.”
Severe carbon monoxide intoxication may be treated 
with hyperbaric oxygen. Anticonvulsants may be needed 
to control seizures, although these are not usually given 
prophylactically. Posthypoxic myoclonus may respond 
to oral administration of clonazepam at doses of 1.5–10 
mg daily or valproate at doses of 300–1200 mg daily in 
divided doses. Myoclonic status epilepticus within 24 h 
after a primary circulatory arrest generally portends a 
very poor prognosis, even if seizures are controlled.
Carbon monoxide and cyanide intoxication can also 
cause a delayed encephalopathy. Little clinical impair-
ment is evident when the patient first regains con-
sciousness, but a parkinsonian syndrome characterized 
by akinesia and rigidity without tremor may develop. 
Symptoms can worsen over months, accompanied by 
increasing evidence of damage in the basal ganglia as 
seen on both CT and MRI.
METABOLIC ENCEPHALOPATHIES
Altered mental states, variously described as confusion, 
delirium, disorientation, and encephalopathy, are pres-
ent in many patients with severe illness in an intensive 
care unit (ICU). Older patients are particularly vulnera-
ble to delirium, a confusional state characterized by dis-
ordered perception, frequent hallucinations, delusions, 
FIGURE 28-5 
Cortical laminar necrosis in hypoxic-ischemic enceph-
alopathy. T1-weighted postcontrast MRI shows cortical 
enhancement in a watershed distribution consistent with 
laminar necrosis.
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
301
and sleep disturbance. This is often attributed to medi-
cation effects, sleep deprivation, pain, and anxiety. The 
presence of delirium is associated with worsened out-
come in critically ill patients, even in those without an 
identiﬁable central nervous system pathology such as 
stroke or brain trauma. In these patients, the cause of 
delirium is often multifactorial, resulting from organ 
dysfunction, sepsis, and especially the use of medica-
tions given to treat pain, agitation, or anxiety. Critically 
ill patients are often treated with a variety of sedative 
and analgesic medications, including opiates, benzodi-
azepines, neuroleptics, and sedative-anesthetic medica-
tions, such as propofol. Recent studies suggest that in 
critically ill patients requiring sedation, the use of the 
centrally acting α2 agonist dexmedetomidine reduces 
delirium and shortens the duration of mechanical ven-
tilation compared to the use of benzodiazepines such 
as lorazepam or midazolam. The presence of family 
members in the ICU may also help to calm and ori-
ent agitated patients, and in severe cases, low doses of 
neuroleptics (e.g., haloperidol 0.5–1 mg) can be useful. 
Current strategies focus on limiting the use of sedative 
medications when this can be done safely.
In the ICU setting, several metabolic causes of an 
altered level of consciousness predominate. Hypercar-
bic encephalopathy can present with headache, confu-
sion, stupor, or coma. Hypoventilation syndrome occurs 
most frequently in patients with a history of chronic CO2 
retention who are receiving oxygen therapy for emphy-
sema or chronic pulmonary disease. The elevated Paco2 
leading to CO2 narcosis may have a direct anesthetic 
effect, and cerebral vasodilation from increased Paco2 can 
lead to increased ICP. Hepatic encephalopathy is sug-
gested by asterixis and can occur in chronic liver failure 
or acute fulminant hepatic failure. Both hyperglyce-
mia and hypoglycemia can cause encephalopathy, as can 
hypernatremia and hyponatremia. Confusion, impair-
ment of eye movements, and gait ataxia are the hallmarks 
of acute Wernicke’s disease (see later).
SEPSIS-ASSOCIATED ENCEPHALOPATHY
Pathogenesis
In patients with sepsis, the systemic response to infectious 
agents leads to the release of circulating inﬂammatory 
mediators that appear to contribute to encephalopathy. 
Critical illness, in association with the systemic inﬂamma-
tory response syndrome (SIRS), can lead to multisystem 
organ failure. This syndrome can occur in the setting of 
apparent sepsis, severe burns, or trauma, even without 
clear identiﬁcation of an infectious agent. Many patients 
with critical illness, sepsis, or SIRS develop encepha-
lopathy without obvious explanation. This condition 
is broadly termed sepsis-associated encephalopathy. While 
the speciﬁc mediators leading to neurologic dysfunction 
remain uncertain, it is clear that the encephalopathy is 
not simply the result of metabolic derangements of multi-
organ failure. The cytokines tumor necrosis factor, inter-
leukin (IL)-1, IL-2, and IL-6 are thought to play a role in 
this syndrome.
Diagnosis
Sepsis-associated encephalopathy presents clinically as a 
diffuse dysfunction of the brain without prominent focal 
ﬁndings. Confusion, disorientation, agitation, and ﬂuc-
tuations in level of alertness are typical. In more pro-
found cases, especially with hemodynamic compromise, 
the decrease in level of alertness can be more prominent, 
at times resulting in coma. Hyperreﬂexia and frontal 
release signs such as a grasp or snout reﬂex (Chap. 18) 
can be seen. Abnormal movements such as myoclonus, 
tremor, or asterixis can occur. Sepsis-associated enceph-
alopathy is quite common, occurring in the majority of 
patients with sepsis and multisystem organ failure. Diag-
nosis is often difﬁcult because of the multiple potential 
causes of neurologic dysfunction in critically ill patients 
and requires exclusion of structural, metabolic, toxic, and 
infectious (e.g., meningitis or encephalitis) causes. The 
mortality rate of patients with sepsis-associated encepha-
lopathy severe enough to produce coma approaches 
50%, although this principally reﬂects the severity of the 
underlying critical illness and is not a direct result of the 
encephalopathy. Patients dying from severe sepsis or sep-
tic shock may have elevated levels of the serum brain 
injury biomarker S-100β and neuropathologic ﬁndings 
of neuronal apoptosis and cerebral ischemic injury. How-
ever, successful treatment of the underlying critical ill-
ness almost always results in complete resolution of the 
encephalopathy, with profound long-term cognitive dis-
ability being uncommon.
CENTRAL PONTINE MYELINOLYSIS
This disorder typically presents in a devastating fash-
ion as quadriplegia and pseudobulbar palsy. Predispos-
ing factors include severe underlying medical illness or 
nutritional deﬁciency; most cases are associated with 
rapid correction of hyponatremia or with hyperosmo-
lar states. The pathology consists of demyelination with-
out inﬂammation in the base of the pons, with relative 
sparing of axons and nerve cells. MRI is useful in estab-
lishing the diagnosis (Fig. 28-6) and may also identify 
partial forms that present as confusion, dysarthria, and/
or disturbances of conjugate gaze without quadriple-
gia. Occasional cases present with lesions outside of the 
brainstem. Therapeutic guidelines for the restoration 
of severe hyponatremia should aim for gradual correc-
tion, i.e., by f10 mmol/L (10 meq/L) within 24 h and 
20 mmol/L (20 meq/L) within 48 h.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
302
WERNICKE’S DISEASE
Wernicke’s disease is a common and preventable disor-
der due to a deﬁciency of thiamine. In the United States, 
alcoholics account for most cases, but patients with mal-
nutrition due to hyperemesis, starvation, renal dialysis, 
cancer, AIDS, or rarely gastric surgery are also at risk. 
The characteristic clinical triad is that of ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia, and global confusion. However, only one-third of 
patients with acute Wernicke’s disease present with the 
classic clinical triad. Most patients are profoundly disori-
ented, indifferent, and inattentive, although rarely they 
have an agitated delirium related to ethanol withdrawal. 
If the disease is not treated, stupor, coma, and death may 
ensue. Ocular motor abnormalities include horizon-
tal nystagmus on lateral gaze, lateral rectus palsy (usually 
bilateral), conjugate gaze palsies, and rarely ptosis. Gait 
ataxia probably results from a combination of polyneu-
ropathy, cerebellar involvement, and vestibular pare-
sis. The pupils are usually spared, but they may become 
miotic with advanced disease.
Wernicke’s disease is usually associated with other 
manifestations of nutritional disease, such as polyneu-
ropathy. Rarely, amblyopia or myelopathy occurs. 
Tachycardia and postural hypotension may be related 
to impaired function of the autonomic nervous sys-
tem or to the coexistence of cardiovascular beriberi. 
Patients who recover show improvement in ocular pal-
sies within hours after the administration of thiamine, 
but horizontal nystagmus may persist. Ataxia improves 
more slowly than the ocular motor abnormalities. 
Approximately half recover incompletely and are left 
with a slow, shufﬂing, wide-based gait and an inabil-
ity to tandem walk. Apathy, drowsiness, and confusion 
improve more gradually. As these symptoms recede, an 
amnestic state with impairment in recent memory and 
learning may become more apparent (Korsakoff’s psy-
chosis). Korsakoff’s psychosis is frequently persistent; the 
residual mental state is characterized by gaps in memory, 
confabulation, and disordered temporal sequencing.
Pathology
Periventricular lesions surround the third ventricle, aque-
duct, and fourth ventricle, with petechial hemorrhages in 
occasional acute cases and atrophy of the mamillary bod-
ies in most chronic cases. There is frequently endothe-
lial proliferation, demyelination, and some neuronal loss. 
These changes may be detected by MRI scanning (Fig. 
28-7). The amnestic defect is related to lesions in the 
dorsal medial nuclei of the thalamus.
Pathogenesis
Thiamine is a cofactor of several enzymes, including tran-
sketolase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, and α-ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase. Thiamine deﬁciency produces a dif-
fuse decrease in cerebral glucose utilization and results 
in mitochondrial damage. Glutamate accumulates owing 
to impairment of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activ-
ity and, in combination with the energy deﬁciency, may 
result in excitotoxic cell damage.
FIGURE 28-6 
Central pontine myelinolysis. Axial T2-weighted MR scan 
through the pons reveals a symmetric area of abnormal high 
signal intensity within the basis pontis (arrows).
FIGURE 28-7 
Wernicke’s disease. Coronal T1-weighted postcontrast MRI 
reveals abnormal enhancement of the mammillary bodies 
(arrows), typical of acute Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
303
TREATMENT 
Wernicke’s Disease
Wernicke’s disease is a medical emergency and requires 
immediate administration of thiamine, in a dose of 100 
mg either IV or IM. The dose should be given daily until 
the patient resumes a normal diet and should be begun 
prior to treatment with IV glucose solutions. Glucose 
infusions may precipitate Wernicke’s disease in a previ-
ously unaffected patient or cause a rapid worsening of 
an early form of the disease. For this reason, thiamine 
should be administered to all alcoholic patients requir-
ing parenteral glucose.
CRITICAL CARE DISORDERS OF THE 
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Critical illness with disorders of the peripheral ner-
vous system (PNS) arises in two contexts: (1) primary 
neurologic diseases that require critical care interven-
tions such as intubation and mechanical ventilation, 
and (2) secondary PNS manifestations of systemic criti-
cal illness, often involving multisystem organ failure. 
The former include acute polyneuropathies such as 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 46), neuromuscular 
junction disorders including myasthenia gravis (Chap. 
47) and botulism, and primary muscle disorders such 
as polymyositis (Chap. 49). The latter result either 
from the systemic disease itself or as a consequence of 
interventions.
General principles of respiratory evaluation in 
patients with PNS involvement, regardless of cause, 
include assessment of pulmonary mechanics, such 
as maximal inspiratory force (MIF) and vital capac-
ity (VC), and evaluation of strength of bulbar muscles. 
Regardless of the cause of weakness, endotracheal 
intubation should be considered when the MIF falls 
to <−25 cmH2O or the VC is <1 L. Also, patients 
with severe palatal weakness may require endotra-
cheal intubation in order to prevent acute upper air-
way obstruction or recurrent aspiration. Arterial blood 
gases and oxygen saturation from pulse oximetry are 
used to follow patients with potential respiratory com-
promise from PNS dysfunction. However, intuba-
tion and mechanical ventilation should be undertaken 
based on clinical assessment rather than waiting until 
oxygen saturation drops or CO2 retention develops 
from hypoventilation. Noninvasive mechanical ven-
tilation may be considered initially in lieu of endotra-
cheal intubation but is generally insufﬁcient in patients 
with severe bulbar weakness or ventilatory failure with 
hypercarbia. 
NEUROPATHY
While encephalopathy may be the most obvious neuro-
logic dysfunction in critically ill patients, dysfunction of 
the PNS is also quite common. It is typically present in 
patients with prolonged critical illnesses lasting several 
weeks and involving sepsis; clinical suspicion is aroused 
when there is failure to wean from mechanical ventila-
tion despite improvement of the underlying sepsis and 
critical illness. Critical illness polyneuropathy refers to the 
most common PNS complication related to critical ill-
ness; it is seen in the setting of prolonged critical illness, 
sepsis, and multisystem organ failure. Neurologic ﬁndings 
include diffuse weakness, decreased reﬂexes, and distal 
sensory loss. Electrophysiologic studies demonstrate a dif-
fuse, symmetric, distal axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, 
and pathologic studies have conﬁrmed axonal degenera-
tion. The precise mechanism of critical illness polyneu-
ropathy remains unclear, but circulating factors such as 
cytokines, which are associated with sepsis and SIRS, 
are thought to play a role. It has been reported that up 
to 70% of patients with the sepsis syndrome have some 
degree of neuropathy, although far fewer have a clinical 
syndrome profound enough to cause severe respiratory 
muscle weakness requiring prolonged mechanical ventila-
tion or resulting in failure to wean. Aggressive glycemic 
control with insulin infusions appears to decrease the risk 
of critical illness polyneuropathy. Treatment is otherwise 
supportive, with speciﬁc intervention directed at treat-
ing the underlying illness. While spontaneous recovery is 
usually seen, the time course may extend over weeks to 
months and necessitate long-term ventilatory support and 
care even after the underlying critical illness has resolved.
DISORDERS OF NEUROMUSCULAR 
TRANSMISSION
A defect in neuromuscular transmission may be a source 
of weakness in critically ill patients. Myasthenia gravis 
may be a consideration; however, persistent weakness 
secondary to impaired neuromuscular junction transmis-
sion is almost always due to administration of drugs. A 
number of medications impair neuromuscular transmis-
sion; these include antibiotics, especially aminoglyco-
sides, and beta-blocking agents. In the ICU, the nonde-
polarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (nd-NMBAs), 
also known as muscle relaxants, are most commonly 
responsible. Included in this group of drugs are such 
agents as pancuronium, vecuronium, rocuronium, and 
atracurium. They are often used to facilitate mechani-
cal ventilation or other critical care procedures, but 
with prolonged use persistent neuromuscular blockade 
may result in weakness even after discontinuation of 
these agents hours or days earlier. Risk factors for this 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
304
prolonged action of neuromuscular blocking agents 
include female sex, metabolic acidosis, and renal failure.
Prolonged neuromuscular blockade does not appear 
to produce permanent damage to the PNS. Once the 
offending medications are discontinued, full strength 
is restored, although this may take days. In general, the 
lowest dose of neuromuscular blocking agent should be 
used to achieve the desired result and, when these agents 
are used in the ICU, a peripheral nerve stimulator should 
be used to monitor neuromuscular junction function.
MYOPATHY
Critically ill patients, especially those with sepsis, fre-
quently develop muscle wasting, often in the face of 
seemingly adequate nutritional support. The assump-
tion has been that this represents a catabolic myopathy 
brought about as a result of multiple factors, including 
elevated cortisol and catecholamine release and other 
circulating factors induced by the SIRS. In this syn-
drome, known as cachectic myopathy, serum creatine 
kinase levels and electromyography (EMG) are normal. 
Muscle biopsy shows type II ﬁber atrophy. Panfascicular 
muscle ﬁber necrosis may also occur in the setting of 
profound sepsis. This so-called septic myopathy is charac-
terized clinically by weakness progressing to a profound 
level over just a few days. There may be associated ele-
vations in serum creatine kinase and urine myoglobin. 
Both EMG and muscle biopsy may be normal initially 
but eventually show abnormal spontaneous activity and 
panfascicular necrosis with an accompanying inﬂamma-
tory reaction. Both of these myopathic syndromes may 
be considered under the broader heading of critical illness 
myopathy.
Acute quadriplegic myopathy describes a clinical syn-
drome of severe weakness seen in the setting of glu-
cocorticoid and nd-NMBA use. The most frequent 
scenario in which this is encountered is the asthmatic 
patient who requires high-dose glucocorticoids and 
nd-NMBA to facilitate mechanical ventilation. This 
muscle disorder is not due to prolonged action of nd-
NMBAs at the neuromuscular junction but, rather, is an 
actual myopathy with muscle damage; it has occasion-
ally been described with high-dose glucocorticoid use 
alone. Clinically this syndrome is most often recognized 
when a patient fails to wean from mechanical ventila-
tion despite resolution of the primary pulmonary pro-
cess. Pathologically, there may be vacuolar changes in 
both type I and type II muscle ﬁbers with evidence of 
regeneration. Acute quadriplegic myopathy has a good 
prognosis. If patients survive their underlying criti-
cal illness, the myopathy invariably improves and most 
patients return to normal. However, because this syn-
drome is a result of true muscle damage, not just pro-
longed blockade at the neuromuscular junction, this 
process may take weeks or months, and tracheotomy 
with prolonged ventilatory support may be necessary. 
Some patients do have residual long-term weakness, 
with atrophy and fatigue limiting ambulation. At pres-
ent, it is unclear how to prevent this myopathic compli-
cation, except by avoiding use of nd-NMBAs, a strategy 
not always possible. Monitoring with a peripheral nerve 
stimulator can help to avoid the overuse of these agents. 
However, this is more likely to prevent the complica-
tion of prolonged neuromuscular junction blockade 
than it is to prevent this myopathy.
SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) renders the brain crit-
ically ill from both primary and secondary brain insults. 
Excluding head trauma, the most common cause of 
SAH is rupture of a saccular aneurysm. Other causes 
include bleeding from a vascular malformation (arte-
riovenous malformation or dural arterial-venous ﬁstula) 
and extension into the subarachnoid space from a pri-
mary intracerebral hemorrhage. Some idiopathic SAHs 
are localized to the perimesencephalic cisterns and are 
benign; they probably have a venous or capillary source, 
and angiography is unrevealing.
Saccular (“berry”) aneurysm
Autopsy and angiography studies have found that about 
2% of adults harbor intracranial aneurysms, for a prev-
alence of 4 million persons in the United States; the 
aneurysm will rupture, producing SAH, in 25,000–
30,000 cases per year. For patients who arrive alive at 
hospital, the mortality rate over the next month is about 
45%. Of those who survive, more than half are left with 
major neurologic deﬁcits as a result of the initial hem-
orrhage, cerebral vasospasm with infarction, or hydro-
cephalus. If the patient survives but the aneurysm is not 
obliterated, the rate of rebleeding is about 20% in the 
ﬁrst 2 weeks, 30% in the ﬁrst month, and about 3% per 
year afterwards. Given these alarming ﬁgures, the major 
therapeutic emphasis is on preventing the predictable 
early complications of the SAH.
Unruptured, asymptomatic aneurysms are much 
less dangerous than a recently ruptured aneurysm. The 
annual risk of rupture for aneurysms <10 mm in size is 
∼0.1%, and for aneurysms v10 mm in size is ∼0.5–1%; 
the surgical morbidity rate far exceeds these percent-
ages. Because of the longer length of exposure to risk of 
rupture, younger patients with aneurysms >10 mm in 
size may beneﬁt from prophylactic treatment. As with 
the treatment of asymptomatic carotid stenosis, this risk-
beneﬁt strongly depends on the complication rate of 
treatment.
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
305
Giant aneurysms, those >2.5 cm in diameter, occur 
at the same sites (see later) as small aneurysms and 
account for 5% of cases. The three most common loca-
tions are the terminal internal carotid artery, middle 
cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation, and top of the basi-
lar artery. Their risk of rupture is ∼6% in the ﬁrst year 
after identiﬁcation and may remain high indeﬁnitely. 
They often cause symptoms by compressing the adja-
cent brain or cranial nerves.
Mycotic aneurysms are usually located distal to the 
ﬁrst bifurcation of major arteries of the circle of Willis. 
Most result from infected emboli due to bacterial endo-
carditis causing septic degeneration of arteries and sub-
sequent dilation and rupture. Whether these lesions 
should be sought and repaired prior to rupture or left to 
heal spontaneously is controversial.
Pathophysiology
Saccular aneurysms occur at the bifurcations of the large- 
to medium-sized intracranial arteries; rupture is into the 
subarachnoid space in the basal cisterns and often into the 
parenchyma of the adjacent brain. Approximately 85% 
of aneurysms occur in the anterior circulation, mostly on 
the circle of Willis. About 20% of patients have multiple 
aneurysms, many at mirror sites bilaterally. As an aneu-
rysm develops, it typically forms a neck with a dome. 
The length of the neck and the size of the dome vary 
greatly and are important factors in planning neurosurgi-
cal obliteration or endovascular embolization. The arte-
rial internal elastic lamina disappears at the base of the 
neck. The media thins, and connective tissue replaces 
smooth-muscle cells. At the site of rupture (most often 
the dome) the wall thins, and the tear that allows bleed-
ing is often f0.5 mm long. Aneurysm size and site are 
important in predicting risk of rupture. Those >7 mm in 
diameter and those at the top of the basilar artery and at 
the origin of the posterior communicating artery are at 
greater risk of rupture.
Clinical manifestations
Most unruptured intracranial aneurysms are completely 
asymptomatic. Symptoms are usually due to rupture 
and resultant SAH, although some unruptured aneu-
rysms present with mass effect on cranial nerves or 
brain parenchyma. At the moment of aneurysmal rup-
ture with major SAH, the ICP suddenly rises. This 
may account for the sudden transient loss of conscious-
ness that occurs in nearly half of patients. Sudden loss 
of consciousness may be preceded by a brief moment 
of excruciating headache, but most patients ﬁrst com-
plain of headache upon regaining consciousness. In 10% 
of cases, aneurysmal bleeding is severe enough to cause 
loss of consciousness for several days. In ∼45% of cases, 
severe headache associated with exertion is the present-
ing complaint. The patient often calls the headache 
“the worst headache of my life”; however, the most 
important characteristic is sudden onset. Occasionally, 
these ruptures may present as headache of only moder-
ate intensity or as a change in the patient’s usual head-
ache pattern. The headache is usually generalized, often 
with neck stiffness, and vomiting is common.
Although sudden headache in the absence of focal 
neurologic symptoms is the hallmark of aneurysmal rup-
ture, focal neurologic deﬁcits may occur. Anterior com-
municating artery or MCA bifurcation aneurysms may 
rupture into the adjacent brain or subdural space and 
form a hematoma large enough to produce mass effect. 
The deﬁcits that result can include hemiparesis, aphasia, 
and abulia.
Occasionally, prodromal symptoms suggest the loca-
tion of a progressively enlarging unruptured aneurysm. 
A third cranial nerve palsy, particularly when associated 
with pupillary dilation, loss of ipsilateral (but retained 
contralateral) light reﬂex, and focal pain above or 
behind the eye, may occur with an expanding aneurysm 
at the junction of the posterior communicating artery 
and the internal carotid artery. A sixth nerve palsy may 
indicate an aneurysm in the cavernous sinus, and visual 
ﬁeld defects can occur with an expanding supraclinoid 
carotid or anterior cerebral artery aneurysm. Occipi-
tal and posterior cervical pain may signal a posterior 
inferior cerebellar artery or anterior inferior cerebel-
lar artery aneurysm (Chap. 27). Pain in or behind the 
eye and in the low temple can occur with an expanding 
MCA aneurysm. Thunderclap headache is a variant of 
migraine that simulates an SAH. Before concluding that 
a patient with sudden, severe headache has thunderclap 
migraine, a deﬁnitive workup for aneurysm or other 
intracranial pathology is required.
Aneurysms can undergo small ruptures and leaks 
of blood into the subarachnoid space, so-called sen-
tinel bleeds. Sudden unexplained headache at any loca-
tion should raise suspicion of SAH and be investigated, 
because a major hemorrhage may be imminent.
The initial clinical manifestations of SAH can be 
graded using the Hunt-Hess or World Federation of 
Neurosurgical Societies classiﬁcation schemes (Table 
28-3). For ruptured aneurysms, prognosis for good 
outcomes falls as the grade increases. For example, it is 
unusual for a Hunt-Hess grade 1 patient to die if the 
aneurysm is treated, but the mortality rate for grade 4 
and 5 patients may be as high as 80%.
Delayed neurologic deﬁcits
There are four major causes of delayed neurologic 
deﬁcits: rerupture, hydrocephalus, vasospasm, and 
hyponatremia.
1. Rerupture. The incidence of rerupture of an untreated 
aneurysm in the ﬁrst month following SAH is ∼30%, 
with the peak in the ﬁrst 7 days. Rerupture is asso-
ciated with a 60% mortality rate and poor outcome. 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
306
Early treatment eliminates this risk.
2. Hydrocephalus. Acute hydrocephalus can cause stu-
por and coma and can be mitigated by placement 
of an external ventricular drain. More often, sub-
acute hydrocephalus may develop over a few days or 
weeks and causes progressive drowsiness or slowed 
mentation (abulia) with incontinence. Hydrocepha-
lus is differentiated from cerebral vasospasm with 
a CT scan, CT angiogram, transcranial Doppler 
(TCD) ultrasound, or conventional x-ray angiog-
raphy. Hydrocephalus may clear spontaneously or 
require temporary ventricular drainage. Chronic 
hydrocephalus may develop weeks to months after 
SAH and manifest as gait difﬁculty, incontinence, 
or impaired mentation. Subtle signs may be a lack 
of initiative in conversation or a failure to recover 
independence.
3. Vasospasm. Narrowing of the arteries at the base of 
the brain following SAH causes symptomatic isch-
emia and infarction in ∼30% of patients and is the 
major cause of delayed morbidity and death. Signs 
of ischemia appear 4–14 days after the hemorrhage, 
most often at 7 days. The severity and distribution of 
vasospasm determine whether infarction will occur.
 
 Delayed vasospasm is believed to result from direct 
effects of clotted blood and its breakdown products 
on the arteries within the subarachnoid space. In gen-
eral, the more blood that surrounds the arteries, the 
greater the chance of symptomatic vasospasm. Spasm 
of major arteries produces symptoms referable to the 
appropriate vascular territory (Chap. 27). All of these 
focal symptoms may present abruptly, ﬂuctuate, or 
develop over a few days. In most cases, focal spasm is 
preceded by a decline in mental status.
 
 Vasospasm can be detected reliably with conven-
tional x-ray angiography, but this invasive procedure 
is expensive and carries the risk of stroke and other 
complications. TCD ultrasound is based on the 
principle that the velocity of blood ﬂow within an 
artery will rise as the lumen diameter is narrowed. 
By directing the probe along the MCA and proxi-
mal anterior cerebral artery (ACA), carotid terminus, 
and vertebral and basilar arteries on a daily or every-
other-day basis, vasospasm can be reliably detected 
and treatments initiated to prevent cerebral ischemia 
(see later). CT angiography is another method that 
can detect vasospasm.
 
 Severe cerebral edema in patients with infarction 
from vasospasm may increase the ICP enough to 
reduce cerebral perfusion pressure. Treatment may 
include mannitol, hyperventilation, and hemicrani-
ectomy; moderate hypothermia may have a role as 
well.
4. Hyponatremia. Hyponatremia may be profound and 
can develop quickly in the ﬁrst 2 weeks following 
SAH. There is both natriuresis and volume deple-
tion with SAH, so that patients become both hypo-
natremic and hypovolemic. Both atrial natriuretic 
peptide and brain natriuretic peptide have a role in 
producing this “cerebral salt-wasting syndrome.” 
Typically, it clears over the course of 1–2 weeks 
and, in the setting of SAH, should not be treated 
with free-water restriction as this may increase the 
risk of stroke (see later).
Laboratory evaluation and imaging
(Fig. 28-8) The hallmark of aneurysmal rupture is 
blood in the CSF. More than 95% of cases have enough 
blood to be visualized on a high-quality noncontrast 
CT scan obtained within 72 h. If the scan fails to estab-
lish the diagnosis of SAH and no mass lesion or obstruc-
tive hydrocephalus is found, a lumbar puncture should 
be performed to establish the presence of subarachnoid 
blood. Lysis of the red blood cells and subsequent con-
version of hemoglobin to bilirubin stains the spinal 
ﬂuid yellow within 6–12 h. This xanthochromic spinal 
ﬂuid peaks in intensity at 48 h and lasts for 1–4 weeks, 
depending on the amount of subarachnoid blood.
The extent and location of subarachnoid blood on 
noncontrast CT scan help locate the underlying aneu-
rysm, identify the cause of any neurologic deﬁcit, and 
predict delayed vasospasm. A high incidence of symp-
tomatic vasospasm in the MCA and ACA has been 
found when early CT scans show subarachnoid clots >5 
× 3 mm in the basal cisterns or layers of blood >1 mm 
TABLE 28-3
GRADING SCALES FOR SUBARACHNOID 
HEMORRHAGE
GRADE
HUNT-HESS SCALE
WORLD FEDERATION 
OF NEUROSURGICAL 
SOCIETIES (WFNS) 
SCALE
1
Mild headache, normal 
mental status, no cranial 
nerve or motor ﬁndings
GCSa score 15, no 
motor deﬁcits
2
Severe headache, normal 
mental status, may have 
cranial nerve deﬁcit
GCS score 13–14, 
no motor deﬁcits
3
Somnolent, confused, may 
have cranial nerve or mild 
motor deﬁcit
GCS score 13–14, 
with motor deﬁcits
4
Stupor, moderate to severe 
motor deﬁcit, may have 
intermittent reﬂex 
 posturing
GCS score 7–12, 
with or without 
motor deﬁcits
5
Coma, reﬂex posturing or 
ﬂaccid
GCS score 3–6, 
with or without 
motor deﬁcits
aGlasgow Coma Scale: See Table 36-2.
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
307
thick in the cerebral ﬁssures. CT scans less reliably pre-
dict vasospasm in the vertebral, basilar, or posterior 
cerebral arteries.
Lumbar puncture prior to an imaging procedure is 
indicated only if a CT scan is not available at the time 
of the suspected SAH. Once the diagnosis of hemor-
rhage from a ruptured saccular aneurysm is suspected, 
four-vessel conventional x-ray angiography (both 
carotids and both vertebrals) is generally performed to 
localize and deﬁne the anatomic details of the aneu-
rysm and to determine if other unruptured aneurysms 
exist (Fig. 28-8C). At some centers, the ruptured 
aneurysm can be treated using endovascular techniques 
at the time of the initial angiogram as a way to expe-
dite treatment and minimize the number of invasive 
procedures. CT angiography is an alternative method 
for locating the aneurysm and may be sufﬁcient to 
plan deﬁnitive therapy.
Close monitoring (daily or twice daily) of electro-
lytes is important because hyponatremia can occur pre-
cipitously during the ﬁrst 2 weeks following SAH (see 
earlier).
The electrocardiogram (ECG) frequently shows ST-
segment and T-wave changes similar to those associ-
ated with cardiac ischemia. Prolonged QRS complex, 
increased QT interval, and prominent “peaked” or 
deeply inverted symmetric T waves are usually second-
ary to the intracranial hemorrhage. There is evidence 
that structural myocardial lesions produced by circu-
lating catecholamines and excessive discharge of sym-
pathetic neurons may occur after SAH, causing these 
ECG changes and a reversible cardiomyopathy sufﬁ-
cient to cause shock or congestive heart failure. Echo-
cardiography reveals a pattern of regional wall motion 
abnormalities that follow the distribution of sympathetic 
nerves rather than the major coronary arteries, with rel-
ative sparing of the ventricular wall apex. The sympa-
thetic nerves themselves appear to be injured by direct 
toxicity from the excessive catecholamine release. An 
asymptomatic troponin elevation is common. Serious 
ventricular dysrhythmias are unusual.
TREATMENT 
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
Early aneurysm repair prevents rerupture and allows 
the safe application of techniques to improve blood 
flow (e.g., induced hypertension and hypervolemia) 
should symptomatic vasospasm develop. An aneu-
rysm can be “clipped” by a neurosurgeon or “coiled” 
by an endovascular surgeon. Surgical repair involves 
placing a metal clip across the aneurysm neck, thereby 
immediately eliminating the risk of rebleeding. This 
approach requires craniotomy and brain retraction, 
which is associated with neurologic morbidity. Endo-
vascular techniques involve placing platinum coils, 
or other embolic material, within the aneurysm via a 
catheter that is passed from the femoral artery. The 
aneurysm is packed tightly to enhance thrombosis and 
over time is walled off from the circulation (Fig. 28-8D). 
The only prospective randomized trial of surgery ver-
sus endovascular treatment for ruptured aneurysm, 
the International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT), 
was terminated early when 24% of patients treated 
with endovascular therapy were dead or dependent at 
1 year compared to 31% treated with surgery, a signifi-
cant 23% relative reduction. After 5 years, risk of death 
was lower in the coiling group, although the propor-
tion of survivors who were independent was the same 
in both groups. Risk of rebleeding was low, but more 
common in the coiling group. Also, because some 
aneurysms have a morphology that is not amenable to 
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 28-8 
Subarachnoid hemorrhage. A. CT angiography revealing 
an aneurysm of the left superior cerebellar artery. B. Non-
contrast CT scan at the level of the third ventricle revealing 
subarachnoid blood (bright) in the left sylvian ﬁssure and 
within the left lateral ventricle. C. Conventional anteroposte-
rior x-ray angiogram of the right vertebral and basilar artery 
showing the large aneurysm. D. Conventional angiogram 
following coil embolization of the aneurysm, whereby the 
aneurysm body is ﬁlled with platinum coils delivered through 
a microcatheter navigated from the femoral artery into the 
aneurysm neck.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
308
endovascular treatment, surgery remains an important 
treatment option. Centers that combine both endo-
vascular and neurosurgical expertise likely offer the 
best outcomes for patients, and there are reliable data 
showing that centers that specialize in aneurysm treat-
ment have improved mortality rates.
The medical management of SAH focuses on protect-
ing the airway, managing blood pressure before and 
after aneurysm treatment, preventing rebleeding prior 
to treatment, managing vasospasm, treating hydro-
cephalus, treating hyponatremia, and preventing pul-
monary embolus.
Intracranial hypertension following aneurysmal rup-
ture occurs secondary to subarachnoid blood, paren-
chymal hematoma, acute hydrocephalus, or loss of vas-
cular autoregulation. Patients who are stuporous should 
undergo emergent ventriculostomy to measure ICP and 
to treat high ICP in order to prevent cerebral ischemia. 
Medical therapies designed to combat raised ICP (e.g., 
mild hyperventilation, mannitol, and sedation) can also 
be used as needed. High ICP refractory to treatment is a 
poor prognostic sign.
Prior to definitive treatment of the ruptured aneu-
rysm, care is required to maintain adequate cerebral 
perfusion pressure while avoiding excessive elevation 
of arterial pressure. If the patient is alert, it is reasonable 
to lower the blood pressure to normal using nicardip-
ine, labetolol, or esmolol. If the patient has a depressed 
level of consciousness, ICP should be measured and the 
cerebral perfusion pressure targeted to 60–70 mmHg. 
If headache or neck pain is severe, mild sedation and 
analgesia are prescribed. Extreme sedation is avoided 
because it can obscure changes in neurologic status. 
Adequate hydration is necessary to avoid a decrease in 
blood volume predisposing to brain ischemia.
Seizures are uncommon at the onset of aneurysmal 
rupture. The quivering, jerking, and extensor posturing 
that often accompany loss of consciousness with SAH 
are probably related to the sharp rise in ICP rather than 
seizure. However, anticonvulsants are sometimes given 
as prophylactic therapy since a seizure could theoreti-
cally promote rebleeding.
Glucocorticoids may help reduce the head and neck 
ache caused by the irritative effect of the subarach-
noid blood. There is no good evidence that they reduce 
cerebral edema, are neuroprotective, or reduce vascu-
lar injury, and their routine use therefore is not recom-
mended.
Antifibrinolytic agents are not routinely prescribed 
but may be considered in patients in whom aneurysm 
treatment cannot proceed immediately. They are associ-
ated with a reduced incidence of aneurysmal rerupture 
but may also increase the risk of delayed cerebral infarc-
tion and deep-vein thrombosis (DVT).
Vasospasm remains the leading cause of morbidity 
and mortality following aneurysmal SAH. Treatment 
with the calcium channel antagonist nimodipine (60 
mg PO every 4 h) improves outcome, perhaps by pre-
venting ischemic injury rather than reducing the risk 
of vasospasm. Nimodipine can cause significant hypo-
tension in some patients, which may worsen cerebral 
ischemia in patients with vasospasm. Symptomatic 
cerebral vasospasm can also be treated by increas-
ing the cerebral perfusion pressure by raising mean 
arterial pressure through plasma volume expansion 
and the judicious use of IV vasopressor agents, usually 
phenylephrine or norepinephrine. Raised perfusion 
pressure has been associated with clinical improve-
ment in many patients, but high arterial pressure may 
promote rebleeding in unprotected aneurysms. Treat-
ment with induced hypertension and hypervolemia 
generally requires monitoring of arterial and central 
venous pressures; it is best to infuse pressors through 
a central venous line as well. Volume expansion helps 
prevent hypotension, augments cardiac output, and 
reduces blood viscosity by reducing the hematocrit. 
This method is called “triple-H” (hypertension, hemodi-
lution, and hypervolemic) therapy.
If symptomatic vasospasm persists despite optimal 
medical therapy, intraarterial vasodilators and percuta-
neous transluminal angioplasty are considered. Vasodi-
latation by direct angioplasty appears to be permanent, 
allowing triple-H therapy to be tapered sooner. The 
pharmacologic vasodilators (verapamil and nicardipine) 
do not last more than about 24 h, and therefore multi-
ple treatments may be required until the subarachnoid 
blood is reabsorbed. Although intraarterial papaverine 
is an effective vasodilator, there is evidence that papav-
erine may be neurotoxic, so its use should generally be 
avoided.
Acute hydrocephalus can cause stupor or coma. It 
may clear spontaneously or require temporary ventric-
ular drainage. When chronic hydrocephalus develops, 
ventricular shunting is the treatment of choice.
Free-water restriction is contraindicated in patients 
with SAH at risk for vasospasm because hypovole-
mia and hypotension may occur and precipitate cere-
bral ischemia. Many patients continue to experience a 
decline in serum sodium despite receiving parenteral 
fluids containing normal saline. Frequently, supplemen-
tal oral salt coupled with normal saline will mitigate 
hyponatremia, but often patients also require hyper-
tonic saline. Care must be taken not to correct serum 
sodium too quickly in patients with marked hyponatre-
mia of several days’ duration, as central pontine myelin-
olysis may occur.
All patients should have pneumatic compression 
stockings applied to prevent pulmonary embolism. 
 
CHAPTER 28
Neurologic Critical Care
309
Unfractionated heparin administered subcutaneously 
for DVT prophylaxis can be initiated immediately fol-
lowing endovascular treatment and within days fol-
lowing craniotomy and surgical clipping and is a useful 
adjunct to pneumatic compression stockings. Treatment 
of pulmonary embolus depends on whether the aneu-
rysm has been treated and whether or not the patient 
has had a craniotomy. Systemic anticoagulation with 
heparin is contraindicated in patients with ruptured and 
untreated aneurysms. It is a relative contraindication 
following craniotomy for several days, and it may delay 
thrombosis of a coiled aneurysm. Following craniotomy, 
use of inferior vena cava filters is preferred to prevent 
further pulmonary emboli, while systemic anticoagula-
tion with heparin is preferred following successful endo-
vascular treatment.
 William W. Seeley  ■   Bruce L. Miller 
310
 Dementia, a syndrome with many causes, affects >4 
million Americans and results in a total health care cost 
of >$100 billion annually. It is deﬁ ned as an acquired 
deterioration in cognitive abilities that impairs the suc-
cessful performance of activities of daily living. Mem-
ory is the most common cognitive ability lost with 
dementia; 10% of persons >70 and 20–40% of indi-
viduals >85 have clinically identiﬁ able memory loss. 
In addition to memory, other mental faculties may be 
affected; these include language, visuospatial ability, 
calculation, judgment, and problem solving. Neuropsy-
chiatric and social deﬁ cits also arise in many dementia 
syndromes, resulting in depression, apathy, hallucina-
tions, delusions, agitation, insomnia, and disinhibition. 
The most common forms of dementia are progressive, 
but some are static and unchanging or ﬂ uctuate from 
day to day or even minute to minute. Most patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most prevalent form 
of dementia, begin with memory impairment, although 
in other dementias, such as frontotemporal dementia, 
memory loss is not a presenting feature.  Focal cerebral 
disorders are discussed in  Chap. 18 and illustrated in a 
video library in  Chap. 19 . 
 FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE 
DEMENTIAS 
 Dementia syndromes result from the disruption of spe-
ciﬁ c large-scale neuronal networks; the location and 
severity of synaptic and neuronal loss combine to pro-
duce the clinical features ( Chap. 18 ). Behavior and 
mood are modulated by noradrenergic, serotonergic, 
and dopaminergic pathways, whereas cholinergic signal-
ing is critical for attention and memory functions. The 
dementias differ in the relative neurotransmitter deﬁ cit 
proﬁ les; accordingly, accurate diagnosis guides effective 
pharmacotherapy. 
 AD begins in the transentorhinal region, spreads to 
the hippocampus, and then moves to lateral and poste-
rior temporal and parietal neocortex, eventually caus-
ing a more widespread degeneration.  Vascular dementia is 
associated with focal damage in a random patchwork of 
cortical and subcortical regions or white matter tracts that 
disconnect nodes within distributed networks. In keeping 
with the anatomy, AD typically presents with memory 
loss accompanied later by aphasia or navigational prob-
lems. In contrast, patients with dementias that begin in 
frontal or subcortical regions such as  frontotemporal demen-
tia (FTD) or  Huntington’s disease (HD) are less likely to 
begin with memory problems and more likely to have 
difﬁ culties with judgment, mood, and behavior. 
 Lesions of cortical-striatal pathways produce speciﬁ c 
effects on behavior. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
bears connections with a central band of the caudate. 
Lesions of either node or connecting white matter path-
ways result in poor organization and planning, decreased 
cognitive ﬂ exibility, and impaired working memory. The 
lateral orbital frontal cortex connects with the ventrome-
dial caudate. Lesions of this system cause impulsiveness, 
distractibility, and disinhibition. The anterior cingulate 
cortex projects to the nucleus accumbens, and interrup-
tion of these connections produces apathy, poverty of 
speech, or even akinetic mutism. All corticostriatal sys-
tems also include topographically organized projections 
through the pallidum and thalamus, and damage to these 
nodes can likewise reproduce the clinical syndrome of 
corticostriatal damage. 
 THE CAUSES OF DEMENTIA 
 The single strongest risk factor for dementia is increasing 
age. The prevalence of disabling memory loss increases 
 ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND OTHER DEMENTIAS 
 CHAPTER 29 
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
311
with each decade over age 50 and is usually associated 
with the microscopic changes of AD at autopsy. Yet 
some centenarians have intact memory function and no 
evidence of clinically signiﬁcant dementia. Whether 
dementia is an inevitable consequence of normal human 
aging remains controversial.
The many causes of dementia are listed in Table 29-1. 
The frequency of each condition depends on the age 
group under study, the access of the group to medical 
care, the country of origin, and perhaps racial or ethnic 
background. AD is the most common cause of demen-
tia in Western countries, accounting for more than half 
of all patients. Vascular disease is considered the second 
most frequent cause for dementia and is particularly com-
mon in elderly patients or populations with limited access 
to medical care, where vascular risk factors are under-
treated. Often, vascular disease is mixed with other neu-
rodegenerative disorders, making it difﬁcult, even for the 
neuropathologist, to estimate the contribution of cere-
brovascular disease to the cognitive disorder in an indi-
vidual patient. Dementias related to Parkinson’s disease 
(PD) are extremely common, and temporally can follow 
a parkinsonian disorder as seen with PD-related demen-
tia (PDD) or can occur concurrently with or preceding 
the motor syndrome as with dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB). In patients under the age of 65, FTD rivals AD 
as the most common cause of dementia. Chronic intoxica-
tions, including those resulting from alcohol and prescrip-
tion drugs, are an important and often treatable cause of 
dementia. Other disorders listed in the table are uncom-
mon but important because many are reversible. The 
classiﬁcation of dementing illnesses into reversible and 
irreversible disorders is a useful approach to differential 
diagnosis. When effective treatments for the neurodegen-
erative conditions emerge, this dichotomy will become 
obsolete.
In a study of 1000 persons attending a memory disor-
ders clinic, 19% had a potentially reversible cause of the 
cognitive impairment and 23% had a potentially revers-
ible concomitant condition. The three most common 
potentially reversible diagnoses were depression, hydro-
cephalus, and alcohol dependence (Table 29-1).
Subtle cumulative decline in episodic memory is a 
natural part of aging. This frustrating experience, often 
the source of jokes and humor, is referred to as benign for-
getfulness of the elderly. Benign means that it is not so pro-
gressive or serious that it impairs reasonably successful 
and productive daily functioning, although the distinc-
tion between benign and more signiﬁcant memory loss 
can be difﬁcult to make. At age 85, the average person is 
able to learn and recall approximately one-half the num-
ber of items (e.g., words on a list) that he or she could 
at age 18. A measurable cognitive problem that does not 
disrupt daily activities is often referred to as mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI). Factors that predict progression from 
TABLE 29-1
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF DEMENTIA
Most Common Causes of Dementia
Alzheimer’s disease
Vascular dementia
 Multi-infarct
 Diffuse white matter  
disease (Binswanger’s)
Alcoholisma
Parkinson’s disease
Drug/medication intoxicationa
Less Common Causes of Dementia
Vitamin deﬁciencies
 Thiamine (B1): Wernicke’s 
encephalopathya
 B12 (subacute combined 
degeneration)a
 Nicotinic acid (pellagra)a
Endocrine and other organ 
failure
 Hypothyroidisma
 Adrenal insufﬁciency and 
Cushing’s syndromea
 Hypo- and hyperparathy-
roidisma
 Renal failurea
 Liver failurea
 Pulmonary failurea
Chronic infections
 HIV
 Neurosyphilisa
 Papovavirus (JC virus)
(progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy)
 Tuberculosis, fungal, and 
protozoala
 Whipple’s diseasea
Head trauma and diffuse 
brain damage
 Dementia pugilistica
 Chronic subdural hema-
tomaa
 Postanoxia
 Postencephalitis
 Normal-pressure hydro-
cephalusa
Neoplastic
 Primary brain tumora
 Metastatic brain tumora
 Paraneoplastic limbic 
encephalitis
Toxic disorders
 Drug, medication, and nar-
cotic poisoninga
 Heavy metal intoxicationa
 Dialysis dementia (aluminum)
 Organic toxins
Psychiatric
 Depression (pseudodementia)a
 Schizophreniaa
 Conversion reactiona
Degenerative disorders
 Huntington’s disease
 Dementia with Lewy bodies
 Progressive supranuclear 
palsy
 Multisystem atrophy
 Hereditary ataxias (some 
forms)
 Motor neuron disease (amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis 
[ALS]; some forms)
 Frontotemporal dementia
 Corticobasal degeneration
 Multiple sclerosis
 Adult Down syndrome with 
Alzheimer’s disease
 ALS Parkinson’s dementia 
complex of Guam
 Prion (Creutzfeldt-Jakob and 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-
Scheinker diseases)
Miscellaneous
 Sarcoidosisa
 Vasculitisa
 CADASIL, etc.
 Acute intermittent porphyriaa
 Recurrent nonconvulsive  
seizuresa
Additional conditions in  
children or adolescents
 Pantothenate kinase-associ-
ated neurodegeneration
 Subacute sclerosing panen-
cephalitis
 Metabolic disorders (e.g.,  
Wilson’s and Leigh’s dis-
eases, leukodystrophies, 
lipid storage diseases,  
mitochondrial mutations)
aPotentially reversible dementia.
Abbreviation: CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with 
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
312
MCI to AD include a prominent memory deﬁcit, fam-
ily history of dementia, presence of an apolipoprotein ε4 
(Apo ε4) allele, small hippocampal volumes, and AD-like 
signature of cortical atrophy, low cerebrospinal ﬂuid Aβ 
and elevated tau or positive amyloid imaging with Pitts-
burgh Compound-B (PiB), although the latter remains 
an experimental approach not yet available for routine 
clinical use.
The major degenerative dementias include AD, DLB, 
FTD and related disorders, HD, and prion diseases, includ-
ing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). These disorders are all 
associated with the abnormal aggregation of a speciﬁc pro-
tein: Aβ42 and tau in AD; α-synuclein in DLB; tau, TAR 
DNA-binding protein of 43kDa (TDP-43), or fused in 
sarcoma (FUS) in FTD; huntingtin in HD; and misfolded 
prion protein (PrPsc) in CJD (Table 29-2).
TABLE 29-2
THE MOLECULAR BASIS FOR DEGENERATIVE DEMENTIA
DEMENTIA
MOLECULAR BASIS
CAUSAL GENES AND 
(CHROMOSOME)
SUSCEPTIBILITY GENES
PATHOLOGY
AD
Aβ
<2% carry these mutations.
APP (21), PS-1 (14), PS-2 (1) 
(most mutations are in PS-1)
Apo ε4 (19)
Amyloid plaques, neuroﬁ-
brillary tangles
FTD
Tau
Tau exon and intron mutations 
(17) (about 10% of familial cases)
Progranulin (17) (10% of familial 
cases)
H1 tau haplotypes
Tau inclusions, Pick 
bodies, neuroﬁbrillary 
tangles
TDP-43
FUS
TDP-43 inclusions
FUS inclusions
DLB
α-synuclein
Very rare α-synuclein (4) (domi-
nant)
Unknown
α-synuclein inclusions 
(Lewy bodies)
CJD
PrPSC proteins
Prion (20) (up to 15% of cases 
carry these dominant mutations)
Codon 129 homozy-
gosity for methionine 
or valine
Tau inclusions, spongi-
form changes, gliosis
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; FTD, frontotemporal dementia.
HISTORY The history should concentrate on the 
onset, duration, and tempo of progression. An acute or 
subacute onset of confusion may represent delirium and 
should trigger the search for intoxication, infection, or 
metabolic derangement. An elderly person with slowly 
progressive memory loss over several years is likely to suf-
fer from AD. Nearly 75% of patients with AD begin with 
memory symptoms, but other early symptoms include 
difficulty with managing money, driving, shopping, fol-
lowing instructions, finding words, or navigating. A per-
sonality change, disinhibition, and weight gain or com-
pulsive eating suggest FTD, not AD. FTD is also suggested 
by prominent apathy, compulsivity, or progressive loss of 
speech fluency or word comprehension, and by a relative 
sparing of memory or visuospatial abilities. The diagnosis 
of DLB is suggested by early visual hallucinations; par-
kinsonism; brittle proneness to delirium or sensitivity to 
psychoactive medications; REM behavior disorder (RBD, 
the loss of skeletal muscle paralysis during dreaming); or 
Capgras’ syndrome, the delusion that a familiar person 
has been replaced by an impostor.
A history of stroke with irregular stepwise progres-
sion suggests vascular dementia. Vascular dementia 
is also commonly seen in the setting of hypertension, 
atrial fibrillation, peripheral vascular disease, and diabe-
tes. In patients suffering from cerebrovascular disease, 
it can be difficult to determine whether the dementia is 
due to AD, vascular disease, or a mixture of the two as 
many of the risk factors for vascular dementia, includ-
ing diabetes, high cholesterol, elevated homocysteine, 
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Dementias
Three major issues should be kept at the forefront: (1) 
What is the most accurate diagnosis? (2) Is there a treat-
able or reversible component to the dementia? (3) Can 
the physician help to alleviate the burden on caregivers? 
A broad overview of the approach to dementia is shown 
in Table 29-3. The major degenerative dementias can 
usually be distinguished by the initial symptoms; neuro-
psychological, neuropsychiatric, and neurologic findings; 
and neuroimaging features (Table 29-4).
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
313
and low exercise, are also risk factors for AD. Rapid pro-
gression with motor rigidity and myoclonus suggests 
CJD. Seizures may indicate strokes or neoplasm but also 
occur in AD, particularly early age of onset AD. Gait dis-
turbance is common in vascular dementia, PD/DLB, or 
normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH). A prior history of 
high-risk sexual behaviors or intravenous drug use should 
trigger a search for central nervous system (CNS) infec-
tion, especially for HIV or syphilis. A history of recurrent 
head trauma could indicate chronic subdural hematoma, 
dementia pugilistica, or NPH. Subacute onset of severe 
amnesia and psychosis with mesial temporal T2 hyperin-
tensities on MRI should raise concern for paraneoplastic 
limbic encephalitis, especially in a long-term smoker or 
other patients at risk for cancer. Related nonparaneo-
plastic autoimmune conditions can present with a similar 
tempo and imaging signature. Alcoholism creates risk for 
malnutrition and thiamine deficiency. Veganism, bowel 
TABLE 29-3
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH DEMENTIA
ROUTINE EVALUATION
OPTIONAL FOCUSED TESTS
OCCASIONALLY HELPFUL TESTS
History
Psychometric testing
EEG
Physical examination
Chest x-ray
Parathyroid function
Laboratory tests
Lumbar puncture
Adrenal function
 Thyroid function (TSH)
Liver function
Urine heavy metals
 Vitamin B12
Renal function
RBC sedimentation rate
 Complete blood count
Urine toxin screen
Angiogram
 Electrolytes
HIV
Brain biopsy
 CT/MRI
Apolipoprotein E
SPECT
RPR or VDRL
PET
Diagnostic Categories
REVERSIBLE CAUSES
IRREVERSIBLE/DEGENERATIVE DEMENTIAS
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Examples
Examples
Depression
 Hypothyroidism
 Alzheimer’s
Schizophrenia
 Thiamine deﬁciency
 Frontotemporal dementia
Conversion reaction
 Vitamin B12 deﬁciency
 Huntington’s
 Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
 Dementia with Lewy bodies
 Subdural hematoma
 Vascular
 Chronic infection
 Leukoencephalopathies
 Brain tumor
 Parkinson’s
 Drug intoxication
Associated Treatable Conditions
Depression 
Agitation
Seizures 
Caregiver “burnout”
Insomnia 
Drug side effects
Abbreviations: PET, positron emission tomography; RPR, rapid plasma reagin (test); SPECT, single-photon emission CT; VDRL, Venereal 
Disease Research Laboratory (test for syphilis).
irradiation, an autoimmune diathesis, or a remote his-
tory of gastric surgery can result in B12 deficiency. Certain 
occupations, such as working in a battery or chemical 
factory, might indicate heavy metal intoxication. Careful 
review of medication intake, especially for sedatives and 
analgesics, may raise the issue of chronic drug intoxica-
tion. An autosomal dominant family history is found in 
HD and in familial forms of AD, FTD, DLB, or prion disor-
ders. The recent death of a loved one, or depressive signs 
such as insomnia or weight loss, raises the possibility of 
depression-related cognitive impairments.
PHYSICAL AND NEUROLOGIC EXAMINA-
TION A thorough general and neurologic examination 
is essential to document dementia, to look for other signs 
of nervous system involvement, and to search for clues 
suggesting a systemic disease that might be responsi-
ble for the cognitive disorder. Typical AD does not affect 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
314
motor systems until later in the course. In contrast, FTD 
patients often develop axial rigidity, supranuclear gaze 
palsy, or a motor neuron disease reminiscent of amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In DLB, the initial symptoms 
may include the new onset of a parkinsonian syndrome 
(resting tremor, cogwheel rigidity, bradykinesia, festi-
nating gait) but often starts with visual hallucinations or 
dementia. Symptoms referable to the lower brainstem 
(RBD, gastrointestinal or autonomic problems) may arise 
years before parkinsonism or dementia. Corticobasal syn-
drome (CBS) features asymmetric akinesia and rigidity, 
dystonia, myoclonus, alien limb phenomena, and pyra-
midal or cortical sensory deficits. Associated cognitive 
features include nonfluent aphasia with or without motor 
speech impairment, executive dysfunction, apraxia, or a 
behavioral disorder. Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) 
is associated with unexplained falls, axial rigidity, dyspha-
gia, and vertical gaze deficits. CJD is suggested by the 
presence of diffuse rigidity, an akinetic-mute state, and 
prominent, often startle-sensitive myoclonus.
Hemiparesis or other focal neurologic deficits sug-
gest vascular dementia or brain tumor. Dementia with a 
myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy suggests vitamin 
B12 deficiency. Peripheral neuropathy could also indicate 
another vitamin deficiency, heavy metal intoxication, 
TABLE 29-4
 CLINICAL DIFFERENTIATION OF THE MAJOR DEMENTIAS
DISEASE
FIRST SYMPTOM
MENTAL STATUS
NEUROPSYCHIATRY
NEUROLOGY
IMAGING
AD
Memory loss
Episodic memory 
loss
Initially normal
Initially normal
Entorhinal cortex 
and hippocampal 
atrophy
FTD
Apathy; poor judgment/
insight, speech/lan-
guage; hyperorality
Frontal/executive, 
language; spares 
drawing
Apathy, disinhibi-
tion, hyperorality, 
euphoria, depres-
sion
May have vertical 
gaze palsy, axial 
rigidity, dystonia, 
alien hand, or MND
Frontal, insular, 
and/or temporal 
atrophy; spares 
posterior parietal 
lobe
DLB
Visual hallucinations, 
REM sleep disorder, 
delirium, Capgras’ syn-
drome, parkinsonism
Drawing and fron-
tal/executive; 
spares memory; 
delirium prone
Visual hallucina-
tions, depression, 
sleep disorder, 
delusions
Parkinsonism
Posterior parietal 
atrophy; hippo-
campi larger than 
in AD
CJD
Dementia, mood, anxi-
ety, movement disor-
ders
Variable, frontal/
executive, focal 
cortical, memory
Depression, anxiety
Myoclonus, rigidity, 
parkinsonism
Cortical ribboning 
and basal ganglia 
or thalamus hyper-
intensity on diffu-
sion/FLAIR MRI
Vascular
Often but not always 
sudden; variable; apa-
thy, falls, focal weak-
ness
Frontal/executive, 
cognitive slow-
ing; can spare 
memory
Apathy, delusions, 
anxiety
Usually motor slow-
ing, spasticity; can 
be normal
Cortical and/or 
subcortical infarc-
tions, conﬂuent 
white matter dis-
ease
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CBD, cortical basal degeneration; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; 
FTD, frontotemporal dementia; MND, motor neuron disease; PSP, progressive supranuclear palsy.
thyroid dysfunction, Lyme disease, or vasculitis. Dry, cool 
skin, hair loss, and bradycardia suggest hypothyroidism. 
Fluctuating confusion associated with repetitive stereo-
typed movements may indicate ongoing limbic, tem-
poral, or frontal seizures. Hearing impairment or visual 
loss may produce confusion and disorientation misinter-
preted as dementia. Such sensory deficits are common in 
the elderly but can be a manifestation of mitochondrial 
disorders.
COGNITIVE AND NEUROPSYCHIATRIC EXA-
MINATION Brief screening tools such as the mini-
mental status examination (MMSE) help to confirm the 
presence of cognitive impairment and to follow the pro-
gression of dementia (Table 29-5). The MMSE, a simple 
30-point test of cognitive function, contains tests of ori-
entation, working memory (e.g., spell world backwards), 
episodic memory (orientation and 3-word recall), lan-
guage comprehension, naming, and figure copying. In 
most patients with MCI and some with clinically apparent 
AD, the MMSE may be normal and a more rigorous set 
of neuropsychological tests will be required. When the 
etiology for the dementia syndrome remains in doubt, 
a specially tailored evaluation should be performed 
that includes tasks of working and episodic memory, 
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
315
executive function, language, and visuospatial and per-
ceptual abilities. In AD the early deficits involve episodic 
memory, category generation (“name as many animals 
as you can in one minute”), and visuoconstructive abil-
ity. Usually deficits in verbal or visual episodic memory 
are the first neuropsychological abnormalities detected, 
and tasks that require the patient to recall a long list of 
words or a series of pictures after a predetermined delay 
will demonstrate deficits in most patients. In FTD, the 
earliest deficits on cognitive testing involve executive or 
language (speech or naming) function. DLB patients have 
more severe deficits in visuospatial function but do better 
on episodic memory tasks than patients with AD. Patients 
with vascular dementia often demonstrate a mixture 
of executive and visuospatial deficits, with prominent 
psychomotor slowing. In delirium, the most prominent 
deficits involve attention, working memory, and execu-
tive function, making the assessment of other cognitive 
domains challenging and often uninformative.
TABLE 29-5
THE MINI-MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION
POINTS
Orientation
 Name: season/date/day/month/
year
5 (1 for each name)
 Name: hospital/ﬂoor/town/state/
country
5 (1 for each name)
Registration
 Identify three objects by name 
and ask patient to repeat
3 (1 for each object)
Attention and calculation
 Serial 7s; subtract from 100 
(e.g., 93–86–79–72–65)
5 (1 for each subtrac-
tion)
Recall
 Recall the three objects pre-
sented earlier
3 (1 for each object)
Language
 Name pencil and watch
2 (1 for each object)
 Repeat “No ifs, ands, or buts”
1
 Follow a 3-step command (e.g., 
“Take this paper, fold it in half, 
and place it on the table”)
3 (1 for each com-
mand)
 Write “close your eyes” and ask 
patient to obey written com-
mand
1
 Ask patient to write a sentence
1
 Ask patient to copy a design 
(e.g., intersecting pentagons)
1
Total
30
A functional assessment should also be performed. 
The physician should determine the day-to-day impact of 
the disorder on the patient’s memory, community affairs, 
hobbies, judgment, dressing, and eating. Knowledge of 
the patient’s day-to-day function will help the clinician 
and the family to organize a therapeutic approach.
Neuropsychiatric assessment is important for diag-
nosis, prognosis, and treatment. In the early stages of 
AD, mild depressive features, social withdrawal, and irri-
tability or anxiety are the most prominent psychiatric 
changes, but patients often maintain core social skills into 
the middle or late stages, when delusions, agitation, and 
sleep disturbance may emerge. In FTD, dramatic person-
ality change featuring apathy, overeating, compulsions, 
disinhibition, euphoria, and loss of empathy are early 
and common. DLB is associated with visual hallucina-
tions, delusions related to person or place identity, RBD, 
and excessive daytime sleepiness. Dramatic fluctuations 
occur not only in cognition but also in primary arousal, 
such that caregivers may seek emergency room evalua-
tion for suspected stroke. Vascular dementia can present 
with psychiatric symptoms such as depression, anxiety, 
delusions, disinhibition, or apathy.
LABORATORY TESTS The choice of laboratory 
tests in the evaluation of dementia is complex. The physi-
cian must take measures to avoid missing a reversible or 
treatable cause, yet no single treatable etiology is com-
mon; thus, a screen must employ multiple tests, each of 
which has a low yield. Cost/benefit ratios are difficult to 
assess, and many laboratory screening algorithms for 
dementia discourage multiple tests. Nevertheless, even 
a test with only a 1–2% positive rate is probably worth 
undertaking if the alternative is missing a treatable cause 
of dementia. Table 29-3 lists most screening tests for 
dementia. The American Academy of Neurology recom-
mends the routine measurement of thyroid function, a 
vitamin B12 level, and a neuroimaging study (CT or MRI).
Neuroimaging studies help to rule out primary and 
metastatic neoplasms, locate areas of infarction, detect 
subdural hematomas, and suggest NPH or diffuse white 
matter disease. They also help to establish a regional pat-
tern of atrophy. Support for the diagnosis of AD includes 
hippocampal atrophy in addition to posterior-predom-
inant cortical atrophy. Focal frontal and/or anterior tem-
poral atrophy suggests FTD. DLB often features less 
prominent atrophy, with greater involvement of amyg-
dala than hippocampus. In CJD, MR diffusion-weighted 
imaging reveals abnormalities in the cortical ribbon and 
basal ganglia in the majority of patients. Extensive white 
matter abnormalities correlate with a vascular etiology 
for dementia. The role of functional-metabolic imaging 
in the diagnosis of dementia is still under study, although 
the Federal Drug Administration has approved the use 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
316
of positron emission tomography (PET) in dementia dif-
ferential diagnosis. Single-photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) and PET scanning show temporal-
parietal hypoperfusion or hypometabolism in AD and 
frontotemporal deficits in FTD, but these changes often 
reflect atrophy and can therefore be detected with MRI 
alone in many patients. Recently, amyloid imaging has 
shown promise for the diagnosis of AD, and Pittsburgh 
Compound-B (PiB) and 18F-AV-45 appear to be reliable 
radioligands for detecting brain amyloid associated 
with amyloid angiopathy or neuritic plaques (Fig. 29-1). 
Because these abnormalities can be seen in cognitively 
normal older persons, however, amyloid imaging may 
detect preclinical or incidental AD in patients lacking an 
AD-like dementia syndrome. Once powerful disease-
modifying therapies become available, use of these 
biomarkers may help to identify treatment candidates 
before irreversible brain injury has occurred. In the mean-
time, however, the significance of detecting brain amy-
loid in an asymptomatic elder remains a topic of vigorous 
investigation. Similarly, MRI perfusion and functional con-
nectivity methods are being explored as potential treat-
ment-monitoring strategies.
Lumbar puncture need not be done routinely in the 
evaluation of dementia, but it is indicated when CNS 
infection or inflammation are credible diagnostic possi-
bilities. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of tau protein and 
Aβ42 show differing patterns with the various dementias; 
however, the sensitivity and specificity of these mea-
sures are not yet sufficiently high to warrant routine use. 
Formal psychometric testing, although not necessary 
in every patient with dementia, helps to document the 
severity of cognitive disturbance, suggest psychogenic 
causes, and provide a more formal method for follow-
ing the disease course. Electroencephalogram (EEG) is 
rarely helpful except to suggest CJD (repetitive bursts of 
diffuse high-amplitude sharp waves, or “periodic com-
plexes”) or an underlying nonconvulsive seizure disorder 
(epileptiform discharges). Brain biopsy (including menin-
ges) is not advised except to diagnose vasculitis, poten-
tially treatable neoplasms, or unusual infections when the 
diagnosis is uncertain. Systemic disorders with CNS mani-
festations, such as sarcoidosis, can usually be confirmed 
through biopsy of lymph node or solid organ rather than 
brain. Angiography should be considered when cerebral 
vasculitis or cerebral venous thrombosis is a possible 
cause of the dementia.
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Approximately 10% of all persons over the age of 70 
have signiﬁcant memory loss, and in more than half the 
cause is AD. It is estimated that the annual total cost of 
caring for a single AD patient in an advanced stage of 
the disease is >$50,000. The disease also exacts a heavy 
emotional toll on family members and caregivers. AD 
can occur in any decade of adulthood, but it is the most 
common cause of dementia in the elderly. AD most 
often presents with an insidious onset of memory loss 
followed by a slowly progressive dementia over several 
years. Pathologically, atrophy is distributed throughout 
the medial temporal lobes, as well as lateral and medial 
parietal lobes and lateral frontal cortex. Microscopically, 
there are neuritic plaques containing Aβ, neuroﬁbrillary 
tangles (NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau 
ﬁlaments, and accumulation of amyloid in blood vessel 
walls in cortex and leptomeninges (see “Pathology”). 
The identiﬁcation of four different susceptibility genes 
for AD has provided a foundation for rapid progress in 
understanding the biologic basis of the disorder.
FIGURE 29-1 
PET images obtained with the amyloid-imaging agent 
Pittsburgh Compound-B ([11C]PIB) in a normal control (left); 
three different patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI, 
center); and a mild AD patient (right). Some MCI patients 
have control-like levels of amyloid, some have AD-like levels 
of amyloid, and some have intermediate levels. AD, Alzheim-
er’s disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PET, positron 
emission tomography.
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
317
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The cognitive changes of AD tend to follow a charac-
teristic pattern, beginning with memory impairment 
and spreading to language and visuospatial deﬁcits. Yet, 
approximately 20% of patients with AD present with 
nonmemory complaints such as word-ﬁnding, organi-
zational, or navigational difﬁculty. In the early stages of 
the disease, the memory loss may go unrecognized or be 
ascribed to benign forgetfulness. Once the memory loss 
becomes noticeable to the patient and spouse and falls 
1.5 standard deviations below normal on standardized 
memory tests, the term MCI is applied. This construct 
provides useful prognostic information, because approxi-
mately 50% of patients with MCI (roughly 12% per year) 
will progress to AD over 4 years. Slowly the cognitive 
problems begin to interfere with daily activities, such as 
keeping track of ﬁnances, following instructions on the 
job, driving, shopping, and housekeeping. Some patients 
are unaware of these difﬁculties (anosognosia), while oth-
ers remain acutely attuned to their deﬁcits. Changes in 
environment (such as vacations or hospital stays) may be 
disorienting, and the patient may become lost on walks 
or while driving. In the middle stages of AD, the patient 
is unable to work, is easily lost and confused, and requires 
daily supervision. Social graces, routine behavior, and 
superﬁcial conversation may be surprisingly intact. Lan-
guage becomes impaired—ﬁrst naming, then compre-
hension, and ﬁnally ﬂuency. In some patients, aphasia is 
an early and prominent feature. Word-ﬁnding difﬁcul-
ties and circumlocution may be a problem even when 
formal testing demonstrates intact naming and ﬂuency. 
Apraxia emerges, and patients have trouble performing 
learned sequential motor tasks. Visuospatial deﬁcits begin 
to interfere with dressing, eating, or even walking, and 
patients fail to solve simple puzzles or copy geometric 
ﬁgures. Simple calculations and clock reading become 
difﬁcult in parallel.
In the late stages of the disease, some persons remain 
ambulatory but wander aimlessly. Loss of judgment and 
reasoning is inevitable. Delusions are common and usu-
ally simple, with common themes of theft, inﬁdelity, or 
misidentiﬁcation. Approximately 10% of AD patients 
develop Capgras’ syndrome, believing that a caregiver 
has been replaced by an impostor. In contrast to DLB, 
where Capgras’ syndrome is an early feature, in AD this 
syndrome emerges later. Loss of inhibitions and aggres-
sion may occur and alternate with passivity and with-
drawal. Sleep-wake patterns are disrupted, and night-
time wandering becomes disturbing to the household. 
Some patients develop a shufﬂing gait with generalized 
muscle rigidity associated with slowness and awkwardness 
of movement. Patients often look parkinsonian (Chap. 
30) but rarely have a high-amplitude, rhythmic, resting 
tremor. In end-stage AD, patients become rigid, mute, 
incontinent, and bedridden. Help is needed with eating, 
dressing, and toileting. Hyperactive tendon reﬂexes and 
myoclonic jerks (sudden brief contractions of various 
muscles or the whole body) may occur spontaneously or 
in response to physical or auditory stimulation. Gener-
alized seizures may also occur. Often death results from 
malnutrition, secondary infections, pulmonary emboli, 
heart disease, or, most commonly, aspiration. The typical 
duration of AD is 8–10 years, but the course can range 
from 1 to 25 years. For unknown reasons, some AD 
patients show a steady decline in function, while others 
have prolonged plateaus without major deterioration.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Early in the disease course, other etiologies of dementia 
should be excluded (Table  29-1). Neuroimaging studies 
(CT and MRI) do not show a single speciﬁc pattern with 
AD and may be normal early in the course of the disease. 
As AD progresses, more distributed but usually posterior-
predominant cortical atrophy becomes apparent, along 
with atrophy of the medial temporal memory structures 
(Fig. 29-2A, B). The main purpose of imaging is to 
exclude other disorders, such as primary and second-
ary neoplasms, vascular dementia, diffuse white matter 
disease, and NPH; it also helps to distinguish AD from 
other degenerative disorders with distinctive imaging 
patterns such as FTD or CJD. Functional imaging stud-
ies in AD reveal hypoperfusion or hypometabolism in 
the posterior temporal-parietal cortex (Fig. 29-2C, D). 
The EEG in AD is normal or shows nonspeciﬁc slow-
ing. Routine spinal ﬂuid examination is also normal. CSF 
Aβ42 levels are reduced, whereas levels of hyperphos-
phorylated tau protein are elevated, but the consider-
able overlap of these levels with those of the normal aged 
population limits the usefulness of these measurements in 
diagnosis. The use of blood ApoE genotyping is discussed 
under “Pathology.” Slowly progressive decline in memory and 
orientation, normal results on laboratory tests, and an MRI or 
CT scan showing only distributed or posteriorly predominant 
cortical and hippocampal atrophy is highly suggestive of AD. 
A clinical diagnosis of AD reached after careful evalua-
tion is conﬁrmed at autopsy about 90% of the time, with 
misdiagnosed cases usually representing one of the other 
dementing disorders described later in this chapter, a 
mixture of AD with vascular pathology, or DLB.
Simple clinical clues are useful in the differential diag-
nosis. Early prominent gait disturbance with only mild 
memory loss suggests vascular dementia or, rarely, NPH 
(see later). Resting tremor with stooped posture, brady-
kinesia, and masked facies suggest PD (Chap. 30). When 
dementia occurs after a well-established diagnosis of PD, 
PDD is usually the correct diagnosis. The early appear-
ance of parkinsonian features in association with ﬂuctu-
ating alertness, visual hallucinations, or delusional mis-
identiﬁcation suggests DLB. Chronic alcoholism should 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
318
prompt the search for vitamin deﬁciency. Loss of sensi-
bility to position and vibration stimuli accompanied by 
Babinski responses suggests vitamin B12 deﬁciency (Chap. 
35). Early onset of a focal seizure suggests a metastatic or 
primary brain neoplasm (Chap. 37). Previous or ongoing 
depression raises suspicion for depression-related cogni-
tive impairment, although AD can feature a depressive 
prodrome. A history of treatment for insomnia, anxi-
ety, psychiatric disturbance, or epilepsy suggests chronic 
drug intoxication. Rapid progression over a few weeks 
or months associated with rigidity and myoclonus sug-
gests CJD (Chap. 43). Prominent behavioral changes 
with intact navigation and focal anterior-predominant 
atrophy on brain imaging are typical of FTD. A posi-
tive family history of dementia suggests either one of the 
familial forms of AD or one of the other genetic disorders 
associated with dementia, such as HD (see later), FTD 
(see later), prion disease (Chap. 43), or rare hereditary 
ataxias (Chap. 31).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The most important risk factors for AD are old age and 
a positive family history. The frequency of AD increases 
with each decade of adult life, reaching 20–40% of the 
population over the age of 85. A positive family history of 
dementia suggests a genetic cause of AD, although auto-
somal dominant inheritance occurs in only 2% of patients 
with AD. Female sex may also be a risk factor indepen-
dent of the greater longevity of women. Some AD patients 
have a past history of head trauma with concussion. AD is 
more common in groups with low educational attainment, 
but education inﬂuences test-taking ability, and it is clear 
that AD can affect persons of all intellectual levels. One 
study found that the capacity to express complex written 
language in early adulthood correlated with a decreased 
risk for AD. Numerous environmental factors, includ-
ing aluminum, mercury, and viruses, have been proposed 
as causes of AD, but none has been demonstrated to play 
a signiﬁcant role. Similarly, several studies suggest that the 
use of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agents is associated 
with a decreased risk of AD, but this has not been con-
ﬁrmed in large prospective studies. Vascular disease, and 
stroke in particular, seems to lower the threshold for the 
clinical expression of AD. Also, in many patients with 
AD, amyloid angiopathy can lead to microhemorrhages, 
large lobar hemorrhages, or ischemic infarctions. Diabetes 
increases the risk of AD threefold. Elevated homocysteine 
and cholesterol levels; hypertension; diminished serum lev-
els of folic acid; low dietary intake of fruits, vegetables, and 
red wine; and low levels of exercise are all being explored 
as potential risk factors for AD.
PATHOLOGY
At autopsy, the earliest and most severe degeneration is 
usually found in the medial temporal lobe (entorhinal/
perirhinal cortex and hippocampus), lateral temporal 
cortex, and nucleus basalis of Meynert. The characteris-
tic microscopic ﬁndings are neuritic plaques and NFTs. 
These lesions accumulate in small numbers during nor-
mal brain aging but dominate the picture in AD. Increas-
ing evidence suggests that soluble amyloid species called 
oligomers may cause cellular dysfunction and represent the 
early toxic molecule in AD. Eventually, further amy-
loid polymerization and ﬁbril formation lead to neuritic 
plaques (Fig. 29-3), which contain a central amyloid 
core, proteoglycans, Apo ε4, α-antichymotrypsin, and 
other proteins. Aβ is a protein of 39–42 amino acids 
that is derived proteolytically from a larger transmem-
brane protein, amyloid precursor protein (APP), when APP 
FIGURE 29-2 
Alzheimer’s disease. Axial T1-weighted MR images through 
the midbrain of a normal 86-year-old athlete (A) and a 
77-year-old man with AD (B). Note that both individuals have 
mild sulcal widening and slight dilation of the temporal horns 
of the lateral ventricles. However, there is a reduction in hip-
pocampal volume in the patient with AD (arrows) compared 
with the volume of the normal-for-age hippocampus (A). 
Fluorodeoxyglucose PET scans of a normal control (C) and 
a patient with AD (D). Note that the patient with AD shows 
decreased glucose metabolism in the posterior temporo-
parietal regions bilaterally (arrows), a typical ﬁnding in this 
condition. AD, Alzheimer’s disease; PET, positron emission 
tomography. (Images courtesy of TF Budinger, University of 
California.)
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
319
is cleaved by β and γ secretases. The normal function of 
Aβ is unknown. APP has neurotrophic and neuroprotec-
tive properties. The plaque core is surrounded by a halo, 
which contains dystrophic, tau-immunoreactive neu-
rites and activated microglia. The accumulation of Aβ in 
cerebral arterioles is termed amyloid angiopathy. NFTs are 
composed of silver-staining neuronal cytoplasmic ﬁbrils 
composed of abnormally phosphorylated tau (τ) pro-
tein; they appear as paired helical ﬁlaments by electron 
microscopy. Tau binds to and stabilizes microtubules, 
supporting axonal transport of organelles, glycoproteins, 
neurotransmitters, and other important cargoes through-
out the neuron. Once hyperphosphorylated, tau can no 
longer bind properly to microtubules and its functions are 
disrupted. Finally, patients with AD often show comor-
bid DLB and vascular pathology.
Biochemically, AD is associated with a decrease in 
the cortical levels of several proteins and neurotransmit-
ters, especially acetylcholine, its synthetic enzyme cho-
line acetyltransferase, and nicotinic cholinergic recep-
tors. Reduction of acetylcholine may be related in part to 
degeneration of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basa-
lis of Meynert that project throughout the cortex. There 
is also noradrenergic and serotonergic depletion due to 
degeneration of brainstem nuclei such as the locus coeru-
leus and dorsal raphe.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Several genes play important pathogenic roles in at 
least some patients with AD. One is the APP gene on 
chromosome 21. Adults with trisomy 21 (Down 
syndrome) consistently develop the typical neuropathologic 
hallmarks of AD if they survive beyond age 40. Many 
develop a progressive dementia superimposed on their base-
line mental retardation. APP is a membrane-spanning pro-
tein that is subsequently processed into smaller units, includ-
ing Aβ, which is deposited in neuritic plaques. Aβ peptide 
results from cleavage of APP by β and γ secretases 
(Fig. 29-4). Presumably, the extra dose of the APP gene on 
chromosome 21 is the initiating cause of AD in adult Down 
syndrome and results in excess cerebral amyloid. Further-
more, a few families with early-onset familial Alzheimer’s 
disease (FAD) have been discovered to have point mutations 
in the APP gene. Although very rare, these families were 
the ﬁrst examples of single-gene autosomal dominant trans-
mission of AD.
Investigation of large families with multigenera-
tional FAD led to the discovery of two additional AD 
genes, the presenilins. Presenilin-1 (PS-1) is on chromo-
some 14 and encodes a protein called S182. Mutations 
in this gene cause an early-onset AD (onset before age 
60 and often before age 50) transmitted in an autoso-
mal dominant, highly penetrant fashion. More than 
100 different mutations have been found in the PS-
1 gene in families from a wide range of ethnic back-
grounds. Presenilin-2 (PS-2) is on chromosome 1 and 
encodes a protein called STM2. A mutation in the PS-
2 gene was ﬁrst found in a group of American families 
with Volga German ethnic background. Mutations in 
PS-1 are much more common than those in PS-2. The 
FIGURE 29-3 
Mature neuritic plaque with a dense central amyloid core 
surrounded by dystrophic neurites (thioﬂavin S stain). (Image 
courtesy of S. DeArmond, University of California; with per-
mission.)
β
γ
α
Cell
membrane
Step 1: Cleavage by either α or β secretase
Step 2: Cleavage by γ secretase
Aβ42
Aβ40
P3
Toxic
Amyloidogenic
Nontoxic
Nontoxic
β Secretase product
α Secretase product
APP
FIGURE 29-4 
Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is catabolized by α, β, 
and γ secretases. A key initial step is the digestion by either 
β secretase (BASE) or α secretase (ADAM10 or ADAM17 
[TACE]), producing smaller nontoxic products. Cleavage 
of the β secretase product by γ secretase (Step 2) results 
in either the toxic Aβ42 or the nontoxic Aβ40 peptide; cleav-
age of the α secretase product by γ secretase produces the 
nontoxic P3 peptide. Excess production of Aβ42 is a key ini-
tiator of cellular damage in Alzheimer’s disease. Current AD 
research is focused on developing therapies designed to 
reduce accumulation of Aβ42 by antagonizing β or γ secre-
tases, promoting α secretase, or clearing Aβ42 that has 
already formed by use of speciﬁc antibodies.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
320
presenilins are highly homologous and encode similar 
proteins that at ﬁrst appeared to have seven transmem-
brane domains (hence the designation STM), but subse-
quent studies have suggested eight such domains, with a 
ninth submembrane region. Both S182 and STM2 are 
cytoplasmic neuronal proteins that are widely expressed 
throughout the nervous system. They are homologous 
to a cell-trafﬁcking protein, sel 12, found in the nem-
atode Caenorhabditis elegans. Patients with mutations in 
these genes have elevated plasma levels of Aβ42, and 
PS-1 mutations in cell cultures produce increased Aβ42 
in the media. There is evidence that PS-1 is involved 
in the cleavage of APP at the gamma secretase site and 
mutations in either gene (PS-1 or APP) may disturb 
this function. Mutations in PS-1 have thus far proved 
to be the most common cause of early-age-of-onset 
FAD, representing perhaps 40–70% of this relatively 
rare syndrome. Mutations in PS-1 tend to produce AD 
with an earlier age of onset (mean onset 45 years) and a 
shorter, more rapidly progressive course (mean duration 
6–7 years) than the disease caused by mutations in PS-
2 (mean onset 53 years; duration 11 years). Although 
some carriers of uncommon PS-2 mutations have had 
onset of dementia after the age of 70, mutations in the 
presenilins are rarely involved in the more common 
sporadic cases of late-onset AD occurring in the gen-
eral population. Genetic testing for these uncommon 
mutations is now commercially available. This diagnos-
tic avenue is likely to be revealing only in early-age-of-
onset familial AD and should be performed in the con-
text of formal genetic counseling, especially when there 
are asymptomatic persons at risk.
A discovery of great importance has been that the Apo 
ε gene on chromosome 19 is involved in the pathogen-
esis of late-onset familial and sporadic forms of AD. Apo 
ε participates in cholesterol transport and has three alleles: 
ε2, ε3, and ε4. The Apo ε4 allele confers increased risk of 
AD in the general population, including sporadic and late-
age-of-onset familial forms. Approximately 24–30% of the 
nondemented white population has at least one ε4 allele 
(12–15% allele frequency), and about 2% are ε4/4 homo-
zygotes. Among patients with AD, 40–65% have at least 
one ε4 allele, a highly signiﬁcant difference compared with 
controls. Conversely, many AD patients have no ε4 allele, 
and ε4 carriers may never develop AD. Therefore, ε4 is 
neither necessary nor sufﬁcient to cause AD. Neverthe-
less, the Apo ε4 allele, especially in the homozygous state, 
represents the most important genetic risk factor for AD 
and acts as a dose-dependent disease modiﬁer, with the 
earliest age of onset associated with the ε4 homozygosity. 
Precise mechanisms through which Apo ε4 confers AD 
risk or hastens onset remain unclear, but ε4 may produce 
less efﬁcient amyloid clearance. Apo ε can be identiﬁed in 
neuritic plaques and may also be involved in neuroﬁbril-
lary tangle formation, because it binds to tau protein. Apo 
ε4 decreases neurite outgrowth in dorsal root ganglion 
neuronal cultures, perhaps indicating a deleterious role in 
the brain’s response to injury. Some evidence suggests that 
the ε2 allele may reduce AD risk, but the issue remains to 
be clariﬁed. Use of Apo ε testing in AD diagnosis remains 
controversial. It is not indicated as a predictive test in nor-
mal persons because its precise predictive value is unclear, 
and many individuals with the ε4 allele never develop 
dementia. Many cognitively normal ε4 heterozygotes and 
homozygotes show decreased cerebral cortical metabolic 
function with PET, suggesting presymptomatic abnormali-
ties due to AD or an inherited vulnerability of the AD tar-
get network. In demented persons who meet clinical cri-
teria for AD, ﬁnding an ε4 allele increases the reliability of 
diagnosis however, the absence of an ε4 allele cannot be 
considered evidence against AD. Furthermore, all patients 
with dementia, including those with an ε4 allele, require a 
search for reversible causes of their cognitive impairment. 
Nevertheless, Apo ε4 remains the single most important 
biologic marker associated with AD risk, and studies of 
ε4’s functional role and diagnostic utility are progressing 
rapidly. The ε4 allele is not associated with risk for FTD, 
DLB, or CJD, although some evidence suggests that ε4 
may exacerbate the phenotype of non-AD degenerative 
disorders. Additional genes are also likely to be involved 
in AD, especially as minor risk alleles for sporadic forms of 
the disease. Recent genome-wide association studies have 
implicated the clusterin (CLU), phosphatidylinositol-bind-
ing clathrin assembly protein (PICALM), and complement 
component (3b/4b) receptor 1 (CR1) genes, and research-
ers are now working to understand the potential role of 
these genes in AD pathogenesis. CLU may play a role in 
synapse turnover, PICALM participates in clathrin-medi-
ated endocytosis, and CR1 may be involved in amyloid 
clearance through the complement pathway.
TREATMENT 
Alzheimer’s Disease
The management of AD is challenging and gratifying, 
despite the absence of a cure or a robust pharmacologic 
treatment. The primary focus is on long-term ameliora-
tion of associated behavioral and neurologic problems, as 
well as providing caregiver support.
Building rapport with the patient, family members, 
and other caregivers is essential to successful manage-
ment. In the early stages of AD, memory aids such as 
notebooks and posted daily reminders can be helpful. 
Family members should emphasize activities that are 
pleasant and curtail those that are unpleasant. In other 
words, practicing skills that have become difficult, such 
as through memory games and puzzles, will often frus-
trate and depress the patient without proven benefits. 
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
321
Kitchens, bathrooms, stairways, and bedrooms need to 
be made safe, and eventually patients must stop driving. 
Loss of independence and change of environment may 
worsen confusion, agitation, and anger. Communication 
and repeated calm reassurance are necessary. Caregiver 
“burnout” is common, often resulting in nursing home 
placement of the patient or new health problems for 
the caregiver, and respite breaks for the caregiver help 
to maintain a successful long-term therapeutic milieu. 
Use of adult day care centers can be helpful. Local and 
national support groups, such as the Alzheimer’s Asso-
ciation and the Family Caregiver Alliance, are valuable 
resources. Internet access to these resources has become 
available to clinicians and families in recent years.
Donepezil (target dose, 10 mg daily), rivastigmine 
(target dose, 6 mg twice daily or 9.5-mg patch daily), 
galantamine (target dose 24 mg daily, extended-release), 
memantine (target dose, 10 mg twice daily), and tacrine 
are the drugs presently approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for treatment of AD. Due to hepa-
totoxicity, tacrine is no longer used. Dose escalations for 
each of these medications must be carried out over 4–6 
weeks to minimize side effects. The pharmacologic action 
of donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine is inhibi-
tion of the cholinesterases, primarily acetylcholinester-
ase, with a resulting increase in cerebral acetylcholine 
levels. Memantine appears to act by blocking overex-
cited N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors. 
Double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover studies with 
cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine have shown 
them to be associated with improved caregiver ratings 
of patients’ functioning and with an apparent decreased 
rate of decline in cognitive test scores over periods of up 
to 3 years. The average patient on an anticholinesterase 
compound maintains his or her MMSE score for close to 
a year, whereas a placebo-treated patient declines 2–3 
points over the same time period. Memantine, used in 
conjunction with cholinesterase inhibitors or by itself, 
slows cognitive deterioration and decreases caregiver 
burden for patients with moderate to severe AD but is 
not approved for mild AD. Each of these compounds has 
only modest efficacy for AD. Cholinesterase inhibitors are 
relatively easy to administer, and their major side effects 
are gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, diarrhea, cramps), 
altered sleep with unpleasant or vivid dreams, bradycar-
dia (usually benign), and muscle cramps.
In a prospective observational study, the use of estro-
gen replacement therapy appeared to protect—by about 
50%—against development of AD in women. This study 
seemed to confirm the results of two earlier case-con-
trolled studies. Sadly, a prospective placebo-controlled 
study of a combined estrogen-progesterone therapy for 
asymptomatic postmenopausal women increased, rather 
than decreased, the prevalence of dementia. This study 
markedly dampened enthusiasm for hormonal treat-
ments to prevent dementia. Additionally, no benefit has 
been found in the treatment of AD with estrogen alone.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial 
of an extract of Ginkgo biloba found modest improve-
ment in cognitive function in subjects with AD and vascu-
lar dementia. Unfortunately, a comprehensive 6-year mul-
ticenter prevention study using Ginkgo biloba found no 
slowing of progression to dementia in the treated group.
Vaccination against Aβ42 has proved highly effica-
cious in mouse models of AD, helping clear brain amyloid 
and preventing further amyloid accumulation. In human 
trials, this approach led to life-threatening complica-
tions, including meningoencephalitis, but modifications 
of the vaccine approach using passive immunization 
with monoclonal antibodies are currently being evalu-
ated in phase 3 trials. Another experimental approach 
to AD treatment has been the use of β and γ secretase 
inhibitors that diminish the production of Aβ42, but the 
first two placebo-controlled trials of γ secretase inhibi-
tors, tarenflurbil and semagacestat, were negative, and 
semagacestat may have accelerated cognitive decline 
compared to placebo. Medications that modify tau phos-
phorylation and aggregation are beginning to be stud-
ied as possible treatments for both AD and non-AD tau-
related disorders including FTD and PSP.
Several retrospective studies suggest that nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory agents and 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-
glutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors 
(statins) may have a protective effect on dementia, and 
controlled prospective studies are being conducted. Simi-
larly, prospective studies with the goal of lowering serum 
homocysteine are underway to slow the progression to 
dementia, following an association of elevated homocys-
teine with dementia progression in epidemiologic stud-
ies. Finally, there is now a strong interest in the relation-
ship between diabetes and AD, and insulin-regulating 
studies are being conducted.
Mild to moderate depression is common in the early 
stages of AD and may respond to antidepressants or 
cholinesterase inhibitors. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly used due to their low 
anticholinergic side effects (escitalopram 5–10 mg daily). 
Generalized seizures should be treated with an appropri-
ate anticonvulsant, such as phenytoin or carbamazepine. 
Agitation, insomnia, hallucinations, and belligerence 
are especially troublesome characteristics of some AD 
patients, and these behaviors can lead to nursing home 
placement. The newer generation of atypical antipsychot-
ics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, and olanzapine, are 
being used in low doses to treat these neuropsychiatric 
symptoms. The few controlled studies comparing drugs 
against behavioral intervention in the treatment of agi-
tation suggest mild efficacy with significant side effects 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
322
related to sleep, gait, and cardiovascular complications, 
including an increased risk of death. All antipsychotics 
carry a black-box FDA warning and should be used with 
caution in the demented elderly; however, careful, daily, 
nonpharmacologic behavior management is often not 
available, rendering medications necessary for some 
patients. Finally, medications with strong anticholinergic 
effects should be vigilantly avoided, including prescrip-
tion and over-the-counter sleep aids (e.g., diphenhydr-
amine) or incontinence therapies (e.g., oxybutynin).
of multi-infarct dementia. Early symptoms are mild con-
fusion, apathy, anxiety, psychosis, and memory, spatial, 
or executive deﬁcits. Marked difﬁculties in judgment and 
orientation and dependence on others for daily activities 
develop later. Euphoria, elation, depression, or aggres-
sive behaviors are common as the disease progresses. Both 
pyramidal and cerebellar signs may be present. A gait 
disorder is present in at least half of these patients. With 
advanced disease, urinary incontinence and dysarthria with 
or without other pseudobulbar features (e.g., dysphagia, 
emotional lability) are frequent. Seizures and myoclonic 
jerks appear in a minority of patients. This disorder appears 
to result from chronic ischemia due to occlusive disease of 
small, penetrating cerebral arteries and arterioles (micro-
angiopathy). Any disease-causing stenosis of small cere-
bral vessels may be the critical underlying factor, although 
hypertension is the major cause. The term Binswanger’s 
disease should be used with caution, because it does not 
clearly identify a single entity.
Other rare causes of white matter disease also pres-
ent with dementia, such as adult metachromatic leuko-
dystrophy (arylsulfatase A deﬁciency) and progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (JC virus infection). 
A dominantly inherited form of diffuse white matter 
VASCULAR DEMENTIA
Dementia associated with cerebrovascular disease can be 
divided into two general categories: multi-infarct demen-
tia and diffuse white matter disease (also called leukoaraiosis, 
subcortical arteriosclerotic leukoencephalopathy, or Binswanger’s 
disease). Cerebrovascular disease appears to be a more com-
mon cause of dementia in Asia than in Europe and North 
America, perhaps due to the increased prevalence of intra-
cranial atherosclerosis. Individuals who have had several 
strokes may develop chronic cognitive deﬁcits, commonly 
called multi-infarct dementia. The strokes may be large or 
small (sometimes lacunar) and usually involve several dif-
ferent brain regions. The occurrence of dementia depends 
partly on the total volume of damaged cortex, but it is 
also more common in individuals with left-hemisphere 
lesions, independent of any language disturbance. Patients 
typically report previous discrete episodes of sudden neu-
rologic deterioration. Many patients with multi-infarct 
dementia have a history of hypertension, diabetes, coro-
nary artery disease, or other manifestations of widespread 
atherosclerosis. Physical examination usually shows focal 
neurologic deﬁcits such as hemiparesis, a unilateral Babin-
ski sign, a visual ﬁeld defect, or pseudobulbar palsy. Recur-
rent strokes result in a stepwise disease progression. Neu-
roimaging reveals multiple areas of infarction. Thus, the 
history and neuroimaging ﬁndings differentiate this condi-
tion from AD; however, both AD and multiple infarctions 
are common and sometimes co-occur. With normal aging, 
there is also an accumulation of amyloid in cerebral blood 
vessels, leading to a condition called cerebral amyloid angiopa-
thy (without dementia), which predisposes older persons 
to lobar hemorrhage and brain microhemorrhages. AD 
patients appear to be at increased risk for amyloid angiopa-
thy, and this may explain some of the observed association 
between AD and stroke.
Some individuals with dementia are discovered on 
MRI to have bilateral abnormalities of subcortical white 
matter, termed diffuse white matter disease, often occurring 
in association with lacunar infarctions (Fig. 29-5). The 
dementia may be insidious in onset and progress slowly, 
features that distinguish it from multi-infarct dementia, but 
other patients show a stepwise deterioration more typical 
FIGURE 29-5 
Diffuse white matter disease. Axial ﬂuid-attenuated inver-
sion recovery (FLAIR) MR image through the lateral ventricles 
reveals multiple areas of hyperintensity involving the peri-
ventricular white matter as well as the corona radiata and 
striatum (arrows). While seen in some individuals with normal 
cognition, this appearance is more pronounced in patients 
with dementia of a vascular etiology.
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
323
disease is known as cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy 
with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADA-
SIL). Clinically, there is a progressive dementia devel-
oping in the ﬁfth to seventh decades in multiple fam-
ily members who may also have a history of migraine 
and recurrent lacunar stroke without hypertension. Skin 
biopsy may show pathognomonic osmophilic gran-
ules in the media of arterioles. The disease is caused by 
mutations in the Notch 3 gene, and genetic testing is 
commercially available. The frequency of this disorder is 
unknown, and there are no effective treatments.
Mitochondrial disorders can present with stroke-like 
episodes and can selectively injure basal ganglia or cortex. 
Many such patients show other ﬁndings suggestive of a 
neurologic or systemic disorder such as ophthalmoplegia, 
retinal degeneration, deafness, myopathy, neuropathy, or 
diabetes. Diagnosis is difﬁcult, but serum or (especially) 
CSF levels of lactate and pyruvate may be abnormal, 
and biopsy of affected tissue, preferably muscle, may be 
diagnostic.
Treatment of vascular dementia must be focused on 
preventing new ischemic injury by stabilizing or remov-
ing the underlying causes, such as hypertension, diabetes, 
smoking, or lack of exercise. Recovery of lost cognitive 
function is not likely, although ﬂuctuations with periods 
of improvement are common.
FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA, 
PROGRESSIVE SUPRANUCLEAR PALSY, 
AND CORTICOBASAL DEGENERATION
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) often begins in the ﬁfth 
to seventh decades, and in this age group it is nearly as 
prevalent as AD. Early studies suggested that FTD may 
be more common in men than women, although more 
recent reports cast some doubt on this ﬁnding. Unlike 
in AD, behavioral symptoms predominate in the early stages 
of FTD. Although a family history of dementia is com-
mon, autosomal dominant inheritance is seen in about 
10% of all FTD cases. The clinical heterogeneity in 
familial and sporadic forms of FTD is remarkable, with 
patients demonstrating variable mixtures of behavioral, 
language, movement, and motor neuron symptoms. The 
most common autosomal dominantly inherited mutations 
causing FTD involve the MAPT or GRN genes, both on 
chromosome 17. MAPT mutations lead to a change in 
the alternate splicing of tau or cause loss of function in 
the tau molecule. With GRN, mutations in the coding 
sequence of the gene encoding progranulin protein result 
in mRNA degradation due to nonsense-mediated decay. 
Progranulin appears to be a rare example of an autoso-
mal dominant mutation that leads to haploinsufﬁciency, 
resulting in around one-half the normal level of progran-
ulin protein. Progranulin is a growth factor that binds to 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors. How progranu-
lin mutations lead to FTD is unknown. Both MAPT and 
GRN mutations are associated with parkinsonian fea-
tures, while ALS is rare with these mutations. In contrast, 
familial FTD with ALS has been linked to chromosome 
9. Mutations in the valosin-containing protein (chro-
mosome 9) and the charged multivesicular body protein 
2b (CHMP2b) genes (chromosome 3) also lead to rare 
autosomal dominant forms of familial FTD. Mutations 
in the TDP-43 and FUS genes (see later) cause familial 
ALS, sometimes in association with an FTD syndrome, 
although a few patients presenting with FTD alone have 
been reported.
In FTD, early symptoms are divided among behavioral, 
language, and sometimes motor abnormalities, reﬂecting 
degeneration of the anterior insular, frontal, and temporal 
regions, basal ganglia, and motor neurons. Cognitive test-
ing typically reveals spared memory but impaired planning, 
judgment, or language. Poor business decisions and difﬁ-
culty organizing work tasks are common, and speech and 
language deﬁcits often emerge. Patients with FTD often 
show an absence of insight into their condition. Common 
behavioral features include apathy, disinhibition, weight 
gain, food fetishes, compulsions, and emotional distance or 
loss of empathy.
Findings at the bedside are dictated by the anatomic 
localization of the disorder. Asymmetric left frontal cases 
present with nonﬂuent aphasia, while left anterior tem-
poral degeneration is characterized by loss of word mean-
ing (semantic dementia). Nonﬂuent patients quickly 
progress to mutism, while those with semantic dementia 
develop features of a multimodal associative agnosia, los-
ing the ability to recognize faces, objects, words, and the 
emotions of others. Visuoconstructive ability, arithmetic 
calculations, and navigation often remain normal late into 
the illness. Recently it has become apparent that many 
patients with nonﬂuent aphasia progress to clinical syn-
dromes that overlap with PSP and corticobasal degenera-
tion (CBD) and show these pathologies at autopsy. This 
left hemisphere presentation of FTD has been called pri-
mary progressive aphasia with nonﬂuent and semantic variants. 
In contrast, right frontal or temporal cases show profound 
alterations in social conduct, with loss of empathy, dis-
inhibition, and antisocial behaviors predominating. There 
is a striking overlap among FTD, PSP, CBD, and motor 
neuron disease; ophthalmoplegia, dystonia, swallowing 
symptoms, and fasciculations are common at presentation 
of FTD or emerge during the course of the illness.
The distinguishing anatomic hallmark of FTD is a 
focal atrophy of frontal, insular, and/or temporal cor-
tex, which can be visualized with neuroimaging stud-
ies and is often profound at autopsy (Figs. 29-6 and 
29-7). Despite the appearance of advanced FTD, how-
ever, the atrophy often begins focally in one hemisphere 
before spreading to anatomically interconnected regions, 
including basal ganglia. Microscopic ﬁndings seen across 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
324
all patients with FTD include gliosis, microvacuolation, 
and neuronal loss, but the disease is subtyped according 
to the protein composition of neuronal and glial inclu-
sions, which contain either tau or TDP-43 in at least 90% 
of patients, with the remaining 10% showing inclusions 
containing FUS (Fig. 29-8).
A toxic gain of function related to tau underlies the 
pathogenesis of many familial cases and is presumed to 
be a factor in sporadic tauopathies, although loss of tau 
microtubule stabilizing function may also play a role. 
TDP-43 and FUS, in contrast, are RNA/DNA binding 
proteins whose roles in neuronal function are still being 
actively investigated. Loss of cortical serotonergic inner-
vation is seen in many patients. In contrast to AD, the 
cholinergic system is relatively spared in FTD.
Historically, Pick’s disease was described as a progressive 
degenerative disorder characterized by selective involve-
ment of the anterior frontal and temporal neocortex 
and pathologically by intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclu-
sions (Pick bodies). Classical Pick bodies are argyrophilic, 
staining positively with the Bielschowsky silver method 
and also with immunostaining for tau (Fig. 29-9). Sub-
sequent pathologic studies revealed a signiﬁcant subset 
of patients with silver-negative, tau-negative inclusions, 
which have since been shown mainly to contain TDP-
43, although a minority stain only for FUS. Although the 
nomenclature used to describe these patients has contin-
ued to evolve, the term FTD is increasingly used to refer 
to the clinical syndromes, while frontotemporal lobar degen-
eration (FTLD) refers to the underlying pathology, with 
three major subtypes recognized: FTLD-tau, FTLD-
TDP, and FTLD-FUS. Despite signiﬁcant progress, 
available data do not yet allow a reliable prediction of 
underlying pathology based on clinical features. Accord-
ingly researchers continue to seek serum, CSF, or neu-
roimaging biomarkers that will afford greater diagnostic 
accuracy, deﬁned as concordance with neuropathology.
The burden on caregivers of patients with FTD is 
extremely high because the illness disrupts core emo-
tional and personality functions of the loved one. Treat-
ment is symptomatic, and there are currently no therapies 
known to slow progression or improve symptoms. Many 
FIGURE 29-6 
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Coronal MRI sections 
from representative patients with behavioral variant FTD 
(left), semantic dementia (center), and progressive nonﬂu-
ent aphasia (right). Areas of early and severe atrophy in each 
syndrome are highlighted (white arrowheads). The behavioral 
variant features anterior cingulate and frontoinsular atro-
phy, spreading to orbital and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. 
Semantic dementia shows prominent temporopolar atro-
phy, more often on the left. Progressive nonﬂuent aphasia is 
associated with dominant frontal opercular and dorsal insula 
degeneration.
FIGURE 29-7 
Voxel-based morphometry analysis showing differing pat-
terns of brain atrophy in three variants of progressive apha-
sia, including nonﬂuent (red), semantic (green), and logo-
pedic subtypes (blue). Voxel-based morphometry allows 
comparison of MRI gray matter volumes between patient 
groups and control subjects, as shown here. (Image cour-
tesy of M Gorno-Tempini, University of California at San Fran-
cisco; with permission.)
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)
FTLD-tau
FTLD-TDP
Type 1
Type 2
Pick’s
3R tau
CBD
4R tau
PSP
4R tau
FTDP-17
(MAPT )
Tau NOS
3R/4R tau
FTD-MND
FTLD-FUS
Type 3
(PGRN )
Type 4
(VCP )
aFTLD-U
NIFID
Semantic
dementia
Progressive
nonfluent aphasia
Behavioral variant
(bvFTD)
BIBD
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
FIGURE 29-8 
Frontotemporal dementia syndromes are united by under-
lying frontotemporal lobar degeneration pathology, which 
can be divided according to the presence of tau, TPD-43, or 
fused in sarcoma (FUS) inclusions in neurons and glia. Cor-
relations between clinical syndrome and major molecular cat-
egory are shown with colored shading.
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
325
of the behaviors that accompany FTD, such as depres-
sion, hyperorality, compulsions, and irritability, can be 
ameliorated with antidepressants, especially SSRIs. The 
co-association with motor disorders such as parkinsonism 
necessitates the careful use of antipsychotics, which can 
exacerbate this problem.
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a degenerative 
disease that involves the brainstem, basal ganglia, limbic 
structures, and selected areas of cortex. Clinically, this 
disorder begins with falls and executive or subtle per-
sonality changes (such as mental rigidity, impulsivity, 
or apathy). Shortly thereafter, a progressive oculomotor 
syndrome ensues that begins with square wave jerks, fol-
lowed by slowed saccades (vertical worse than horizontal) 
before resulting in progressive supranuclear ophthalmo-
paresis. Dysarthria, dysphagia, and symmetric axial rigid-
ity can be prominent features that emerge at any point 
in the illness. A stiff, unstable posture with hyperexten-
sion of the neck and a slow, jerky, toppling gait is char-
acteristic. Frequent unexplained and sometimes spectacu-
lar falls are common secondary to a combination of axial 
rigidity, inability to look down, and bad judgment. Even 
once patients have severely limited voluntary eye move-
ments, they retain oculocephalic reﬂexes (demonstrated 
using a vertical doll’s head maneuver); thus, the oculo-
motor disorder is supranuclear. The dementia overlaps 
with FTD, featuring apathy, frontal-executive dysfunc-
tion, poor judgment, slowed thought processes, impaired 
verbal ﬂuency, and difﬁculty with sequential actions 
and with shifting from one task to another. These fea-
tures are common at presentation and often precede the 
motor syndrome. Some patients begin with a nonﬂuent 
aphasia or motor speech disorder and progress to classical 
PSP. Response to L-dopa is limited or absent; no other 
treatments exist. Death occurs within 5–10 years of onset. 
At autopsy, accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau is 
seen within neurons and glia. Neuronal inclusions often 
take the form of neuroﬁbrillary tangles (NFTs), which 
may be large, spherical, and coarse when found in brain-
stem oculomotor control system neurons. These charac-
teristic tau inclusions are called globose tangles, and may 
be found in multiple subcortical structures (including the 
subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, 
locus coeruleus, periaqueductal gray, superior colliculi, 
oculomotor nuclei, and dentate nucleus). Neocortical 
NFTs, like those in AD, often take on a more ﬂame-
shaped morphology, but on electron microscopy PSP 
tangles can be shown to consist of straight tubules rather 
than the paired helical ﬁlaments found in AD. Further-
more, PSP is associated with prominent tau-positive glial 
pathomorphologies, such as tufted and thorny astrocytes.
In addition to its overlap with FTD and CBD (see 
later), PSP is often confused with idiopathic Parkinson’s 
disease (PD). Although elderly patients with PD may have 
restricted upgaze, they do not develop downgaze pare-
sis or other abnormalities of voluntary eye movements 
typical of PSP. Dementia occurs in ∼20% of patients 
with PD, often due to the emergence of a full-blown 
DLB syndrome. Furthermore, the behavioral syndromes 
seen with DLB differ from PSP (see later). Dementia in 
PD becomes more likely with increasing age, increasing 
severity of extrapyramidal signs, a long disease duration, 
and the presence of depression. Patients with PD who 
develop dementia also show cortical atrophy on brain 
imaging. Neuropathologically, there may be Alzheim-
er’s disease–related changes in the cortex, DLB-related 
α-synuclein inclusions in both the limbic system and cor-
tex, or no speciﬁc microscopic changes other than gliosis 
and neuronal loss. Parkinson’s disease is discussed in detail 
in Chap. 30.
Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a slowly progressive 
dementing illness associated with severe gliosis and neu-
ronal loss in both the cortex and basal ganglia (substan-
tia nigra and striatopallidum). Some patients present with 
a unilateral onset with rigidity, dystonia, and apraxia of 
one arm and hand, sometimes called the alien limb when 
it begins to exhibit unintended motor actions, while 
in other instances the disease presents as a progressive 
behavioral, executive, or language syndrome or as pro-
gressive symmetric parkinsonism. Some patients begin 
with a progressive nonﬂuent aphasia or a progressive 
motor speech disorder. Eventually CBD becomes bilat-
eral and leads to dysarthria, slow gait, action tremor, and 
dementia. The microscopic features include ballooned, 
achromatic, tau-positive neurons with astrocytic plaques 
and other dystrophic glial tau pathomorphologies that 
overlap with those seen in PSP. Most speciﬁcally, CBD 
features a severe tauopathy burden in the subcortical 
white matter, consisting of threads and oligodendroglial 
FIGURE 29-9 
Pick’s disease, a subtype of frontotemporal lobar degen-
eration (FTLD)-tau. Pick bodies, shown here in the dentate 
gyrus of a patient with advanced bvFTD, consist of loosely 
arranged paired helical and straight ﬁlaments and stain posi-
tively for hyperphosphorylated tau. Classical Pick’s disease is 
seen in only 10–20% of patients with frontotemporal dementia. 
Scale bar represents 50 microns. (CP-13 antibody courtesy of P. 
Davies.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
326
coiled bodies. The condition is rarely familial, the cause is 
unknown, and there is no speciﬁc treatment.
PARKINSON’S DISEASE DEMENTIA AND 
DEMENTIA WITH LEWY BODIES
The parkinsonian dementia syndromes are under increas-
ing study, with many cases uniﬁed by Lewy body and 
Lewy neurite pathology that ascends from the low brain-
stem up through the substantia nigra, limbic system, and 
cortex. The DLB clinical syndrome is characterized by 
visual hallucinations, parkinsonism, ﬂuctuating alertness, 
falls, and often RBD. Dementia can precede or follow 
the appearance of parkinsonism. Hence, one pathway 
occurs in patients with long-standing PD without cog-
nitive impairment, who slowly develop a dementia that 
is associated with visual hallucinations and ﬂuctuating 
alertness. When this occurs after an established diagno-
sis of PD, many use the term Parkinson’s disease demen-
tia (PDD). In others, the dementia and neuropsychiatric 
syndrome precede the parkinsonism, and this constel-
lation is referred to as DLB. Both PDD and DLB may 
be accompanied or preceded by symptoms referable 
to brainstem pathology below the substantia nigra, and 
many researchers conceptualize these disorders as points 
on a spectrum of α-synuclein pathology.
Patients with PDD and DLB are highly sensitive to 
metabolic perturbations, and in some patients the ﬁrst 
manifestation of illness is a delirium, often precipitated by 
an infection, new medicine, or other systemic disturbance. 
A hallucinatory delirium induced by L-dopa, prescribed 
for parkinsonian symptoms attributed to PD may likewise 
provide the initial clue to a PDD diagnosis. Conversely, 
patients with mild cognitive deﬁcits and hallucinations 
may receive typical or atypical antipsychotic medications, 
which induce profound parkinsonism at low doses due 
to a subclinical DLB-related nigral dopaminergic neuron 
loss. Even without an underlying precipitant, ﬂuctuations 
can be marked in DLB, with episodic confusion or even 
stupor admixed with lucid intervals. However, despite the 
ﬂuctuating pattern, the clinical features persist over a long 
period, unlike delirium, which resolves following correc-
tion of the inciting factor. Cognitively, DLB features rela-
tive preservation of memory but more severe visuospatial 
and executive deﬁcits than patients with early AD.
The key neuropathologic feature in DLB is the pres-
ence of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites throughout 
speciﬁc brainstem nuclei, substantia nigra, amygdala, 
cingulate gyrus, and, ultimately, the neocortex. Lewy 
bodies are intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions that stain 
with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) and ubiquitin but are 
now identiﬁed with antibodies to the presynaptic pro-
tein, α-synuclein. They are composed of straight neu-
roﬁlaments 7–20 nm long with surrounding amorphous 
material and contain epitopes recognized by antibodies 
against phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated neuroﬁl-
ament proteins, ubiquitin, and α-synuclein. Lewy bod-
ies are typically found in the substantia nigra of patients 
with idiopathic PD, where they can be readily seen with 
hematoxylin-and-eosin staining. A profound choliner-
gic deﬁcit, owing to basal forebrain and pedunculopon-
tine nucleus involvement, is present in many patients 
with DLB and may be a factor responsible for the ﬂuc-
tuations, inattention, and visual hallucinations. In patients 
without other pathologic features, the condition is some-
times referred to as diffuse Lewy body disease. In patients 
whose brains also contain a substantial burden of amyloid 
plaques and NFTs, the condition is sometimes called the 
Lewy body variant of Alzheimer’s disease.
Due to the overlap with AD and the cholinergic deﬁ-
cit in DLB, cholinesterase inhibitors often provide signiﬁ-
cant beneﬁt, reducing hallucinosis, stabilizing delusional 
symptoms, and even helping with RBD in some patients. 
Exercise programs maximize motor function and protect 
against fall-related injury. Antidepressants are often nec-
essary. Atypical antipsychotics may be required for psy-
chosis but can worsen extrapyramidal syndromes, even 
at low doses, and increase risk of death. As noted earlier, 
patients with DLB are extremely sensitive to dopaminergic 
medications, which must be carefully titrated; tolerability 
may be improved by concomitant use of a cholinesterase 
inhibitor.
OTHER CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
Prion diseases such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) are 
rare neurodegenerative conditions (prevalence ∼1 per 
million) that produce dementia. CJD is a rapidly pro-
gressive disorder associated with dementia, focal corti-
cal signs, rigidity, and myoclonus, causing death <1 year 
after ﬁrst symptoms appear. The rapidity of progression 
seen with CJD is uncommon in AD so that the distinc-
tion between the two disorders is usually straightforward. 
CBD and DLB, more rapid degenerative dementias with 
prominent movement abnormalities, are more likely to 
be mistaken for CJD. The differential diagnosis for CJD 
includes other rapidly progressive dementing conditions 
such as viral or bacterial encephalitides, Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy, CNS vasculitis, lymphoma, or para-
neoplastic syndromes. The markedly abnormal periodic 
complexes on EEG and cortical ribbon and basal ganglia 
hyperintensities on MR diffusion-weighted imaging are 
highly speciﬁc diagnostic features of CJD, although rarely 
prolonged focal or generalized seizures can produce a 
similar imaging appearance. Prion diseases are discussed in 
detail in Chap. 43.
Huntington’s disease (HD) (Chap. 30) is an autoso-
mal dominant, degenerative brain disorder. HD clinical 
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
327
hallmarks include chorea, behavioral disturbance, and 
executive impairment. Symptoms typically begin in the 
fourth or ﬁfth decade, but there is a wide range, from 
childhood to >70 years. Memory is frequently not 
impaired until late in the disease, but attention, judg-
ment, awareness, and executive functions are often deﬁ-
cient at an early stage. Depression, apathy, social with-
drawal, irritability, and intermittent disinhibition are 
common. Delusions and obsessive-compulsive behavior 
may occur. Disease duration is typically around 15 years 
but is quite variable.
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a relatively 
uncommon but treatable syndrome. The clinical, physi-
ologic, and neuroimaging characteristics of NPH must 
be carefully distinguished from those of other demen-
tias associated with gait impairment. Historically, many 
patients treated for NPH have suffered from other 
dementias, particularly AD, vascular dementia, DLB, and 
PSP. For NPH, the clinical triad includes an abnormal 
gait (ataxic or apractic), dementia (usually mild to mod-
erate, with an emphasis on executive impairment), and 
urinary urgency or incontinence. Neuroimaging reveals 
enlarged lateral ventricles (hydrocephalus) with little or 
no cortical atrophy, although the sylvian ﬁssures may 
appear propped open (so-called “boxcarring”), which can 
be mistaken for perisylvian atrophy. This syndrome is a 
communicating hydrocephalus with a patent aqueduct 
of Sylvius (Fig. 29-10), in contrast to aqueductal ste-
nosis, in which the aqueduct is small. Lumbar puncture 
opening pressure falls in the high normal range, and the 
CSF protein, glucose, and cell counts are normal. NPH 
may be caused by obstruction to normal CSF ﬂow over 
the cerebral convexities and delayed resorption into the 
venous system. The indolent nature of the process results 
in enlarged lateral ventricles with relatively little increase 
in CSF pressure. Presumed stretching and distortion of 
subfrontal white matter tracts may lead to clinical symp-
toms, but the precise underlying pathophysiology remains 
unclear. Some patients provide a history of conditions 
that produce meningeal scarring (blocking CSF resorp-
tion) such as previous meningitis, subarachnoid hemor-
rhage, or head trauma. Others with long-standing but 
asymptomatic congenital hydrocephalus may have adult-
onset deterioration in gait or memory that is confused 
with NPH. In contrast to AD, the patient with NPH 
complains of an early and prominent gait disturbance 
without cortical atrophy on CTor MRI.
Numerous attempts to improve NPH diagnosis with 
various special studies and predict the success of ventricu-
lar shunting have been undertaken. These tests include 
radionuclide cisternography (showing a delay in CSF 
absorption over the convexity) and various efforts to 
monitor and alter CSF ﬂow dynamics, including a con-
stant-pressure infusion test. None has proven to be spe-
ciﬁc or consistently useful. A transient improvement in 
gait or cognition may follow lumbar puncture (or serial 
punctures) with removal of 30–50 mL of CSF, but this 
ﬁnding has also not proved to be consistently predictive 
of postshunt improvement. Perhaps the most reliable 
strategy is a period of close inpatient evaluation before, 
FIGURE 29-10 
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus. A. Sagittal T1-weighted 
MR image demonstrates dilation of the lateral ventricle and 
stretching of the corpus callosum (arrows), depression of the 
ﬂoor of the third ventricle (single arrowhead), and enlarge-
ment of the aqueduct (double arrowheads). Note the diffuse 
dilation of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles with a pat-
ent aqueduct, typical of communicating hydrocephalus. B. 
Axial T2-weighted MR images demonstrate dilation of the 
lateral ventricles. This patient underwent successful ventricu-
loperitoneal shunting.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
328
during, and after lumbar CSF drainage. Occasionally, 
when a patient with AD presents with gait impairment 
(at times due to comorbid subfrontal vascular injury) and 
absent or only mild cortical atrophy on CT or MRI, dis-
tinguishing NPH from AD can be challenging. Hippo-
campal atrophy on MRI favors AD, whereas a character-
istic “magnetic” gait with external hip rotation, low foot 
clearance and short strides, along with prominent truncal 
sway or instability, favors NPH. The diagnosis of NPH 
should be avoided when hydrocephalus is not detected 
on imaging studies, even if the symptoms otherwise ﬁt. 
Thirty to ﬁfty percent of patients identiﬁed by careful 
diagnosis as having NPH will improve with ventricular 
shunting. Gait may improve more than cognition, but 
many reported failures to improve cognitively may have 
resulted from comorbid AD. Short-lasting improve-
ment is common. Patients should be carefully selected 
for shunting, because subdural hematoma, infection, and 
shunt failure are known complications and can be a cause 
for early nursing home placement in an elderly patient 
with previously mild dementia.
Dementia can accompany chronic alcoholism (Chap. 56) 
and may result from associated malnutrition, especially of 
B vitamins, particularly thiamine. Other poorly deﬁned 
aspects of chronic alcoholism may, however, also pro-
duce cerebral damage. A rare idiopathic syndrome of 
dementia and seizures with degeneration of the corpus 
callosum has been reported primarily in male Italian red 
wine drinkers (Marchiafava-Bignami disease).
Thiamine (vitamin B1) deﬁciency causes Wernicke’s 
encephalopathy (Chap. 28). The clinical presentation 
features a malnourished patient (frequently but not nec-
essarily alcoholic) with confusion, ataxia, and diplopia 
resulting from inﬂammation and necrosis of periventric-
ular midline structures, including dorsomedial thalamus, 
mammillary bodies, midline cerebellum, periaqueductal 
gray matter, and trochlear and abducens nuclei. Dam-
age to the dorsomedial thalamus correlates most closely 
with the memory loss. Prompt administration of paren-
teral thiamine (100 mg intravenously for 3 days followed 
by daily oral dosage) may reverse the disease if given in 
the ﬁrst days of symptom onset. However, prolonged 
untreated thiamine deﬁciency can result in an irreversible 
dementia/amnestic syndrome (Korsakoff’s syndrome) or 
even death.
In Korsakoff’s syndrome, the patient is unable to recall 
new information despite normal immediate memory, 
attention span, and level of consciousness. Memory for 
new events is seriously impaired, whereas knowledge 
acquired prior to the illness remains relatively intact. 
Patients are easily confused, disoriented, and cannot 
store information for more than a few minutes. Super-
ﬁcially, they may be conversant, engaging, and able to 
perform simple tasks and follow immediate commands. 
Confabulation is common, although not always present. 
There is no speciﬁc treatment because the previous thia-
mine deﬁciency has produced irreversible damage to the 
medial thalamic nuclei and mammillary bodies. Mammil-
lary body atrophy may be visible on MRI in the chronic 
phase (Fig.  28-7).
Vitamin B12 deﬁciency, as can occur in pernicious ane-
mia, causes a megaloblastic anemia and may also damage 
the nervous system (Chap. 35). Neurologically, it most 
commonly produces a spinal cord syndrome (myelopa-
thy) affecting the posterior columns (loss of vibration 
and position sense) and corticospinal tracts (hyperac-
tive tendon reﬂexes with Babinski signs); it also damages 
peripheral nerves (neuropathy), resulting in sensory loss 
with depressed tendon reﬂexes. Damage to myelinated 
axons may also cause dementia. The mechanism of neu-
rologic damage is unclear but may be related to a deﬁ-
ciency of S-adenosyl methionine (required for methyla-
tion of myelin phospholipids) due to reduced methionine 
synthase activity or accumulation of methylmalonate, 
homocysteine, and propionate, providing abnormal sub-
strates for fatty acid synthesis in myelin. The neurologic 
sequelae of vitamin B12 deﬁciency may occur in the 
absence of hematologic manifestations, making it criti-
cal to avoid using the CBC and blood smear as a substi-
tute for measuring B12 blood levels. Treatment with par-
enteral vitamin B12 (1000 μg intramuscularly daily for a 
week, weekly for a month, and monthly for life for per-
nicious anemia) stops progression of the disease if insti-
tuted promptly, but complete reversal of advanced ner-
vous system damage will not occur.
Deﬁciency of nicotinic acid (pellagra) is associated 
with skin rash over sun-exposed areas, glossitis, and 
angular stomatitis. Severe dietary deﬁciency of nico-
tinic acid along with other B vitamins such as pyridox-
ine may result in spastic paraparesis, peripheral neuropa-
thy, fatigue, irritability, and dementia. This syndrome has 
been seen in prisoners of war and in concentration camps 
but should be considered in any malnourished individual. 
Low serum folate levels appear to be a rough index of 
malnutrition, but isolated folate deﬁciency has not been 
proved as a speciﬁc cause of dementia.
CNS infections usually cause delirium and other acute 
neurologic syndromes. However, some chronic CNS 
infections, particularly those associated with chronic 
meningitis (Chap. 41), may produce a dementing illness. 
The possibility of chronic infectious meningitis should 
be suspected in patients presenting with a dementia or 
behavioral syndrome, who also have headache, meningis-
mus, cranial neuropathy, and/or radiculopathy. Between 
20 and 30% of patients in the advanced stages of HIV 
infection become demented (Chap. 42). Cardinal features 
include psychomotor retardation, apathy, and impaired 
memory. This syndrome may result from secondary 
opportunistic infections but can also be caused by direct 
infection of CNS neurons with HIV. Neurosyphilis was 
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
329
a common cause of dementia in the preantibiotic era; it is 
now uncommon but can still be encountered in patients 
with multiple sex partners, particularly among patients 
with HIV. Characteristic CSF changes consist of pleocy-
tosis, increased protein, and a positive Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory (VDRL) test.
Primary and metastatic neoplasms of the CNS (Chap. 
37) usually produce focal neurologic ﬁndings and sei-
zures rather than dementia, but if tumor growth begins 
in the frontal or temporal lobes, the initial manifes-
tations may be memory loss or behavioral changes. A 
paraneoplastic syndrome of dementia associated with 
occult carcinoma (often small cell lung cancer) is termed 
limbic encephalitis. In this syndrome, confusion, agitation, 
seizures, poor memory, emotional changes, and frank 
dementia may occur. Paraneoplastic encephalitis associ-
ated with NMDA receptor antibodies presents as a progres-
sive psychiatric disorder with memory loss and seizures; 
affected patients are often young women with ovarian 
teratoma (Chap. 44).
A nonconvulsive seizure disorder may underlie a syn-
drome of confusion, clouding of consciousness, and gar-
bled speech. Often, psychiatric disease is suspected, but 
an EEG demonstrates the epileptic nature of the illness. 
If recurrent or persistent, the condition may be termed 
complex partial status epilepticus. The cognitive disturbance 
often responds to anticonvulsant therapy. The etiology 
may be previous small strokes or head trauma; some cases 
are idiopathic.
It is important to recognize systemic diseases that indi-
rectly affect the brain and produce chronic confusion or 
dementia. Such conditions include hypothyroidism; vas-
culitis; and hepatic, renal, or pulmonary disease. Hepatic 
encephalopathy may begin with irritability and confusion 
and slowly progress to agitation, lethargy, and coma.
Isolated vasculitis of the CNS (CNS granulomatous angi-
itis) (Chap. 27) occasionally causes a chronic encepha-
lopathy associated with confusion, disorientation, and 
clouding of consciousness. Headache is common, and 
strokes and cranial neuropathies may occur. Brain imag-
ing studies may be normal or nonspeciﬁcally abnormal. 
CSF analysis reveals a mild pleocytosis or protein eleva-
tion. Cerebral angiography can show multifocal stenoses 
involving medium-caliber vessels, but some patients have 
only small-vessel disease that is not revealed on angiog-
raphy. The angiographic appearance is not speciﬁc and 
may be mimicked by atherosclerosis, infection, or other 
causes of vascular disease. Brain or meningeal biopsy 
demonstrates endothelial cell proliferation and mono-
nuclear inﬁltrates within blood vessel walls. The progno-
sis is often poor, although the disorder may remit spon-
taneously. Some patients respond to glucocorticoids or 
chemotherapy.
Chronic metal exposure represents a rare cause of demen-
tia. The key to diagnosis is to elicit a history of exposure 
at work or home. Chronic lead poisoning from inad-
equately ﬁre-glazed pottery has been reported. Fatigue, 
depression, and confusion may be associated with epi-
sodic abdominal pain and peripheral neuropathy. Gray 
lead lines appear in the gums, usually accompanied by an 
anemia with basophilic stippling of red blood cells. The 
clinical presentation can resemble that of acute intermit-
tent porphyria, including elevated levels of urine por-
phyrins as a result of the inhibition of δ-aminolevulinic 
acid dehydrase. The treatment is chelation therapy with 
agents such as ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). 
Chronic mercury poisoning produces dementia, periph-
eral neuropathy, ataxia, and tremulousness that may 
progress to a cerebellar intention tremor or choreoath-
etosis. The confusion and memory loss of chronic arsenic 
intoxication is also associated with nausea, weight loss, 
peripheral neuropathy, pigmentation and scaling of the 
skin, and transverse white lines of the ﬁngernails (Mees’ 
lines). Treatment is chelation therapy with dimercaprol 
(BAL). Aluminum poisoning is rare but was documented 
with the dialysis dementia syndrome, in which water 
used during renal dialysis was contaminated with exces-
sive amounts of aluminum. This poisoning resulted in a 
progressive encephalopathy associated with confusion, 
nonﬂuent aphasia, memory loss, agitation, and, later, 
lethargy and stupor. Speech arrest and myoclonic jerks 
were common and associated with severe and generalized 
EEG changes. The condition has been eliminated by the 
use of deionized water for dialysis.
Recurrent head trauma in professional boxers may 
lead to a dementia sometimes called the “punch-drunk” 
syndrome, or dementia pugilistica. The symptoms can be 
progressive, beginning late in a boxer’s career or even 
long after retirement. The severity of the syndrome cor-
relates with the length of the boxing career and number 
of bouts. Early in the condition, a personality change 
associated with social instability and sometimes paranoia 
and delusions occurs. Later, memory loss progresses to 
full-blown dementia, often associated with parkinso-
nian signs and ataxia or intention tremor. At autopsy, 
the cerebral cortex may show changes similar to AD, 
although NFTs are usually more prominent than amyloid 
plaques (which are usually diffuse rather than neuritic). 
Superﬁcial layer NFT aggregates have been reported to 
differentiate these patients from those with more typical 
AD. Also, there may be loss of neurons in the substan-
tia nigra. Chronic subdural hematoma (Chap. 36) is also 
occasionally associated with dementia, often in the con-
text of underlying cortical atrophy from conditions such 
as AD or HD.
Transient global amnesia (TGA) is characterized by the 
sudden onset of a severe episodic memory deﬁcit, usu-
ally occurring in persons over the age of 50 years. Often 
the amnesia occurs in the setting of an emotional stimu-
lus or physical exertion. During the attack, the individual 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
330
is alert and communicative, general cognition seems 
intact, and there are no other neurologic signs or symp-
toms. The patient may seem confused and repeatedly ask 
about his or her location in place and time. The ability to 
form new memories returns after a period of hours, and 
the individual returns to normal with no recall for the 
period of the attack. Frequently no cause is determined, 
but cerebrovascular disease, epilepsy (7% in one study), 
migraine, or cardiac arrhythmias have all been impli-
cated. A Mayo Clinic review of 277 patients with TGA 
found a history of migraine in 14% and cerebrovascular 
disease in 11%, but these conditions were not temporally 
related to the TGA episodes. Approximately one-quar-
ter of the patients had recurrent attacks, but they were 
not at increased risk for subsequent stroke. Rare instances 
of permanent memory loss after sudden onset have been 
reported, usually representing ischemic infarction of the 
hippocampus or medial thalamic nucleus bilaterally.
The ALS/parkinsonian/dementia complex of Guam is a 
rare degenerative disease that has occurred in the Cham-
orro natives on the island of Guam. Individuals may have 
any combination of parkinsonian features, dementia, and 
motor neuron disease. The most characteristic pathologic 
features are the presence of NFTs in degenerating neu-
rons of the cortex and substantia nigra and loss of motor 
neurons in the spinal cord, although recent reanalysis 
has shown that some patients with this illness also show 
coexisting TDP-43 pathology. Epidemiologic evidence 
supports a possible environmental cause, such as exposure 
to a neurotoxin or an infectious agent with a long latency 
period. One interesting but unproven candidate neu-
rotoxin occurs in the seed of the false palm tree, which 
Guamanians traditionally used to make ﬂour. The ALS 
syndrome is no longer present in Guam, but a dementing 
illness with rigidity continues to be seen.
Rarely, adult-onset leukodystrophies, lysosomal stor-
age diseases, and other genetic disorders can present as a 
dementia in middle to late life. Metachromatic leukodys-
trophy (MLD) causes a progressive psychiatric or demen-
tia syndrome associated with extensive, conﬂuent frontal 
white matter abnormality. MLD is diagnosed by measur-
ing arylsulfatase A enzyme activity in white blood cells. 
Adult-onset presentations of adrenoleukodystrophy have 
been reported in female carriers, and these patients often 
feature spinal cord and posterior white matter involve-
ment. Adrenoleukodystrophy is diagnosed with measure-
ment of plasma very long chain fatty acids. CADASIL 
is another genetic syndrome associated with white mat-
ter disease, often frontally and temporally predominant. 
Diagnosis is made with skin biopsy, which shows osmo-
philic granules in arterioles, or, increasingly, through 
genetic testing for mutations in Notch 3 (see earlier). The 
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are a genetically hetero-
geneous group of disorders associated with myoclonus, 
seizures, and progressive dementia. Diagnosis is made by 
ﬁnding curvilinear inclusions within white blood cells or 
neuronal tissue.
Psychogenic amnesia for personally important memories 
can be seen. Whether this results from deliberate avoid-
ance of unpleasant memories, outright malingering, or 
from unconscious repression remains unknown and 
probably depends on the patient. Event-speciﬁc amne-
sia is more likely to occur after violent crimes such as 
homicide of a close relative or friend or sexual abuse. It 
may develop in association with severe drug or alcohol 
intoxication and sometimes with schizophrenia. More 
prolonged psychogenic amnesia occurs in fugue states 
that also commonly follow severe emotional stress. The 
patient with a fugue state suffers from a sudden loss of 
personal identity and may be found wandering far from 
home. In contrast to neurologic amnesia, fugue states are associ-
ated with amnesia for personal identity and events closely asso-
ciated with the personal past. At the same time, memory 
for other recent events and the ability to learn and use 
new information are preserved. The episodes usually last 
hours or days and occasionally weeks or months while 
the patient takes on a new identity. On recovery, there 
is a residual amnesia gap for the period of the fugue. 
Very rarely does selective loss of autobiographic informa-
tion reﬂect a focal injury to the brain areas involved with 
these functions.
Psychiatric diseases may mimic dementia. Severely 
depressed or anxious individuals may appear demented, 
a phenomenon sometimes called pseudodementia. Mem-
ory and language are usually intact when carefully tested, 
and a signiﬁcant memory disturbance usually suggests 
an underlying dementia, even if the patient is depressed. 
Patients in this condition may feel confused and unable 
to accomplish routine tasks. Vegetative symptoms, such 
as insomnia, lack of energy, poor appetite, and concern 
with bowel function, are common. Onset is often more 
abrupt, and the psychosocial milieu may suggest promi-
nent reasons for depression. Such patients respond to 
treatment of the underlying psychiatric illness. Schizo-
phrenia is usually not difﬁcult to distinguish from demen-
tia, but occasionally the distinction can be problematic. 
Schizophrenia generally has a much earlier age of onset 
(second and third decades) than most dementing illnesses, 
and is associated with intact memory. The delusions and 
hallucinations of schizophrenia are usually more complex 
and bizarre than those of dementia. Some chronic schizo-
phrenics develop an unexplained progressive dementia 
late in life that is not related to AD. Conversely, FTD, 
HD, vascular dementia, DLB, AD, or leukoencephalopa-
thy can begin with schizophrenia-like features, leading to 
the misdiagnosis of a psychiatric condition. Later age of 
onset, signiﬁcant deﬁcits on cognitive testing, or the pres-
ence of abnormal neuroimaging point toward a degen-
erative condition. Memory loss may also be part of a 
conversion disorder. In this situation, patients commonly 
 
CHAPTER 29
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias
331
complain bitterly of memory loss, but careful cognitive 
testing either does not conﬁrm the deﬁcits or demon-
strates inconsistent or unusual patterns of cognitive prob-
lems. The patient’s behavior and “wrong” answers to 
questions often indicate that he or she understands the 
question and knows the correct answer.
Clouding of cognition by chronic drug or medication use, 
often prescribed by physicians, is an important cause of 
dementia. Sedatives, tranquilizers, and analgesics used 
to treat insomnia, pain, anxiety, or agitation may cause 
confusion, memory loss, and lethargy, especially in the 
elderly. Discontinuation of the offending medication 
often improves mentation.
able side-effect profile, second-generation antipsychotics 
such as quetiapine (starting dose, 12.5–25 mg daily) can 
be used for patients with agitation, aggression, and psy-
chosis, although the risk profile for these compounds is sig-
nificant. When patients do not respond to treatment, it is 
usually a mistake to advance to higher doses or to use anti-
cholinergics or sedatives (such as barbiturates or benzodi-
azepines). It is important to recognize and treat depression; 
treatment can begin with a low dose of an SSRI (e.g., esci-
talopram 5–10 mg daily) while monitoring for efficacy and 
toxicity. Sometimes apathy, visual hallucinations, depres-
sion, and other psychiatric symptoms respond to the cho-
linesterase inhibitors, especially in DLB, obviating the need 
for other more toxic therapies.
Cholinesterase inhibitors are being used to treat AD 
(donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) and PDD (riv-
astigmine). Other compounds, such as anti-inflamma-
tory agents, are being investigated in the treatment or 
prevention of AD. These approaches are reviewed in the 
treatment sections for individual disorders earlier in this 
chapter. Memantine proves useful when treating some 
patients with moderate to severe AD; its major benefit 
relates to decreasing caregiver burden, most likely by 
decreasing resistance to dressing and grooming support.
A proactive strategy has been shown to reduce the 
occurrence of delirium in hospitalized patients. This strat-
egy includes frequent orientation, cognitive activities, 
sleep-enhancement measures, vision and hearing aids, 
and correction of dehydration.
Nondrug behavior therapy has an important place in 
dementia management. The primary goals are to make 
the patient’s life comfortable, uncomplicated, and safe. 
Preparing lists, schedules, calendars, and labels can be 
helpful in the early stages. It is also useful to stress famil-
iar routines, short-term tasks, walks, and simple physi-
cal exercises. For many demented patients, memory for 
events is worse than for routine activities, and they may 
still be able to take part in physical activities such as walk-
ing, bowling, dancing, and golf. Demented patients usu-
ally object to losing control over familiar tasks such as 
driving, cooking, and handling finances. Attempts to help 
or take over may be greeted with complaints, depression, 
or anger. Hostile responses on the part of the caretaker 
are useless and sometimes harmful. Explanation, reas-
surance, distraction, and calm positive statements are 
more productive in this setting. Eventually, tasks such 
as finances and driving must be assumed by others, and 
the patient will conform and adjust. Safety is an impor-
tant issue that includes not only driving but controlling 
the kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area environments, 
as well as stairways. These areas need to be monitored, 
supervised, and made as safe as possible. A move to a 
retirement home, assisted-living center, or nursing home 
can initially increase confusion and agitation. Repeated 
TREATMENT 
Dementia
The major goals of dementia management are to treat 
correctable causes and to provide comfort and support 
to the patient and caregivers. Treatment of underlying 
causes might include thyroid replacement for hypothy-
roidism; vitamin therapy for thiamine or B12 deficiency 
or for elevated serum homocysteine; antimicrobials for 
opportunistic infections or antiretrovirals for HIV; ventric-
ular shunting for NPH; or appropriate surgical, radiation, 
and/or chemotherapeutic treatment for CNS neoplasms. 
Removal of cognition-impairing drugs or medications 
is the most frequently useful approach employed in a 
dementia clinic. If the patient’s cognitive complaints stem 
from a psychiatric disorder, vigorous treatment of this 
condition should seek to eliminate the cognitive com-
plaint or confirm that it persists despite adequate reso-
lution of the mood or anxiety symptoms. Patients with 
degenerative diseases may also be depressed or anxious, 
and those aspects of their condition may respond to ther-
apy. Antidepressants, such as SSRIs (Chap. 54), which fea-
ture anxiolytic properties but few cognitive side effects 
provide the mainstay of treatment when necessary. Anti-
convulsants are used to control seizures.
Agitation, hallucinations, delusions, and confusion are 
difficult to treat. These behavioral problems represent 
major causes for nursing home placement and institution-
alization. Before treating these behaviors with medications, 
the clinician should aggressively seek out modifiable envi-
ronmental or metabolic factors. Hunger, lack of exercise, 
toothache, constipation, urinary tract infection, or drug 
toxicity all represent easily correctable causes that can 
be remedied without psychoactive drugs. Drugs such as 
phenothiazines and benzodiazepines may ameliorate the 
behavior problems but have untoward side effects such 
as sedation, rigidity, dyskinesia, and occasionally paradoxi-
cal disinhibition (benzodiazepines). Despite their unfavor-
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
332
reassurance, reorientation, and careful introduction to 
the new personnel will help to smooth the process. Pro-
viding activities that are known to be enjoyable to the 
patient can be of considerable benefit. The clinician 
must pay special attention to frustration and depression 
among family members and caregivers. Caregiver guilt 
and burnout are common. Family members often feel 
overwhelmed and helpless and may vent their frustra-
tions on the patient, each other, and health care provid-
ers. Caregivers should be encouraged to take advantage 
of day-care facilities and respite breaks. Education and 
counseling about dementia are important. Local and 
national support groups, such as the Alzheimer’s Associa-
tion (www.alz.org), can provide considerable help.
 C. Warren Olanow   ■   Anthony H.V. Schapira 
333
 PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND RELATED 
DISORDERS 
 Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second commonest neu-
rodegenerative disease, exceeded only by Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD). It is estimated that approximately 1 mil-
lion persons in the United States and 5 million persons 
in the world suffer from this disorder. PD affects men 
and women of all races, all occupations, and all coun-
tries. The mean age of onset is about 60 years, but cases 
can be seen in patients in their 20s, and even younger. 
The frequency of PD increases with aging, and based 
on projected population demographics, it is estimated 
that the prevalence will dramatically increase in future 
decades. 
 Clinically, PD is characterized by rest tremor, rigid-
ity, bradykinesia, and gait impairment, known as the 
“cardinal features” of the disease. Additional features 
can include freezing of gait, postural instability, speech 
difﬁ culty, autonomic disturbances, sensory alterations, 
mood disorders, sleep dysfunction, cognitive impair-
ment, and dementia  ( Table 30-1 ) , all known as non-
dopaminergic features because they do not fully respond 
to dopaminergic therapy. 
 Pathologically, the hallmark features of PD are 
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia 
nigra pars compacta (SNc), reduced striatal dopamine, 
and intracytoplasmic proteinaceous inclusions known 
as Lewy bodies  ( Fig. 30-1 ) . While interest has primar-
ily focused on the dopamine system, neuronal degen-
eration with inclusion body formation can also affect 
cholinergic neurons of the nucleus basalis of Meynert 
(NBM), norepinephrine neurons of the locus coeru-
leus (LC), serotonin neurons in the raphe nuclei of the 
brainstem, and neurons of the olfactory system, cere-
bral hemispheres, spinal cord, and peripheral autonomic 
nervous system. This “nondopaminergic” pathology is 
likely responsible for the nondopaminergic clinical fea-
tures listed in  Table 30-1 . Indeed, there is evidence 
that pathology begins in the peripheral autonomic ner-
vous system, olfactory system, and dorsal motor nucleus 
of the vagus nerve in the lower brainstem, and then 
spreads in a sequential manner to affect the upper brain-
stem and cerebral hemispheres. These studies suggest 
that dopamine neurons are affected in midstage disease. 
Indeed, several studies suggest that symptoms reﬂ ect-
ing nondopaminergic degeneration such as constipation, 
anosmia, rapid eye movement (REM) behavior sleep 
disorder, and cardiac denervation precede the onset of 
the classic motor features of the illness. 
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS 
 Parkinsonism is a general term that is used to deﬁ ne a 
symptom complex manifest by bradykinesia with rigidity 
and/or tremor. It has a wide differential diagnosis  ( Table 
30-2 ) and can reﬂ ect damage to different components 
of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia comprise a group 
of subcortical nuclei that include the striatum (putamen 
and caudate nucleus), subthalamic nucleus (STN), globus 
pallidus pars externa (GPe), globus pallidus pars interna 
(GPi), and the SNc  ( Fig. 30-2 ) . The basal ganglia play 
an important role in regulating normal motor behavior. 
It is now appreciated that basal ganglia also play a role in 
modulating emotional and cognitive functions. Among 
the different forms of parkinsonism, PD is the most com-
mon (approximately 75% of cases). Historically, PD was 
diagnosed based on the presence of two of three parkin-
sonian features (tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia). However, 
postmortem studies found a 24% error rate when these 
criteria were used. Clinicopathologic correlation stud-
ies subsequently determined that parkinsonism associ-
ated with rest tremor, asymmetry, and a good response 
to levodopa was more likely to predict the correct 
 PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND OTHER 
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL MOVEMENT DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 30 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
334
pathologic diagnosis. With these revised criteria (known 
as the U.K. brain bank criteria), the clinical diagnosis of 
PD is conﬁrmed pathologically in 99% of cases.
Imaging of the brain dopamine system in PD with 
positron emission tomography (PET) or single-photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT) shows reduced 
uptake of striatal dopaminergic markers, particularly in 
the posterior putamen (Fig. 30-3). Imaging can be use-
ful in difﬁcult cases or research studies but is rarely nec-
essary in routine practice, as the diagnosis can usually be 
established on clinical criteria alone. This may change 
in the future when there is a disease-modifying therapy 
and it is important to make the diagnosis at as early a 
time point as possible. Genetic testing is not generally 
employed at present, but it can be helpful for identify-
ing at-risk individuals in a research setting. Mutations 
of the LRRK2 gene (see later) have attracted particu-
lar interest as they are the commonest cause of familial 
PD and are responsible for approximately 1% of typi-
cal sporadic cases of the disease. Mutations in LRRK2 
are particularly common causes of PD in Ashkenazi 
Jews and North African Berber Arabs. The penetrance 
of the most common LRRK2 mutation ranges from 28 
to 74%, depending on age. Mutations in the parkin gene 
TABLE 30-1
CLINICAL FEATURES OF PARKINSON’S DISEASE
CARDINAL FEATURES
OTHER MOTOR FEATURES
NONMOTOR FEATURES
Bradykinesia
Rest tremor
Rigidity
Gait disturbance/postural instability
Micrographia
Masked facies (hypomimia) equalize
Reduced eye blink
Soft voice (hypophonia)
Dysphagia
Freezing
Anosmia
Sensory disturbances (e.g., pain)
Mood disorders (e.g., depression)
Sleep disturbances
Autonomic disturbances
 Orthostatic hypotension
 Gastrointestinal disturbances
 Genitourinal disturbances
 Sexual dysfunction
Cognitive impairment/dementia
A
B
C
FIGURE 30-1 
Pathologic specimens from a patient with Parkinson’s dis-
ease (PD) compared to a normal control demonstrating (A) 
reduction of pigment in SNc in PD (right) vs control (left), (B) 
reduced numbers of cells in SNc in PD (right) compared to con-
trol (left), and (C) Lewy bodies (arrows) within melanized dopa-
mine neurons in PD. SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta.
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
335
should be considered in patients with disease onset prior 
to 40 years.
Atypical and secondary parkinsonism
Atypical parkinsonism refers to a group of neurode-
generative conditions that usually are associated with 
more widespread neurodegeneration than is found in 
PD (often involvement of SNc and striatum and/or pal-
lidum). As a group, they present with a parkinsonism 
(rigidity and bradykinesia) but typically have a slightly 
different clinical picture than PD, reﬂecting differ-
ences in underlying pathology. Parkinsonism in these 
conditions is often characterized by early speech and 
gait impairment, absence of rest tremor, no asymme-
try, poor or no response to levodopa, and an aggressive 
clinical course. In the early stages, they may show some 
modest beneﬁt from levodopa and be difﬁcult to distin-
guish from PD. Neuroimaging of the dopamine system 
is usually not helpful, as several atypical parkinsonisms 
also have degeneration of dopamine neurons. Patholog-
ically, neurodegeneration occurs without Lewy bodies 
(see later for individual conditions). Metabolic imaging 
of the basal ganglia/thalamus network may be helpful, 
reﬂecting a pattern of decreased activity in the GPi with 
increased activity in the thalamus, the reverse of what is 
seen in PD.
Multiple-system atrophy (MSA) manifests as a com-
bination of parkinsonian, cerebellar, and autonomic fea-
tures and can be divided into a predominant parkinso-
nian (MSA-p) or cerebellar (MSA-c) form. Clinically, 
MSA is suspected when a patient presents with atypical 
parkinsonism in conjunction with cerebellar signs and/
or early and prominent autonomic dysfunction, usu-
ally orthostatic hypotension (Chap. 33). Pathologically, 
MSA is characterized by degeneration of the SNc, stria-
tum, cerebellum, and inferior olivary nuclei coupled 
with characteristic glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) 
that stain for α-synuclein. MRI can show pathologic 
iron accumulation in the striatum on T2-weighted 
TABLE 30-2
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF PARKINSONISM
Parkinson’s Disease
 Genetic
 Sporadic
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Atypical Parkinsonisms
 Multiple-system atrophy
  Cerebellar type (MSA-c)
  Parkinson type (MSA-p)
 Progressive supranuclear 
palsy
 Corticobasal ganglionic  
degeneration
 Frontotemporal dementia
Secondary Parkinsonism
 Drug-induced
 Tumor
 Infection
 Vascular
 Normal-pressure  
hydrocephalus
 Trauma
 Liver failure
 Toxins (e.g., carbon mon-
oxide, manganese, MPTP, 
cyanide, hexane, methanol, 
carbon disulﬁde)
Other Neurodegenerative 
Disorders
 Wilson’s disease
 Huntington’s disease
 Neurodegeneration with 
brain iron accumulation
 SCA 3 (spinocerebellar 
ataxia)
 Fragile X–associated  
ataxia-tremor-parkinsonism
 Prion disease
 Dystonia-parkinsonism 
(DYT3)
 Alzheimer’s disease with 
parkinsonism
Striatum
(Putamen and
Caudate)
Globus Pallidus
SNc
STN
SNc
Striatum
Globus Pallidus
FIGURE 30-2 
Basal ganglia nuclei. Schematic (A) and postmortem (B) 
coronal sections illustrating the various components of the 
basal ganglia. SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta; STN, 
subthalamic nucleus.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
336
scans, high signal change in the region of the external 
surface of the putamen (putaminal rim) in MSA-p, or 
cerebellar and brainstem atrophy (the pontine “hot cross 
buns” sign [Fig.  33-2]) in MSA-c.
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a form of 
atypical parkinsonism that is characterized by slow ocu-
lar saccades, eyelid apraxia, and restricted eye move-
ments with particular impairment of downward gaze. 
Patients frequently experience hyperextension of the 
neck with early gait disturbance and falls. In later stages, 
speech and swallowing difﬁculty and dementia become 
evident. MRI may reveal a characteristic atrophy of the 
midbrain with relative preservation of the pons (the 
“hummingbird sign” on midsagittal images). Pathologi-
cally, PSP is characterized by degeneration of the SNc 
and pallidum along with neuroﬁbrillary tangles and 
GCIs that stain for tau.
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration is less common 
and is usually manifest by asymmetric dystonic contrac-
tions and clumsiness of one hand coupled with cortical 
sensory disturbances manifest as apraxia, agnosia, focal 
myoclonus, or alien limb phenomenon (where the 
limb assumes a position in space without the patient 
being aware of it). Dementia may occur at any stage of 
the disease. MRI frequently shows asymmetric cortical 
atrophy. Pathologic ﬁndings include achromatic neu-
ronal degeneration with tau deposits similar to those 
found in PSP.
Secondary parkinsonism can be associated with drugs, 
stroke, tumor, infection, or exposure to toxins such as 
carbon monoxide or manganese. Dopamine-blocking 
agents such as the neuroleptics are the commonest cause 
of secondary parkinsonism. These drugs are most widely 
used in psychiatry, but physicians should be aware that 
drugs such as metoclopramide and chlorperazine, which 
are primarily used to treat gastrointestinal problems, are 
also neuroleptic agents and common causes of secondary 
parkinsonism and tardive dyskinesia. Other drugs that 
can cause secondary parkinsonism include tetrabenazine, 
amiodarone, and lithium.
Finally, parkinsonism can be seen as a feature of 
other degenerative disorders such as Wilson’s dis-
ease, Huntington’s disease (especially the juvenile form 
known as Westphal variant), dopa-responsive dystonia, 
and neurodegenerative disorders with brain iron accu-
mulation such as pantothenate kinase (PANK)–associated 
neurodegeneration (formerly known as Hallervorden-
Spatz disease).
Some features that suggest parkinsonism might 
be due to a condition other than PD are shown in 
Table 30-3.
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Most PD cases occur sporadically (∼85–90%) and are of 
unknown cause. Twin studies suggest that environmen-
tal factors likely play the more important role in patients 
older than 50 years, with genetic factors being more 
important in younger patients. Epidemiologic studies 
suggest increased risk with exposure to pesticides, rural 
living, and drinking well water and reduced risk with 
cigarette smoking and caffeine. However, no environ-
mental factor has yet been determined to cause PD. The 
environmental hypothesis received a boost with the 
demonstration in the 1980s that MPTP (1-methyl-4-
phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine), a byproduct of the 
illicit manufacture of a heroin-like drug, caused a PD-
like syndrome in addicts in northern California. MPTP 
is transported to the central nervous system, where it is 
metabolized to form MPP+, a mitochondrial toxin that 
A
B
FIGURE 30-3 
[11C]dihydrotetrabenazine PET (a marker of VMAT2) in 
healthy control  (A) and PD (B) patient. Note the reduced 
striatal uptake of tracer which is most pronounced in the 
posterior putamen and tends to be asymmetric. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Jon Stoessl.)
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
337
is selectively taken up by, and damages, dopamine neu-
rons. However, MPTP or MPTP-like compounds have 
not been linked to sporadic PD. MPTP has, however, 
proved useful for generating an animal model of the dis-
ease. About 10–15% of cases are familial in origin, and 
multiple speciﬁc mutations and gene associations have 
been identiﬁed (Table 30-4). It has been proposed that 
most cases of PD are due to a “double hit” involving 
an interaction between a gene mutation that induces 
susceptibility coupled with exposure to a toxic environ-
mental factor. In this scenario, both factors are required 
for PD to ensue, while the presence of either one alone 
is not sufﬁcient to cause the disease.
Factors that have been implicated in the pathogen-
esis of cell death include oxidative stress, intracellular 
calcium accumulation with excitotoxicity, inﬂam-
mation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and proteolytic 
stress. Whatever the pathogenic mechanism, cell death 
appears to occur, at least in part, by way of a signal-
mediated apoptotic or “suicidal” process. Each of these 
mechanisms offer potential targets for neuroprotective 
drugs. However, it is not clear which of these factors 
is primary, if the cause is the same in each case, or if 
one or all merely represent epiphenomena unrelated to 
the true cause of cell death that remains undiscovered 
(Fig. 30-4).
TABLE 30-3
FEATURES SUGGESTING ALTERNATE DIAGNOSIS 
THAN PD
SYMPTOMS/SIGNS
ALTERNATE DIAGNOSIS TO 
CONSIDER
History
Early speech and gait 
impairment
Atypical parkinsonism
Exposure to neuroleptics
Drug-induced parkinsonism
Onset prior to age 40
Genetic form of PD
Liver disease
Wilson’s disease, non-
Wilsonian hepatolenticular 
degeneration
Early hallucinations
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Diplopia
PSP
Poor or no response to an 
adequate trial of levodopa
Atypical or secondary par-
kinsonism
Physical Exam
Dementia as ﬁrst symptom
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Prominent orthostatic  
hypotension
MSA-p
Prominent cerebellar signs
MSA-c
Impairment of down gaze
PSP
High-frequency (8–10 Hz) 
symmetric postural tremor 
with a prominent kinetic 
component
Essential tremor
Abbreviations: MSA-c, multiple-system atrophy–cerebellar type; 
MSA-p, multiple-system atrophy–Parkinson type; PSP, progressive 
supranuclear palsy.
TABLE 30-4
GENETIC CAUSES OF PD
NAME
CHROMOSOME
LOCUS
GENE
INHERITANCE
Park 1
Chr 4
q21-23
α-Synuclein
AD
Park 2
Chr 6
q25-27
Parkin
AR
Park 3
Chr 2
p13
Unknown
AD
Park 4
Chr 4
q21-23
α-Synuclein
AD
Park 5
Chr 4
p14
UCHL-1
AD
Park 6
Chr 1
p35-36
PINK-1
AR
Park 7
Chr 1
p36
DJ-1
AR
Park 8
Chr 12
p11-q13 LRRK2
AR/Sp
Park 9
Chr 1
p36
ATP13A2
AR
Park 10
Chr 1
p32
Unknown
Sp
Park 11
Chr 2
q36-37
GIGYF2
AD
Park 12
Chr X
q21-25
Unknown
Sp
Park 13
Chr 2
p13
Omi/HtrA2
AD
Park 14
Chr 22
q13
PLA2G6
AR
Park 15
Chr 22
q12-13
FBX07
AR
Park 16
Chr 1
q32
Unknown
SP
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; SP, 
sporadic.
Etiology
Oxidative stress
Mitochondrial
dysfunction
Cell death
Protein aggregation
Excitotoxicity
Inflammation
FIGURE 30-4 
Schematic representation of how pathogenetic factors 
implicated in PD interact in a network manner, ultimately 
leading to cell death. This ﬁgure illustrates how interference 
with any one of these factors may not necessarily stop the 
cell death cascade. (Adapted from CW Olanow: Movement 
Disorders 22:S-335, 2007.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
338
Gene mutations discovered to date have been helpful 
in pointing to speciﬁc pathogenic mechanisms as being 
central to the neurodegenerative process. The most sig-
niﬁcant of these mechanisms appear to be protein mis-
folding and accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction. 
The idea that proteins are involved in the pathogenesis 
of PD is not surprising, given that PD is characterized 
by Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, which are com-
posed of misfolded and aggregated proteins (Fig.  30-1). 
Protein accumulation could result from either increased 
formation or impaired clearance of proteins. Mutations 
in α-synuclein promote misfolding of the protein and 
the formation of oligomers and aggregates thought to be 
involved in the cell death process. Importantly, duplica-
tion or triplication of the wild-type α-synuclein gene 
can itself cause PD, indicating that increased production 
of even the normal protein can cause PD. Increased lev-
els of unwanted proteins could also result from impaired 
clearance. Proteins are normally cleared by the ubiquitin 
proteasome system or the autophagy/lysosome pathway. 
These pathways are defective in patients with sporadic 
PD, and interestingly α-synuclein is a prominent com-
ponent of Lewy bodies in these cases. Further, mutations 
in parkin (a ubiquitin ligase that attaches ubiquitin to 
misfolded proteins to promote their transport to the pro-
teasome for degradation) and UCH-L1 (which cleaves 
ubiquitin from misfolded proteins to permit their entry 
into the proteasome) are causative in other cases of famil-
ial PD. Collectively, these ﬁndings implicate abnormal 
protein accumulation in the etiology of PD. Indeed, in 
laboratory models both overexpression of α-synuclein or 
impairment of proteasomal clearance mechanisms leads to 
degeneration of dopamine neurons with inclusion body 
formation.
Mitochondrial dysfunction has also been implicated 
in familial PD. Several causative genes (parkin, PINK1, 
and DJ1) either localize to mitochondria and/or cause 
mitochondrial dysfunction in transgenic animals. Post-
mortem studies have also shown a defect in complex I 
of the respiratory chain in the SNc of patients with spo-
radic PD.
Six different LRRK2 mutations have been linked to 
PD, with the Gly2019Ser being the commonest. The 
mechanism responsible for cell death with this mutation 
is not known but is thought to involve altered kinase 
activity.
Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene 
associated with Gaucher’s disease are also associated 
with an increased risk of idiopathic PD. Again the 
mechanism is not precisely known, but it is notewor-
thy that it is associated with altered autophagy and lyso-
somal function, suggesting that mutations in this gene 
might also impair protein clearance leading to PD.
Whole-genome association studies have provided 
conﬂicting results. Most recently, linkage to mutations 
in human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes were identi-
ﬁed in PD patients, suggesting that altered immunity or 
inﬂammation may be a causative or contributory factor.
While gene mutations account for only a small per-
centage of cases of PD, it is hoped that better under-
standing of the mechanisms whereby they cause cell 
death will provide insight into the nature of the cell 
death process in the more common sporadic form of the 
disease. These mutations could also permit the develop-
ment of more relevant animal models of PD in which 
to test putative neuroprotective drugs.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PD
The classic model of basal ganglia functional organization 
in the normal and PD states is provided in Fig. 30-5. A 
series of neuronal loops link the basal ganglia nuclei with 
corresponding cortical motor regions in a somatotopic 
manner to help regulate motor function. The striatum is 
the major input region of the basal ganglia, while the GPi 
and SNr are the major output regions. The input and 
output regions are connected via direct and indirect path-
ways that have reciprocal effects on the output pathway. 
The output of the basal ganglia provides inhibitory tone 
to thalamic and brainstem neurons that in turn connect 
to motor systems in the cerebral cortex and spinal cord to 
regulate motor function. Dopaminergic projections from 
SNc neurons serve to modulate neuronal ﬁring and to 
stabilize the basal ganglia network.
In PD, dopamine denervation leads to increased ﬁr-
ing of neurons in the STN and GPi, resulting in exces-
sive inhibition of the thalamus, reduced activation of 
cortical motor systems, and the development of parkin-
sonian features (Fig. 30-5). The current role of surgery 
in the treatment of PD is based upon this model, which 
predicted that lesions or high-frequency stimulation of 
the STN or GPi might reduce this neuronal overactiv-
ity and improve PD features.
TREATMENT 
Parkinson’s Disease
LEVODOPA Since its introduction in the late 1960s, 
levodopa has been the mainstay of therapy for PD. 
Experiments in the late 1950s by Carlsson demonstrated 
that blocking dopamine uptake with reserpine caused 
rabbits to become parkinsonian; this could be reversed 
with the dopamine precursor, levodopa. Subsequently, 
Hornykiewicz demonstrated a dopamine deficiency in 
the striatum of PD patients and suggested the potential 
benefit of dopaminergic replacement therapy. Dopa-
mine does not cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB), so 
clinical trials were initiated with levodopa, a precursor of 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
339
dopamine. Studies over the course of the next decade 
confirmed the value of levodopa and revolutionized the 
treatment of PD.
Levodopa is routinely administered in combination 
with a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor to prevent 
its peripheral metabolism to dopamine and the devel-
opment of nausea and vomiting due to activation of 
dopamine receptors in the area postrema that are not 
protected by the BBB. In the United States, levodopa is 
combined with the decarboxylase inhibitor carbidopa 
(Sinemet), while in many other countries it is combined 
with benserazide (Madopar). Levodopa is also available 
in controlled-release formulations as well as in combina-
tion with a COMT inhibitor (see later). Levodopa remains 
the most effective symptomatic treatment for PD and 
the gold standard against which new therapies are com-
pared. No current medical or surgical treatment pro-
vides antiparkinsonian benefits superior to what can be 
achieved with levodopa. Levodopa benefits the classic 
motor features of PD, prolongs independence and 
employability, improves quality of life, and increases life 
span. Almost all PD patients experience improvement, 
and failure to respond to an adequate trial should cause 
the diagnosis to be questioned.
There are, however, important limitations of levo-
dopa therapy. Acute dopaminergic side effects include 
nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension. These 
are usually transient and can generally be avoided by 
gradual titration. If they persist, they can be treated with 
additional doses of a peripheral decarboxylase inhibi-
tor (e.g., carbidopa) or a peripheral dopamine-blocking 
agent such as domperidone (not available in the United 
States). More important are motor complications (see 
later) that develop in the majority of patients treated 
long-term with levodopa therapy. In addition, fea-
tures such as falling, freezing, autonomic dysfunction, 
sleep disorders, and dementia may emerge that are 
not adequately controlled by levodopa. Indeed, these 
Cortex
Putamen
GPe
STN
GPi
SNr
PPN
VL
SNc
GPi
SNr
PPN
GPe
STN
VL
Putamen
SNc
Cortex
SNc
Cortex
GPi
SNr
PPN
GPe
STN
VL
Putamen
SNc
Cortex
DA
DA
A
B
C
Normal
PD
Dyskinesia
FIGURE 30-5 
Basal ganglia organization. Classic model of the organiza-
tion of the basal ganglia in the normal, PD, and levodopa-
induced dyskinesia state. Inhibitory connections are shown 
as blue arrows and excitatory connections as red arrows. 
The striatum is the major input region and receives its major 
input from the cortex. The GPi and SNr are the major out-
put regions and they project to the thalamocortical and 
brainstem motor regions. The striatum and GPi/SNr are con-
nected by direct and indirect pathways. This model predicts 
that parkinsonism results from increased neuronal ﬁring in 
the STN and GPi and that lesions or DBS of these targets 
might provide beneﬁt. This concept led to the rationale for 
surgical therapies for PD. The model also predicts that dys-
kinesia results from decreased ﬁring of the output regions, 
resulting in excessive cortical activation by the thalamus. 
This component of the model is not completely correct as 
lesions of the GPi ameliorate rather than increase dyskine-
sia in PD, suggesting that ﬁring frequency is just one of the 
components that lead to the development of dyskinesia. 
DBS, deep brain stimulation; GPe, external segment of the 
globus pallidus; GPi, internal segment of the globus pallidus; 
SNr, substantia nigra, pars reticulata; SNc, substantia nigra, 
pars compacta; STN, subthalamic nucleus; VL, ventrolateral 
thalamus; PPN, pedunculopontine nucleus. (Derived from JA 
Obeso et al: Trends Neurosci 23:S8, 2000.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
340
nondopaminergic features are the primary source of dis-
ability and main reason for nursing home placement for 
patients with advanced PD.
Levodopa-induced motor complications consist of 
fluctuations in motor response and involuntary move-
ments known as dyskinesias (Fig. 30-6). When patients 
initially take levodopa, benefits are long-lasting (many 
hours) even though the drug has a relatively short half-
life (60–90 min). With continued treatment, however, 
the duration of benefit following an individual dose 
becomes progressively shorter until it approaches the 
half-life of the drug. This loss of benefit is known as 
the wearing-off effect. At the same time, many patients 
develop dyskinesias. These tend to occur at the time of 
maximal clinical benefit and peak plasma concentra-
tion (peak-dose dyskinesia). They are usually choreiform 
in nature but can manifest as dystonia, myoclonus, or 
other movement disorders. They are not troublesome 
when mild, but can be disabling when severe and can 
limit the ability to fully utilize levodopa to control PD 
features. In more advanced states, patients may cycle 
between “on” periods complicated by disabling dyskine-
sias and “off” periods in which they suffer severe parkin-
sonism. Patients may also experience “diphasic dyskine-
sias,” which occur as the levodopa dose begins to take 
effect and again as it wears off. These dyskinesias typi-
cally consist of transient, stereotypic, rhythmic move-
ments that predominantly involve the lower extremi-
ties and are frequently associated with parkinsonism 
in other body regions. They can be relieved by increas-
ing the dose of levodopa, although higher doses may 
induce more severe peak-dose dyskinesia.
The cause of levodopa-induced motor complications 
is not precisely known. They are more likely to occur in 
young individuals with severe disease and with higher 
doses of levodopa. The classic model of the basal ganglia 
has been useful for understanding the origin of motor 
features in PD, but has proved less valuable for under-
standing levodopa-induced dyskinesias (Fig. 30-5). The 
model predicts that dopamine replacement might exces-
sively inhibit the pallidal output system, thereby leading 
to increased thalamocortical activity, enhanced stimula-
tion of cortical motor regions, and the development of 
dyskinesia. However, lesions of the pallidum that com-
pletely destroy its output are associated with ameliora-
tion rather than induction of dyskinesia as suggested 
by the classic model. It is now thought that dyskinesia 
results from levodopa-induced alterations in the GPi neu-
ronal firing pattern (pauses, bursts, synchrony, etc.) and 
not simply the firing frequency alone. This in turn leads to 
the transmission of misinformation from pallidum to thal-
amus/cortex, resulting in dyskinesia. Pallidotomy might 
thus ameliorate dyskinesia by blocking this abnormal fir-
ing pattern and preventing the transfer of misinformation 
to motor systems.
Current information suggests that altered neuronal 
firing patterns and motor complications relate to non-
physiologic levodopa replacement. Striatal dopamine 
levels are normally maintained at a relatively constant 
level. In the PD state, dopamine neurons degenerate 
and striatal dopamine is dependent on peripheral avail-
ability of levodopa. Intermittent doses of short-acting 
levodopa do not restore dopamine in a physiologic 
manner and cause dopamine receptors to be exposed 
to alternating high and low concentrations of dopa-
mine. This intermittent or pulsatile stimulation of dopa-
mine receptors induces molecular changes in striatal 
neurons and neurophysiologic changes in pallidal neu-
rons, leading to the development of motor complica-
tions. It has been hypothesized that more continuous 
Clinical effect
Dyskinesia
threshold
Response
threshold
2
4
6
Time (h)
↑Levodopa
• Long-duration motor response
• Low incidence of dyskinesias
Early PD
Response
threshold
Dyskinesia
threshold
2
4
6
Time (h)
↑Levodopa
Clinical effect
• Short-duration motor response
• “On” time may be associated
 with dyskinesias
Moderate PD
Response
threshold
Dyskinesia
threshold
2
4
6
Time (h)
↑Levodopa
Clinical effect
• Short-duration motor response
• “On” time consistently associated
 with dyskinesias
Advanced PD
FIGURE 30-6 
Changes in motor response associated with chronic 
levodopa treatment. Levodopa-induced motor complica-
tions. Schematic illustration of the gradual shortening of the 
duration of a beneﬁcial motor response to levodopa (wear-
ing off) and the appearance of dyskinesias complicating “on” 
time.
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
341
delivery of levodopa might prevent the development 
of motor complications. Indeed, continuous levodopa 
infusion is associated with improvement in both “off” 
time and dyskinesia in advanced PD patients, but this 
approach has not yet been proved to prevent dyskinesia 
in clinical trials.
Behavioral alterations can be encountered in levodopa-
treated patients. A dopamine dysregulation syndrome 
has been described where patients have a craving for 
levodopa and take frequent and unnecessary doses of the 
drug in an addictive manner. PD patients taking high doses 
of levodopa can also have purposeless, stereotyped behav-
iors such as the meaningless assembly and disassembly or 
collection and sorting of objects. This is known as punding, 
a term taken from the Swedish description of the mean-
ingless behaviors seen in chronic amphetamine users. 
Hypersexuality and other impulse-control disorders are 
occasionally encountered with levodopa, although these 
are more commonly seen with dopamine agonists.
DOPAMINE AGONISTS Dopamine agonists are 
a diverse group of drugs that act directly on dopamine 
receptors. Unlike levodopa, they do not require metabo-
lism to an active product and do not undergo oxidative 
metabolism. Initial dopamine agonists were ergot deriv-
atives (e.g., bromocriptine, pergolide, cabergoline) and 
were associated with ergot-related side effects, includ-
ing cardiac valvular damage. They have largely been 
replaced by a second generation of non-ergot dopa-
mine agonists (e.g., pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine). 
In general, dopamine agonists do not have comparable 
efficacy to levodopa. They were initially introduced as 
adjuncts to levodopa to enhance motor function and 
reduce “off” time in fluctuating patients. Subsequently, 
it was shown that dopamine agonists, possibly because 
they are relatively long-acting, are less prone than 
levodopa to induce dyskinesia. For this reason, many 
physicians initiate therapy with a dopamine agonist, 
although supplemental levodopa is eventually required 
in virtually all patients. Both ropinirole and pramipex-
ole are available as orally administered immediate (tid) 
and extended-release (qd) formulations. Rotigotine is 
administered as a once-daily transdermal patch. Apo-
morphine is a dopamine agonist with efficacy com-
parable to levodopa, but it must be administered par-
enterally and has a very short half-life and duration of 
activity (45 min). It is generally administered SC as a 
rescue agent for the treatment of severe “off” episodes. 
Apomorphine can also be administered by continuous 
infusion and has been demonstrated to reduce both 
“off” time and dyskinesia in advanced patients. However, 
infusions are cumbersome, and this approach has not 
been approved in the United States.
Acute side effects of dopamine agonists include 
nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension. As 
with levodopa, these can usually be avoided by slow 
titration. Hallucinations and cognitive impairment 
are more common with dopamine agonists than with 
levodopa. Sedation with sudden unintended episodes 
of falling asleep while driving a motor vehicle have been 
reported. Patients should be informed about this poten-
tial problem and should not drive when tired. Injections 
of apomorphine and patch delivery of rotigotine can be 
complicated by development of skin lesions at sites of 
administration. Recently, it has become appreciated that 
dopamine agonists are associated with impulse-control 
disorders, including pathologic gambling, hypersexu-
ality, and compulsive eating and shopping. The pre-
cise cause of these problems, and why they appear to 
occur more frequently with dopamine agonists than 
levodopa, remains to be resolved, but reward systems 
associated with dopamine and alterations in the ventral 
striatum have been implicated.
MAO-B INHIBITORS Inhibitors of monoamine 
oxidase type B (MAO-B) block central dopamine metab-
olism and increase synaptic concentrations of the neu-
rotransmitter. Selegiline and rasagiline are relatively 
selective suicide inhibitors of the MAO-B enzyme. Clini-
cally, MAO-B inhibitors provide modest antiparkinso-
nian benefits when used as monotherapy in early dis-
ease, and reduced “off” time when used as an adjunct 
to levodopa in patients with motor fluctuations. MAO-B 
inhibitors are generally safe and well tolerated. They 
may increase dyskinesia in levodopa-treated patients 
but this can usually be controlled by down-titrating 
the dose of levodopa. Inhibition of the MAO-A isoform 
prevents metabolism of tyramine in the gut, leading 
to a potentially fatal hypertensive reaction known as a 
“cheese effect” as it can be precipitated by foods rich 
in tyramine such as some cheeses, aged meats, and 
red wine. Selegiline and rasagiline do not function-
ally inhibit MAO-A in doses employed in clinical prac-
tice and are not associated with a cheese effect. There 
are theoretical risks of a serotonin reaction in patients 
receiving concomitant SSRI antidepressants, but these 
are rarely encountered.
Interest in MAO-B inhibitors has also focused on their 
potential to have disease-modifying effects. MPTP tox-
icity can be prevented by coadministration of a MAO-B 
inhibitor that blocks its conversion to the toxic pyridin-
ium ion MPP+. MAO-B inhibitors also have the potential 
to block the oxidative metabolism of dopamine and 
prevent oxidative stress. In addition, both selegiline 
and rasagiline incorporate a propargyl ring within their 
molecular structure that provides antiapoptotic effects 
in laboratory models. The DATATOP study showed 
that selegiline significantly delayed the time until the 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
342
emergence of disability, necessitating the introduction 
of levodopa in untreated PD patients. However, it could 
not be determined whether this was due to a neuro-
protective effect that slowed disease progression or a 
symptomatic effect that merely masked ongoing neu-
rodegeneration. More recently, the ADAGIO study dem-
onstrated that early treatment with rasagiline 1 mg/d 
but not 2 mg/d provided benefits that could not be 
achieved with delayed treatment with the same drug, 
consistent with a disease-modifying effect; however, the 
long-term significance of these findings is uncertain.
COMT INHIBITORS When levodopa is admin-
istered with a decarboxylase inhibitor, it is primarily 
metabolized by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). 
Inhibitors of COMT increase the elimination half-life of 
levodopa and enhance its brain availability. Combining 
levodopa with a COMT inhibitor reduces “off” time and 
prolongs “on” time in fluctuating patients while enhanc-
ing motor scores. Two COMT inhibitors have been 
approved, tolcapone and entacapone. There is also a 
combination tablet of levodopa, carbidopa, and enta-
capone (Stalevo).
Side effects of COMT inhibitors are primarily dopa-
minergic (nausea, vomiting, increased dyskinesia) and 
can usually be controlled by down-titrating the dose 
of levodopa by 20–30%. Severe diarrhea has been 
described with tolcapone, and to a lesser degree with 
entacapone, and necessitates stopping the medication 
in 5–10% of individuals. Cases of fatal hepatic toxicity 
have been reported with tolcapone, and periodic moni-
toring of liver function is required. This problem has 
not been encountered with entacapone. Discoloration 
of urine can be seen with both COMT inhibitors due 
to accumulation of a metabolite, but it is of no clinical 
concern.
It has been proposed that initiating levodopa in com-
bination with a COMT inhibitor to enhance its elimina-
tion half-life will provide more continuous levodopa 
delivery and reduce the risk of motor complications. 
While this result has been demonstrated in parkinso-
nian monkeys, and continuous infusion reduces “off” 
time and dyskinesia in advanced patients, no benefit of 
initiating levodopa with a COMT inhibitor compared to 
levodopa alone was detected in early PD patients in the 
STRIDE-PD study, and the main value of COMT inhibi-
tors for now continues to be in patients who experience 
motor fluctuations.
OTHER MEDICAL THERAPIES Central-acting 
anticholinergic drugs such as trihexyphenidyl and ben-
ztropine were used historically for the treatment for 
PD, but they lost favor with the introduction of dopa-
minergic agents. Their major clinical effect is on tremor, 
although it is not certain that this is superior to what 
can be obtained with agents such as levodopa and 
dopamine agonists. Still, they can be helpful in indi-
vidual patients. Their use is limited particularly in the 
elderly, due to their propensity to induce a variety of 
side effects including urinary dysfunction, glaucoma, 
and particularly cognitive impairment.
Amantadine also has historical importance. Origi-
nally introduced as an antiviral agent, it was appreci-
ated to also have antiparkinsonian effects that are now 
thought to be due to NMDA-receptor antagonism. 
While some physicians use amantadine in patients with 
early disease for its mild symptomatic effects, it is most 
widely used as an antidyskinesia agent in patients with 
advanced PD. Indeed, it is the only oral agent that has 
been demonstrated in controlled studies to reduce dys-
kinesia while improving parkinsonian features, although 
benefits may be relatively transient. Side effects include 
livido reticularis, weight gain, and impaired cognitive 
function. Amantadine should always be discontinued 
gradually as patients can experience withdrawal symp-
toms.
A list of the major drugs and available dosage 
strengths is provided in Table 30-5.
NEUROPROTECTION Despite the many thera-
peutic agents available for the treatment of PD, patients 
can still experience intolerable disability due to disease 
progression and the emergence of features such as fall-
ing and dementia that are not controlled with dopami-
nergic therapies. Trials of several promising agents such 
as rasagiline, selegiline, coenzyme Q10, pramipexole, 
and ropinirole have had positive results in clinical tri-
als consistent with disease-modifying effects. However, 
it is not possible to determine if the positive results are 
due to neuroprotection with slowed disease progres-
sion or confounding symptomatic or pharmacologic 
effects that mask ongoing progression. If it could be 
determined that a drug slowed disease progression, this 
would be a major advance in the treatment of PD.
SURGICAL TREATMENT Surgical treatments for
PD have been employed for more than a century. 
Lesions placed in the motor cortex improved tremor, 
but were associated with motor deficits and this 
approach was abandoned. Subsequently, it was appre-
ciated that lesions placed into the VIM nucleus of the 
thalamus reduced contralateral tremor without induc-
ing hemiparesis, but these lesions did not meaning-
fully help other more disabling features of PD. Lesions 
placed in the GPi improved rigidity and bradykinesia as 
well as tremor, particularly if placed in the posteroven-
tral portion of the nucleus. Importantly, pallidotomy 
was also associated with marked improvement in con-
tralateral dyskinesia. This procedure gained favor with 
greater understanding of the pathophysiology of PD 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
343
(see earlier). However, this procedure is not optimal for 
patients with bilateral disease, as bilateral lesions are 
associated with side effects such as dysphagia, dysar-
thria, and impaired cognition.
Most surgical procedures for PD performed today 
utilize deep brain stimulation (DBS). Here, an electrode 
is placed into the target area and connected to a stim-
ulator inserted SC over the chest wall. DBS simulates 
the effects of a lesion without necessitating a brain 
lesion. The stimulation variables can be adjusted with 
respect to electrode configuration, voltage, frequency, 
and pulse duration in order to maximize benefit and 
minimize adverse side effects. In cases with intolerable 
side effects, stimulation can be stopped and the sys-
tem removed. The procedure has the advantage that it 
does not require making a lesion in the brain and is thus 
suitable for performing bilateral procedures with rela-
tive safety.
DBS for PD primarily targets the STN or the GPi. It 
provides dramatic results, particularly with respect to 
“off” time and dyskinesias, but does not improve fea-
tures that fail to respond to levodopa and does not pre-
vent the development or progression of nondopami-
nergic features such as freezing, falling, and dementia. 
The procedure is thus primarily indicated for patients 
who suffer disability resulting from levodopa-induced 
motor complications that cannot be satisfactorily con-
trolled with drug manipulation. Side effects can be seen 
with respect to the surgical procedure (hemorrhage, 
infarction, infection), the DBS system (infection, lead 
break, lead displacement, skin ulceration), or stimula-
tion (ocular and speech abnormalities, muscle twitches, 
TABLE 30-5
DRUGS COMMONLY USED FOR TREATMENT OF PDa
AGENT
AVAILABLE DOSAGES
TYPICAL DOSING
Levodopaa
 Carbidopa/levodopa
10/100, 25/100, 25/250
200–1000 mg levodopa/d 2–4 times/d
 Benserazide/levodopa
25/100, 50/200
 Carbidopa/levodopa CR
25/100, 50/200
 Benserazide/levodopa MDS
25/200, 25/250
 Parcopa
10/100, 25/100, 25/250
 Carbidopa/levodopa/entacapone
12.5/50/200,
18.75/75/200,
25/100/200,
31.25/125/200,
37.5/150/200,
50/200/200
Dopamine agonists
 Pramipexole
0.125, 0.25,
0.5, 1.0, 1.5 mg
0.25–1.0 mg tid
 Pramipexole ER
0.375, 0.75,
1.5. 3.0, 4.5 mg
1–3 mg/d
 Ropinirole
0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0 mg
6–24 mg/d
 Ropinirole XL
2, 4, 6, 8
6–24 mg/d
 Rotigotine patch
2-, 4-, 6-mg patches
4–10 mg/d
 Apomorphine SC
2–8 mg
COMT inhibitors
 Entacapone
200 mg
200 mg with each levodopa dose
 Tolcapone
100, 200 mg
100–200 mg tid
MAO-B inhibitors
 Selegiline
5 mg
5 mg bid
 Rasagiline
0.5, 1.0 mg
1.0 mg QAM
aTreatment should be individualized. Generally, drugs should be started in low doses and titrated to optimal dose.
Note: Drugs should not be withdrawn abruptly but should be gradually lowered or removed as appropriate.
Abbreviations: COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase; MAO-B, monoamine oxidase type B.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
344
paresthesias, depression, and rarely suicide). Recent 
studies indicate that benefits following DBS of the STN 
and GPi are comparable, but that GPi stimulation may 
be associated with a reduced frequency of depression. 
While not all PD patients are candidates, the procedure 
is profoundly beneficial for many. Research studies are 
currently examining additional targets that might ben-
efit gait dysfunction, depression, and cognitive impair-
ment in PD patients.
EXPERIMENTAL SURGICAL THERAPIES FOR 
PD There has been considerable scientific and pub-
lic interest in a number of novel therapies as possible 
treatments for PD. These include cell-based therapies 
(such as transplantation of fetal nigral dopamine cells 
or dopamine neurons derived from stem cells), gene 
therapies, and trophic factors. Transplant strategies are 
based on implanting dopaminergic cells into the stria-
tum to replace degenerating SNc dopamine neurons. 
Fetal nigral mesencephalic cells have been demon-
strated to survive implantation, reinnervate the stria-
tum in an organotypic manner, and restore motor func-
tion in PD models. Several open-label studies reported 
positive results. However, two double-blind, sham 
surgery–controlled studies failed to show significant 
benefit of fetal nigral transplantation in comparison to 
a sham operation with respect to their primary end-
points. Post hoc analyses showed possible benefits in 
patients aged <60 years and in those with milder dis-
ease. It is now appreciated that grafting of fetal nigral 
cells is associated with a previously unrecognized form 
of dyskinesia that persists even after lowering or stop-
ping levodopa. In addition, there is evidence that after 
many years, transplanted healthy embryonic dopamine 
neurons from unrelated donors can develop PD pathol-
ogy, suggesting that they somehow became affected 
by the disease process. Most importantly, it is not clear 
how replacing dopamine cells alone will improve non-
dopaminergic features such as falling and dementia, 
which are the major sources of disability for patients 
with advanced disease. These same concerns apply to 
dopamine neurons derived from stem cells, which have 
not yet been tested in PD patients, and bear the addi-
tional theoretical concern of unanticipated side effects 
such as tumors. The short-term future for this technol-
ogy as a treatment for PD, at least in its current state, is 
therefore not promising.
Gene therapy involves viral vector delivery of the 
DNA of a therapeutic protein to specific target regions. 
The DNA of the therapeutic protein can then be incor-
porated into the genome of host cells and thereby, in 
principle, provide continuous and long-lasting delivery 
of the therapeutic molecule. The AAV2 virus has been 
most often used as the viral vector because it does not 
promote an inflammatory response, is not incorporated 
into the host genome, and is associated with long-last-
ing transgene expression. Studies performed to date in 
PD have delivered aromatic amino acid decarboxylase 
with or without tyrosine hydroxylase to the striatum to 
facilitate dopamine production; glutamic acid decar-
boxylase to the STN to inhibit overactive neuronal firing 
in this nucleus; and trophic factors such as GDNF (glial-
derived neurotrophic factor) and neurturin to the stria-
tum to enhance and protect residual dopamine neurons 
in the SNc by way of retrograde transmission. Positive 
results have been reported with open-label studies, but 
these have not yet been confirmed in double-blind tri-
als. While gene delivery technology has great potential, 
this approach also carries the risk of possible unantici-
pated side effects, and current approaches also do not 
address the nondopaminergic features of the illness.
MANAGEMENT OF THE NONMOTOR AND 
NONDOPAMINERGIC 
FEATURES 
OF 
PD 
While most attention has focused on the dopaminergic 
features of PD, management of the nondopaminergic 
features of the illness should not be ignored. Some 
nonmotor features, while not thought to reflect dopa-
minergic pathology, nonetheless benefit from dopami-
nergic drugs. For example, problems such as anxiety, 
panic attacks, depression, sweating, sensory problems, 
freezing, and constipation all tend to be worse during 
“off” periods, and they improve with better dopaminer-
gic control of the underlying PD state. Approximately 
50% of PD patients suffer depression during the course 
of the disease that is frequently underdiagnosed and 
undertreated. Antiparkinsonian agents can help, but 
antidepressants should not be withheld, particularly 
for patients with major depression. Serotonin syn-
dromes have been a theoretical concern with the com-
bined use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) and MAO-B inhibitors, but are rarely encoun-
tered. Anxiety can be treated with short-acting benzo-
diazepines.
Psychosis can be a major problem in PD. In contrast 
to AD, hallucinations are typically visual, formed, and 
nonthreatening and can limit the use of dopaminergic 
agents to adequately control PD features. Psychosis in 
PD often responds to low doses of atypical neurolep-
tics. Clozapine is the most effective, but it can be asso-
ciated with agranulocytosis, and regular monitoring 
is required. For this reason, many physicians start with 
quetiapine even though it is not as effective as clozap-
ine in controlled trials. Hallucinations in PD patients are 
often a harbinger of a developing dementia.
Dementia in PD (PDD) is common, affecting as many 
as 80% of patients. Its frequency increases with aging 
and, in contrast to AD, primarily affects executive func-
tions and attention, with relative sparing of language, 
memory, and calculations. PDD is the commonest cause 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
345
of nursing home placement for PD patients. When 
dementia precedes, or develops within 1 year after, the 
onset of motor dysfunction, it is by convention referred 
to as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; Chap. 29). These 
patients are particularly prone to have hallucinations 
and diurnal fluctuations. Pathologically, DLB is char-
acterized by Lewy bodies distributed throughout the 
cerebral cortex (especially the hippocampus and amyg-
dala). It is likely that DLB and PDD represent a PD spec-
trum rather than separate disease entities. Levodopa 
and other dopaminergic drugs can aggravate cognitive 
function in demented patients and should be stopped 
or reduced to try and provide a compromise between 
antiparkinsonian benefit and preserved cognitive func-
tion. Drugs are usually discontinued in the following 
sequence: anticholinergics, amantadine, dopamine ago-
nists, COMT inhibitors, and MAO-B inhibitors. Eventually, 
patients with cognitive impairment should be managed 
with the lowest dose of standard levodopa that pro-
vides meaningful antiparkinsonian effects and does not 
aggravate mental function. Anticholinesterase agents 
such as rivastigmine and donepezil reduce the rate of 
deterioration of measures of cognitive function in con-
trolled studies and can improve attention. Memantine, 
an antiglutamatergic agent, may also provide benefit for 
some PDD patients.
Autonomic disturbances are common and frequently 
require attention. Orthostatic hypotension can be 
problematic and contribute to falling. Initial treatment 
should include adding salt to the diet and elevating the 
head of the bed to prevent overnight sodium natriure-
sis. Low doses of fludrocortisol (Florinef) or midodrine 
control most cases. Vasopressin, erythropoietin, and 
the norepinephrine precursor 3-0-methylDOPS can be 
used in severe cases. If orthostatic hypotension is promi-
nent in early disease, MSA should be considered. Sexual 
dysfunction can be helped with sildenafil or tadalafil. 
Urinary problems, especially in males, should be treated 
in consultation with a urologist to exclude prostate 
problems. Anticholinergic agents, such as Ditropan, may 
be helpful. Constipation can be a very important prob-
lem for PD patients. Mild laxatives can be useful, but 
physicians should first ensure that patients are drinking 
adequate amounts of fluid and consuming a diet rich in 
bulk with green leafy vegetables and bran. Agents that 
promote GI motility can also be helpful.
Sleep disturbances are common in PD patients, with 
many experiencing fragmented sleep with excess day-
time sleepiness. Restless leg syndrome, sleep apnea, 
and other sleep disorders should be treated as appropri-
ate. REM behavior disorder (RBD) may precede the onset 
of motor features. This syndrome is composed of violent 
movements and vocalizations during REM sleep, pos-
sibly representing acting out of dreams due to a failure 
of the normal inhibition of motor movements that typi-
cally accompanies REM sleep. Low doses of clonazepam 
are usually effective in controlling this problem. Consul-
tation with a sleep specialist and polysomnography may 
be necessary to identify and optimally treat sleep prob-
lems.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY Gait dys-
function with falling is an important cause of disability 
in PD. Dopaminergic therapies can help patients whose 
gait is worse in “off” time, but there are currently no spe-
cific therapies available. Canes and walkers may become 
necessary.
Freezing episodes, where patients freeze in place for 
seconds to minutes, are another cause of falling. Freez-
ing during “off” periods may respond to dopaminergic 
therapies, but there are no specific treatments for “on” 
period freezing. Some patients will respond to sensory 
cues such as marching in place, singing a song, or step-
ping over an imaginary line.
Exercise, with a full range of active and passive move-
ments, has been shown to improve and maintain func-
tion for PD patients. It is less clear that formal physical 
therapy is necessary, unless there is a specific indica-
tion. It is important for patients to maintain social and 
intellectual activities to the extent possible. Education, 
assistance with financial planning, social services, and 
attention to home safety are important elements of 
the overall care plan. Information is available through 
numerous PD foundations and on the web, but should 
be reviewed with physicians to ensure accuracy. The 
needs of the caregiver should not be neglected. Car-
ing for a person with PD involves a substantial work 
effort and there is an increased incidence of depres-
sion among caregivers. Support groups for patients and 
caregivers may be useful.
CURRENT MANAGEMENT OF PD The man-
agement of PD should be tailored to the needs of the 
individual patient, and there is no single treatment 
approach that is universally accepted. Clearly, if an 
agent could be demonstrated to have disease-modi-
fying effects, it should be initiated at the time of diag-
nosis. Indeed, constipation, REM behavior disorder, and 
anosmia may represent pre-motor features of PD and 
could permit the initiation of a disease-modifying ther-
apy even prior to onset of the classical motor features of 
the disease. However, no therapy has yet been proved 
to be disease-modifying. For now, physicians must use 
their judgment in deciding whether or not to introduce 
rasagiline (see earlier) or other drugs for their possible 
disease-modifying effects.
The next important issue to address is when to ini-
tiate symptomatic therapy. Several studies now sug-
gest that it may be best to start therapy at the time of 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
346
diagnosis in order to preserve beneficial compensa-
tory mechanisms and possibly provide functional ben-
efits even in the early stage of the disease. Levodopa 
remains the most effective symptomatic therapy for 
PD, and some recommend starting it immediately using 
relatively low doses, but many others prefer to delay 
levodopa treatment, particularly in younger patients, 
in order to reduce the risk of motor complications. 
Another approach is to begin with an MAO-B inhibitor 
and/or a dopamine agonist, and reserve levodopa for 
later stages when these drugs can no longer provide 
satisfactory control. In making this decision, the age, 
degree of disability, and side-effect profile of the drug 
must all be considered. In patients with more severe 
disability, the elderly, those with cognitive impairment, 
or where the diagnosis is uncertain, most physicians 
would initiate therapy with levodopa. Regardless of ini-
tial choice, it is important not to deny patients levodopa 
when they cannot be adequately controlled with alter-
native medications.
If motor complications develop, they can initially 
be treated by manipulating the frequency and dose 
of levodopa or by combining lower doses of levodopa 
with a dopamine agonist, a COMT inhibitor, or an 
MAO-B inhibitor. Amantadine is the only drug that has 
been demonstrated to treat dyskinesia without wors-
ening parkinsonism, but benefits may be short-lasting 
and there are important side effects. In severe cases, 
it is usually necessary to consider a surgical therapy 
such as DBS if the patient is a suitable candidate, but 
as described above, these procedures have their own 
set of complications. There are ongoing efforts aimed 
at developing a long-acting oral or transdermal formu-
lation of levodopa that mirrors the pharmacokinetic 
properties of a levodopa infusion. Such a formulation 
might provide all of the benefits of levodopa without 
motor complications and avoid the need for polyphar-
macy and surgical intervention.
A decision tree that considers the various treatment 
options and decision points for the management of PD 
is provided in Fig. 30-7.
HYPERKINETIC MOVEMENT 
DISORDERS
Hyperkinetic movement disorders are characterized by 
involuntary movements that may occur in isolation or 
in combination (Table 30-6). The major hyperkinetic 
movement disorders and the diseases with which they 
are associated are considered in this section.
Functional disability
Parkinson’s disease
Surgery/CDS
Combination therapy
Levodopa/dopamine
agonist/COMT
Inhibitor/MAO-B Inhibitor
Nonpharmacologic intervention
Pharmacologic intervention
Neuroprotection —? Rasagiline
Yes
Levodopa
No
Dopamine agonists
TREATMENT ALGORITHM FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
FIGURE 30-7 
Treatment options for the management of PD. Decision 
points include:
 a. Introduction of a neuroprotective therapy: No drug has 
been established to have or is currently approved for neuro-
protection or disease modiﬁcation, but there are several agents 
that have this potential based on laboratory and preliminary 
clinical studies (e.g., rasagiline 1 mg/d, coenzyme Q10 1200 
mg/d, the dopamine agonists ropinirole and pramipexole).
 b. When to initiate symptomatic therapy: There is a trend 
toward initiating therapy at the time of diagnosis or early in 
the course of the disease because patients may have some 
disability even at an early stage, and there is the possibility 
that early treatment may preserve beneﬁcial compensatory 
mechanisms; however, some experts recommend waiting 
until there is functional disability before initiating therapy.
 c. What therapy to initiate: Many experts favor starting 
with an MAO-B inhibitor in mildly affected patients because 
of the potential for a disease-modifying effect; dopamine 
agonists for younger patients with functionally signiﬁcant 
disability to reduce the risk of motor complications; and 
levodopa for patients with more advanced disease, the 
elderly, or those with cognitive impairment.
 d. Management of motor complications: Motor complica-
tions are typically approached with combination therapy to 
try and reduce dyskinesia and enhance the “on” time. When 
medical therapies cannot provide satisfactory control, surgi-
cal therapies can be considered.
 e. Nonpharmacologic approaches: Interventions such as exer-
cise, education, and support should be considered throughout 
the course of the disease.
Source: Adapted from CW Olanow et al: Neurology 72:S1, 
2009.
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
347
TREMOR
CLINICAL FEATURES
Tremor consists of alternating contractions of ago-
nist and antagonist muscles in an oscillating, rhythmic 
manner. It can be most prominent at rest (rest tremor), 
on assuming a posture (postural tremor), or on actively 
reaching for a target (kinetic tremor). Tremor is also 
assessed based on distribution, frequency, and related 
neurologic dysfunction.
PD is characterized by a resting tremor, essential 
tremor (ET) by a postural tremor, and cerebellar disease 
by an intention or kinetic tremor. Normal individuals 
can have a physiologic tremor that typically manifests as 
a mild, high-frequency, postural or action tremor that 
is usually of no clinical consequence and often is only 
appreciated with an accelerometer. An enhanced physi-
ologic tremor (EPT) can be seen in up to 10% of the 
population, often in association with anxiety, fatigue, 
underlying metabolic disturbance (e.g., hyperthyroid-
ism, electrolyte abnormalities), drugs (e.g., valproate, 
lithium), or toxins (e.g., alcohol). Treatment is initially 
directed to the control of any underlying disorder and, 
if necessary, can often be improved with a β blocker.
ET is the commonest movement disorder, affect-
ing approximately 5–10 million persons in the United 
States. It can present in childhood, but dramatically 
increases in prevalence over the age of 70 years. ET 
is characterized by a high-frequency tremor (up to 
11 Hz) that predominantly affects the upper extremi-
ties. The tremor is most often manifest as a postural 
or kinetic tremor. It is typically bilateral and symmet-
ric, but may begin on one side and remain asymmetric. 
Patients with severe ET can have an intention tremor 
with overshoot and slowness of movement. Tremor 
involves the head in ∼30% of cases, voice in ∼20%, 
tongue in ∼20%, face/jaw in ∼10%, and lower limbs 
in ∼10%. The tremor is characteristically improved by 
alcohol and worsened by stress. Subtle impairment of 
coordination or tandem walking may be present. Dis-
turbances of hearing, cognition, and even olfaction have 
been described, but usually the neurologic examination 
is normal aside from tremor. The major differential is 
a dystonic tremor (see later) or PD. PD can usually be 
differentiated from ET based on the presence of brady-
kinesia, rigidity, micrographia, and other parkinsonian 
features. However, the examiner should be aware that 
PD patients may have a postural tremor and ET patients 
may develop a rest tremor. These typically begin after a 
latency of a few seconds (emergent tremor). The exam-
iner must take care to differentiate the effect of tremor 
on measurement of tone in ET from the cog-wheel 
rigidity found in PD.
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The etiology and pathophysiology of ET are not 
known. Approximately 50% of cases have a positive 
family history with an autosomal dominant pattern of 
inheritance. Linkage studies have detected loci at chro-
mosomes 3q13 (ETM-1), 2p22-25 (ETM-2), and 6p23 
(ETM-3). Recent genomewide studies demonstrate 
an association with the LINGO1 gene, particularly in 
patients with young-onset ET, and it is likely that there 
are many other undiscovered loci. Candidate genes 
include the dopamine D3 receptor and proteins that 
map to the cerebellum. The cerebellum and inferior 
olives have been implicated as possible sites of a “tremor 
pacemaker” based on the presence of cerebellar signs 
and increased metabolic activity and blood ﬂow in these 
regions in some patients. Recent pathologic studies 
have described cerebellar pathology with a loss of Pur-
kinje’s cells and axonal torpedoes. However, the precise 
pathologic correlate of ET remains to be deﬁned.
TREATMENT
Many cases are mild and require no treatment other 
than reassurance. Occasionally, tremor can be severe 
and interfere with eating, writing, and activities of daily 
living. This is more likely to occur as the patient ages 
and is often associated with a reduction in tremor fre-
quency. β Blockers or primidone are the standard drug 
therapies for ET and help in about 50% of cases. Pro-
pranolol (20–80 mg daily, given in divided doses) is 
usually effective at relatively low doses, but higher doses 
TABLE 30-6
HYPERKINETIC MOVEMENT DISORDERS
Tremor
Rhythmic oscillation of a body part due to 
intermittent muscle contractions
Dystonia
Involuntary patterned sustained or 
repeated muscle contractions often 
associated with twisting movements and 
abnormal posture
Athetosis
Slow, distal, writhing, involuntary move-
ments with a propensity to affect the 
arms and hands
Chorea
Rapid, semipurposeful, graceful, dance-
like nonpatterned involuntary movements 
involving distal or proximal muscle groups
Myoclonus
Sudden, brief (<100 ms), jerk-like, arrhyth-
mic muscle twitches
Tic
Brief, repeated, stereotyped muscle con-
tractions that are often suppressible. Can 
be simple and involve a single muscle 
group or complex and affect a range of 
motor activities
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
348
may be effective in some patients. The drug is contra-
indicated in patients with bradycardia or asthma. Hand 
tremor tends to be most improved, while head tremor 
is often refractory. Primidone can be helpful, but 
should be started at low doses (12.5 mg) and gradually 
increased (125–250 tid) to avoid sedation. Beneﬁts have 
been reported with gabapentin and topiramate. Botuli-
num toxin injections may be helpful for limb or voice 
tremor, but treatment can be associated with secondary 
muscle weakness. Surgical therapies targeting the VIM 
nucleus of the thalamus can be very effective for severe 
and drug-resistant cases.
DYSTONIA
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dystonia is a disorder characterized by sustained or 
repetitive involuntary muscle contractions frequently 
associated with twisting or repetitive movements and 
abnormal postures. Dystonia can range from minor con-
tractions in an individual muscle group to severe and 
disabling involvement of multiple muscle groups. The 
frequency is estimated at 300,000 cases in the United 
States, but is likely much higher as many cases may not 
be recognized. Dystonia is often brought out by vol-
untary movements (action dystonia) and can become 
sustained and extend to involve other body regions. It 
can be aggravated by stress and fatigue, and attenuated 
by relaxation and sensory tricks such as touching the 
affected body part (geste antagoniste). Dystonia can be 
classiﬁed according to age of onset (childhood vs adult), 
distribution (focal, multifocal, segmental, or general-
ized), or etiology (primary or secondary).
PRIMARY DYSTONIAS
Several gene mutations are associated with dystonia. 
Idiopathic torsion dystonia (ITD) or Oppenheim’s dys-
tonia is predominantly a childhood-onset form of dys-
tonia with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheri-
tance that primarily affects Ashkenazi Jewish families. 
The majority of patients have an age of onset younger 
than 26 years (mean 14 years). In young-onset patients, 
dystonia typically begins in the foot or the arm and in 
60–70% progresses to involve other limbs as well as 
the head and neck. In severe cases, patients can suf-
fer disabling postural deformities that compromise 
mobility. Severity can vary within a family, with some 
affected relatives having severe disability and others a 
mild dystonia that may not even be appreciated. Most 
childhood-onset cases are linked to a mutation in the 
DYT1 gene located on chromosome 9q34 resulting 
in a trinucleotide GAG deletion with loss of one of a 
pair of glutamic acid residues in the protein torsin A. 
DYT1 mutations are found in 90% of Ashkenazi Jew-
ish patients with ITD and probably relate to a founder 
effect that occurred about 350 years ago. There is vari-
able penetrance, with only about 30% of gene carriers 
expressing a clinical phenotype. Why some gene carriers 
express dystonia and others do not is not known. The 
function of torsin A is unknown, but it is a member of 
the AAA+ (ATPase) family that resembles heat-shock 
proteins and may be related to protein regulation. The 
precise pathology responsible for dystonia is not known.
Dopa responsive dystonia (DRD) or the Segawa 
variant (DYT5) is a dominantly inherited form of child-
hood-onset dystonia due to a mutation in the gene that 
encodes for GTP cyclohydrolase-I, the rate-limiting 
enzyme for the synthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin. This 
mutation leads to a defect in the biochemical synthe-
sis of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme 
in the formation of dopamine. DRD typically presents 
in early childhood (1–12 years), and is characterized 
by foot dystonia that interferes with walking. Patients 
often experience diurnal ﬂuctuations, with worsening of 
gait as the day progresses and improvement with sleep. 
DRD is typiﬁed by an excellent and sustained response 
to small doses of levodopa. Some patients may present 
with parkinsonian features, but can be differentiated 
from juvenile PD by normal striatal ﬂuorodopa uptake 
on positron emission tomography and the absence of 
levodopa-induced dyskinesias. DRD may occasion-
ally be confused with cerebral palsy because patients 
appear to have spasticity, increased reﬂexes, and Babin-
ski responses (which likely reﬂect a dystonic contraction 
rather than an upper motor neuron lesion). Any patient 
suspected of having a childhood-onset dystonia should 
receive a trial of levodopa to exclude this condition.
Mutations in the THAP1 gene (DYT6) on chromo-
some 8p21q22 have been identiﬁed in Amish families 
and are the cause of as many as 25% of cases of non-
DYT1 young-onset primary torsion dystonia. Patients 
are more likely to have dystonia beginning in the bra-
chial and cervical muscles, which later can become 
generalized and associated with speech impairment. 
Myoclonic dystonia (DYT11) results from a mutation 
in the epsilon-sarcoglycan gene on chromosome 7q21. 
It typically manifests as a combination of dystonia and 
myoclonic jerks, frequently accompanied by psychiatric 
disturbances.
FOCAL DYSTONIAS
These are the most common forms of dystonia. They 
typically present in the fourth to sixth decades and 
affect women more than men. The major types are 
(1) blepharospasm—dystonic contractions of the eyelids 
with increased blinking that can interfere with read-
ing, watching TV, and driving. This can sometimes be 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
349
so severe as to cause functional blindness. (2) Oroman-
dibular dystonia (OMD)—contractions of muscles of the 
lower face, lips, tongue, and jaw (opening or closing). 
Meige syndrome is a combination of OMD and blepha-
rospasm that predominantly affects women older than 
age 60 years. (3) Spasmodic dysphonia—dystonic con-
tractions of the vocal cords during phonation, causing 
impaired speech. Most cases affect the adductor muscles 
and cause speech to have a choking or strained quality. 
Less commonly, the abductors are affected, leading to 
speech with a breathy or whispering quality. (4) Cervical 
dystonia—dystonic contractions of neck muscles causing 
the head to deviate to one side (torticollis), in a forward 
direction (anterocollis), or in a backward direction (retro-
collis). Muscle contractions can be painful, and associated 
with a secondary cervical radiculopathy. (5) Limb dys-
tonias—These can be present in either arms or legs and 
are often brought out by task-speciﬁc activities such as 
handwriting (writer’s cramp), playing a musical instru-
ment (musician’s cramp), or putting (the yips). Focal 
dystonias can extend to involve other body regions 
(about 30% of cases), and are frequently misdiagnosed 
as psychiatric or orthopedic in origin. Their cause is not 
known, but genetic factors, autoimmunity, and trauma 
have been suggested. Focal dystonias are often associ-
ated with a high-frequency tremor that resembles ET. 
Dystonic tremor can usually be distinguished from ET 
because it tends to occur in conjunction with the dys-
tonic contraction and disappears when the dystonia is 
relieved.
SECONDARY DYSTONIAS
These develop as a consequence of drugs or other neu-
rologic disorders. Drug-induced dystonia is most com-
monly seen with neuroleptic drugs or after chronic 
levodopa treatment in PD patients. Secondary dysto-
nia can also be observed following discrete lesions in 
the striatum, pallidum, thalamus, cortex, and brainstem 
due to infarction, anoxia, trauma, tumor, infection, or 
toxins such as manganese or carbon monoxide. In these 
cases, dystonia often assumes a segmental distribution. 
More rarely, dystonia can develop following peripheral 
nerve injury and be associated with features of chronic 
regional pain syndrome.
DYSTONIA PLUS SYNDROMES
Dystonia may occur as a part of neurodegenerative con-
ditions such as HD, PD, Wilson’s disease, CBGD, PSP, 
the Lubag form of dystonia-parkinsonism (DYT3), and 
mitochondrial encephalopathies. In contrast to the pri-
mary dystonias, dystonia is usually not the dominant 
neurologic feature in these conditions.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DYSTONIA
The pathophysiologic basis of dystonia is not known. 
The phenomenon is characterized by co-contracting 
synchronous bursts of agonist and antagonist muscle 
groups. This is associated with a loss of inhibition at 
multiple levels of the nervous system as well as increased 
cortical excitability and reorganization. Attention has 
focused on the basal ganglia as the site of origin of at 
least some types of dystonia as there are alterations in 
blood ﬂow and metabolism in basal ganglia structures. 
Further, ablation or stimulation of the globus pallidus 
can both induce and ameliorate dystonia. The dopa-
mine system has also been implicated, as dopaminer-
gic therapies can both induce and treat some forms of 
dystonia.
TREATMENT 
Dystonia
Treatment of dystonia is for the most part symptom-
atic except in rare cases where treatment of a primary 
underlying condition is available. Wilson’s disease 
should be ruled out in young patients with dystonia. 
Levodopa should be tried in all cases of childhood-
onset dystonia to rule out DRD. High-dose anticholiner-
gics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl 20–120 mg/d) may be benefi-
cial in children, but adults can rarely tolerate high doses 
because of cognitive impairment with hallucinations. 
Oral baclofen (20–120 mg) may be helpful, but benefits 
if present are usually modest and side effects of seda-
tion, weakness, and memory loss can be problematic. 
Intrathecal infusion of baclofen is more likely to be help-
ful particularly with leg and trunk dystonia, but benefits 
are frequently not sustained and complications can be 
serious and include infection, seizures, and coma. Tetra-
benazine (the usual starting dose is 12.5 mg/d and the 
average treating dose is 25–75 mg/d) may be helpful in 
some patients, but use may be limited by sedation and 
the development of parkinsonism. Neuroleptics can 
improve as well as induce dystonia, but they are typi-
cally not recommended because of their potential to 
induce extrapyramidal side effects, including tardive 
dystonia. Clonazepam and diazepam are rarely effective.
Botulinum toxin has become the preferred treat-
ment for patients with focal dystonia, particularly where 
involvement is limited to small muscle groups such as in 
blepharospasm, torticollis, and spasmodic dysphonia. 
Botulinum toxin acts by blocking the release of acetyl-
choline at the neuromuscular junction, leading to mus-
cle weakness and reduced dystonia, but excessive weak-
ness may ensue and can be troublesome particularly if it 
involves neck and swallowing muscles. Two serotypes of 
botulinum toxin are available (A and B). Both are effec-
tive, and it is not clear that there are advantages of one 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
350
over the other. No systemic side effects are encountered 
with the doses typically employed, but benefits are tran-
sient and repeat injections are required at 2- to 5-month 
intervals. Some patients fail to respond after having 
experienced an initial benefit. This has been attributed 
to antibody formation, but improper muscle selection, 
injection technique, and inadequate dose should be 
excluded.
Surgical therapy is an alternative for patients with 
severe dystonia who are not responsive to other treat-
ments. Peripheral procedures such as rhizotomy and 
myotomy were used in the past to treat cervical dys-
tonia, but are now rarely employed. DBS of the pal-
lidum can provide dramatic benefits for patients with 
primary DYT1 dystonia. This represents a major thera-
peutic advance as previously there was no consis-
tently effective therapy, especially for these patients 
who had severe disability. Benefits tend to be obtained 
with a lower frequency of stimulation and often occur 
after a relatively long latency (weeks) in comparison 
to PD. Better results are typically obtained in younger 
patients. Recent studies suggest that DBS may also be 
valuable for patients with focal and secondary dysto-
nias, although results are less consistent. Supportive 
treatments such as physical therapy and education 
are important and should be a part of the treatment 
regimen.
Physicians should be aware of dystonic storm, a 
rare but potentially fatal condition that can occur in 
response to a stress situation such as surgery in patients 
with preexisting dystonia. It consists of the acute onset 
of generalized and persistent dystonic contractions 
that can involve the vocal cords or laryngeal muscles, 
leading to airway obstruction. Patients may experience 
rhabdomyolysis with renal failure. Patients should be 
managed in an ICU with protection of airway if required. 
Treatment can be instituted with one or a combina-
tion of anticholinergics, diphenhydramine, baclofen, 
benzodiazepines, and dopamine agonists/antagonists. 
Spasms may be difficult to control, and anesthesia with 
muscle paralysis may be required.
60 years. It is prevalent in Europe, North and South 
America, and Australia but is rare in African blacks and 
Asians. HD is characterized by rapid, nonpatterned, 
semipurposeful, involuntary choreiform movements. In 
the early stages, the chorea tends to be focal or segmen-
tal, but progresses over time to involve multiple body 
regions. Dysarthria, gait disturbance, and oculomotor 
abnormalities are common features. With advancing 
disease, there may be a reduction in chorea and emer-
gence of dystonia, rigidity, bradykinesia, myoclonus, 
and spasticity. Functional decline is often predicted by 
progressive weight loss despite adequate calorie intake. 
In younger patients (about 10% of cases), HD can pres-
ent as an akinetic-rigid or parkinsonian syndrome 
(Westphal variant). HD patients eventually develop 
behavioral and cognitive disturbances, and the major-
ity progress to dementia. Depression with suicidal ten-
dencies, aggressive behavior, and psychosis can be 
prominent features. HD patients may also develop non-
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and neuroendocrine 
abnormalities, e.g., hypothalamic dysfunction. A clini-
cal diagnosis of HD can be strongly suspected in cases 
of chorea with a positive family history. The disease 
predominantly strikes the striatum. Progressive atro-
phy of the caudate nuclei, which form the lateral mar-
gins of the lateral ventricles, can be visualized by MRI 
(Fig. 30-8). More diffuse cortical atrophy is seen in the 
middle and late stages of the disease. Supportive stud-
ies include reduced metabolic activity in the caudate 
nucleus and putamen. Genetic testing can be used to 
conﬁrm the diagnosis and to detect at-risk individuals 
in the family, but this must be performed with caution 
and in conjunction with trained counselors, as positive 
results can worsen depression and generate suicidal reac-
tions. The neuropathology of HD consists of promi-
nent neuronal loss and gliosis in the caudate nucleus 
and putamen; similar changes are also widespread in 
the cerebral cortex. Intraneuronal inclusions containing 
aggregates of ubiquitin and the mutant protein hunting-
tin are found in the nuclei of affected neurons.
ETIOLOGY
HD is caused by an increase in the number of polyglu-
tamine (CAG) repeats (>40) in the coding sequence of 
the huntingtin gene located on the short arm of chro-
mosome 4. The larger the number of repeats, the ear-
lier the disease is manifest. Acceleration of the process 
tends to occur, particularly in males, with subsequent 
generations having larger numbers of repeats and ear-
lier age of disease onset, a phenomenon referred to as 
anticipation. The gene encodes the highly conserved 
cytoplasmic protein huntingtin, which is widely distrib-
uted clean in neurons throughout the CNS, but whose 
function is not known. Models of HD with striatal 
CHOREAS
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE (HD)
HD is a progressive, fatal, highly penetrant autosomal 
dominant disorder characterized by motor, behavioral, 
and cognitive dysfunction. The disease is named for 
George Huntington, a family physician who described 
cases on Long Island, New York, in the nineteenth 
century. Onset is typically between the ages of 25 
and 45 years (range, 3–70 years) with a prevalence of 
2–8 cases per 100,000 and an average age at death of 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
351
pathology can be induced by excitotoxic agents such as 
kainic acid and 3-nitropoprionic acid, which promote 
calcium entry into the cell and cytotoxicity. Mitochon-
drial dysfunction has been demonstrated in the striatum 
and skeletal muscle of symptomatic and presymptomatic 
individuals. Fragments of the mutant huntingtin protein 
can be toxic, possibly by translocating into the nucleus 
and interfering with transcriptional upregulation of reg-
ulatory proteins. Neuronal inclusions found in affected 
regions in HD may represent a protective mechanism 
aimed at segregating and facilitating the clearance of 
these toxic proteins.
There is no adequate treatment for the cognitive or 
motor decline. A neuroprotective therapy that slows or 
stops disease progression is the major unmet medical 
need in HD. Promitochondrial agents such as ubiqui-
none and creatine are being tested as possible disease-
modifying therapies. Antiglutamate agents, caspase 
inhibitors, inhibitors of protein aggregation, neuro-
trophic factors, and transplantation of fetal striatal cells 
are areas of active research, but none has as yet been 
demonstrated to have a disease-modifying effect.
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE–LIKE 1 
(HDL1), HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE–LIKE 
2 (HDL2)
HDL1 is a rare inherited disorder due to mutations of 
the protein located at 20p12. Patients exhibit onset of 
personality change in the third or fourth decade, fol-
lowed by chorea, rigidity, myoclonus, ataxia, and epi-
lepsy. HDL2 is an autosomal dominantly inherited dis-
order manifesting in the third or fourth decade with a 
variety of movement disorders, including chorea, dysto-
nia, or parkinsonism and dementia. Most patients are of 
African descent. Acanthocytosis can sometimes be seen 
in these patients, and they must be differentiated from 
neuroacanthocytosis. HDL2 is caused by an abnormally 
expanded CTG/CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in 
the junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene on chromosome 16q24.3. 
The pathology of HDL2 also demonstrates intranuclear 
inclusions immunoreactive for ubiquitin and expanded 
polyglutamine repeats.
FIGURE 30-8 
Huntington’s disease. A. Coronal FLAIR MRI shows 
enlargement of the lateral ventricles reﬂecting typical atrophy 
(arrows). B. Axial FLAIR image demonstrates abnormal high 
signal in the caudate and putamen (arrows).
TREATMENT 
Huntington’s Disease
Treatment involves a multidisciplinary approach, with 
medical, neuropsychiatric, social, and genetic counsel-
ing for patients and their families. Dopamine-block-
ing agents may control the chorea. Tetrabenazine has 
recently been approved for the treatment of chorea in 
the United States, but it may cause secondary parkin-
sonism. Neuroleptics are generally not recommended 
because of their potential to induce other more trou-
bling movement disorders and because HD chorea 
tends to be self-limited and is usually not disabling. 
Depression and anxiety can be greater problems, and 
patients should be treated with appropriate antidepres-
sant and antianxiety drugs and monitored for mania 
and suicidal ideations. Psychosis can be treated with 
atypical neuroleptics such as clozapine (50–600 mg/d), 
quetiapine (50–600 mg/d), and risperidone (2–8 mg/d). 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
352
OTHER CHOREAS
Chorea can be seen in a number of disorders. Syden-
ham’s chorea (originally called St. Vitus’ dance) is more 
common in females and is typically seen in childhood 
(5–15 years). It often develops in association with prior 
exposure to group A streptococcal infection and is 
thought to be autoimmune in nature. With the reduc-
tion in the incidence of rheumatic fever, the inci-
dence of Sydenham’s chorea has fallen, but it can still 
be seen in developing countries. It is characterized by 
the acute onset of choreiform movements, behavioral 
disturbances, and occasionally other motor dysfunc-
tions. Chorea generally responds to dopamine-blocking 
agents, valproic acid, and carbamazepine, but is self-lim-
ited and treatment is generally restricted to those with 
severe chorea. Chorea may recur in later life, particu-
larly in association with pregnancy (chorea gravidarum) 
or treatment with sex hormones.
Chorea-acanthocytosis (neuroacanthocytosis) is a pro-
gressive and typically fatal autosomal recessive disorder that 
is characterized by chorea coupled with red cell abnormali-
ties on peripheral blood smear (acanthocytes). The cho-
rea can be severe and associated with self-mutilating 
behavior, dystonia, tics, seizures, and a polyneuropa-
thy. Mutations in the VPS13A gene on chromosome 
9q21 encoding chorein have been described. A phe-
notypically similar X-linked form of the disorder has 
been described in older individuals who have reactivity 
with Kell blood group antigens (McLeod syndrome). A 
benign hereditary chorea of childhood (BHC1) due to 
mutations in the gene for thyroid transcription factor 1 
and a late-onset benign senile chorea (BHC2) have also 
been described. It is important to ensure that patients 
with these types of choreas do not have HD.
A range of neurodegenerative diseases with brain 
iron accumulation (NBIA) manifesting with chorea 
and dystonia have been described including autosomal 
dominant neuroferritinopathy, autosomal recessive pan-
tothenate-kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN; 
Hallervorden-Spatz disease), and aceruloplasminemia. 
These disorders have excess iron accumulation on MRI 
and a characteristic “eye of the tiger” appearance in the 
globus pallidus due to iron accumulation.
Chorea may also occur in association with vascu-
lar diseases, hypo- and hyperglycemia, and a variety of 
infections and degenerative disorders. Systemic lupus 
erythematosus is the most common systemic disorder 
that causes chorea; the chorea can last for days to years. 
Choreas can also be seen with hyperthyroidism, auto-
immune disorders including Sjögren’s syndrome, infec-
tious disorders including HIV disease, metabolic altera-
tions, polycythemia rubra vera (following open-heart 
surgery in the pediatric population), and in association 
with many medications (especially anticonvulsants, 
cocaine, CNS stimulants, estrogens, lithium). Chorea 
can also be seen in paraneoplastic syndromes associated 
with anti-CRMP-5 or anti-Hu antibodies.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias are a group of rare disorders 
characterized by episodic, brief involuntary movements 
that can include chorea, dystonia, and ballismus. Paroxys-
mal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD) is a familial childhood-
onset disorder in which chorea or chorea-dystonia is pre-
cipitated by sudden movement or running. Attacks may 
affect one side of the body, last seconds to minutes at a 
time, and recur several times a day. Prognosis is usually 
good, with spontaneous remission in later life. Low-dose 
anticonvulsant therapy (e.g., carbamazepine) is usually 
effective if required. Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskine-
sia (PNKD) involves attacks of dyskinesia precipitated by 
alcohol, caffeine, stress, or fatigue. Like PKD, it is familial 
and childhood in onset and the episodes are often choreic 
or dystonic, but have longer duration (minutes to hours) 
and are less frequent (1–3/d).
TREATMENT 
Paroxysmal Nonkinesigenic Dyskinesia
Diagnosis and treatment of the underlying condition, 
where possible, are the first priority. Tetrabenazine, neu-
roleptics, dopamine-blocking agents, propranolol, clon-
azepam, and baclofen may be helpful. Treatment is not 
indicated if the condition is mild and self-limited. Most 
patients with PKND do not benefit from anticonvulsant 
drugs but some may respond to clonazepam.
HEMIBALLISMUS
Hemiballismus is a violent form of chorea composed 
of wild, ﬂinging, large-amplitude movements on one 
side of the body. Proximal limb muscles tend to be pre-
dominantly affected. The movements may be so severe 
as to cause exhaustion, dehydration, local injury, and in 
extreme cases, death. The most common cause is a partial 
lesion (infarct or hemorrhage) in the subthalamic nucleus 
(STN), but rare cases can also be seen with lesions in 
the putamen. Fortunately, hemiballismus is usually self-
limiting and tends to resolve spontaneously after weeks 
or months. Dopamine-blocking drugs can be helpful but 
can themselves lead to movement disorders. In extreme 
cases, pallidotomy can be very effective. Interestingly, 
surgically induced lesions or DBS of the STN in PD are 
usually not associated with hemiballismus.
TICS
TOURETTE’S SYNDROME (TS)
TS is a neurobehavioral disorder named after the French 
neurologist Georges Gilles de la Tourette. It predomi-
nantly affects males, and prevalence is estimated to be 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
353
0.03–1.6%, but it is likely that many mild cases do not 
come to medical attention. TS is characterized by multi-
ple motor tics often accompanied by vocalizations (phonic 
tics). A tic is a brief, rapid, recurrent, and seemingly pur-
poseless stereotyped motor contraction. Motor tics can be 
simple, with movement only affecting an individual mus-
cle group (e.g., blinking, twitching of the nose, jerking of 
the neck), or complex, with coordinated involvement of 
multiple muscle groups (e.g., jumping, snifﬁng, head bang-
ing, and echopraxia [mimicking movements]). Vocal tics 
can also be simple (e.g., grunting) or complex (e.g., echo-
lalia [repeating other people’s words], palilalia [repeating 
one’s own words], and coprolalia [expression of obscene 
words]). Patients may also experience sensory tics, com-
posed of unpleasant focal sensations in the face, head, or 
neck. Patients characteristically can voluntarily suppress tics 
for short periods of time, but then experience an irresist-
ible urge to express them. Tics vary in intensity and may 
be absent for days or weeks only to recur, occasionally in a 
different pattern. Tics tend to present between ages 2 and 
15 years (mean 7 years) and often lessen or even disappear 
in adulthood. Associated behavioral disturbances include 
anxiety, depression, attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder, 
and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Patients may experi-
ence personality disorders, self-destructive behaviors, difﬁ-
culties in school, and impaired interpersonal relationships. 
Tics may present in adulthood and can be seen in associa-
tion with a variety of other disorders, including PD, HD, 
trauma, dystonia, drugs (e.g., levodopa, neuroleptics), and 
toxins.
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
TS is thought to be a genetic disorder, but no speciﬁc 
gene mutation has been identiﬁed. Current evidence 
supports a complex inheritance pattern, with one or 
more major genes, multiple loci, low penetrance, and 
environmental inﬂuences. The risk of a family with 
one affected child having a second is about 25%. The 
pathophysiology of TS is not known, but alterations in 
dopamine neurotransmission, opioids, and second-mes-
senger systems have been proposed. Some cases of TS 
may be the consequence of an autoimmune response to 
β-hemolytic streptococcal infection (pediatric autoim-
mune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with strep-
tococcal infection [PANDAS]); however, this remains 
controversial.
TREATMENT 
Tourette’s Syndrome
Patients with mild disease often only require education 
and counseling (for themselves and family members). 
Drug treatment is indicated when the tics are disabling 
and interfere with quality of life. Therapy is generally initi-
ated with the α-agonist clonidine, starting at low doses 
and gradually increasing the dose and frequency until sat-
isfactory control is achieved. Guanfacine (0.5–2 mg/d) is 
an α-agonist that is preferred by many clinicians because 
it only requires once-a-day dosing. If these agents are 
not effective, antipsychotics can be employed. Atypi-
cal neuroleptics (risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone) 
are preferred as they are thought to be associated with a 
reduced risk of extrapyramidal side effects. If they are not 
effective, low doses of classical neuroleptics such as halo-
peridol, fluphenazine, or pimozide can be tried. Botulinum 
toxin injections can be effective in controlling focal tics 
that involve small muscle groups. Behavioral features, and 
particularly anxiety and compulsions, can be a disabling 
feature of TS and should be treated. The potential value of 
DBS targeting the anterior portion of the internal capsule is 
currently being explored.
MYOCLONUS
Myoclonus is a brief, rapid (<100 ms) shock-like, jerky 
movement consisting of single or repetitive muscle dis-
charges. Myoclonic jerks can be focal, multifocal, segmen-
tal, or generalized and can occur spontaneously, in associa-
tion with voluntary movement (action myoclonus) or in 
response to an external stimulus (reﬂex or startle myoc-
lonus). Negative myoclonus consists of a twitch due to a 
brief loss of muscle activity (e.g., asterixis in hepatic fail-
ure). Myoclonic jerks differ from tics in that they interfere 
with normal movement and are not suppressible. They can 
be seen in association with pathology in cortical, subcorti-
cal, or spinal cord regions and associated with hypoxemic 
damage (especially following cardiac arrest), encephalopa-
thy, and neurodegeneration. Reversible myoclonus can be 
seen with metabolic disturbances (renal failure, electrolyte 
imbalance, hypocalcemia), toxins, and many medications. 
Essential myoclonus is a relatively benign familial condi-
tion characterized by multifocal lightning-like movements. 
Myoclonic jerks can be disabling when they interfere with 
normal movement. They can also be innocent and are 
commonly observed in normal people when waking up or 
falling asleep (hypnogogic jerks).
TREATMENT 
Myoclonus
Treatment primarily consists of treating the underlying 
condition or removing an offending agent. Pharmaco-
logic therapy involves one or a combination of GABA-
ergic agents such as valproic acid (800–3000 mg/d), 
piracetam (8–20 g/d), clonazepam (2–15 mg/d), or prim-
idone (500–1000 mg/d). Recent studies suggest that 
levetiracetam may be particularly effective.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
354
DRUG-INDUCED MOVEMENT 
DISORDERS
This important group of movement disorders is primar-
ily associated with drugs that block dopamine recep-
tors (neuroleptics) or central dopaminergic transmission. 
These drugs are primarily used in psychiatry, but it is 
important to appreciate that drugs used in the treatment 
of nausea or vomiting (e.g., Compazine) or gastro-
esophageal disorders (e.g., metoclopramide) are neuro-
leptic agents. Hyperkinetic movement disorders second-
ary to neuroleptic drugs can be divided into those that 
present acutely, subacutely, or after prolonged exposure 
(tardive syndromes). Dopamine-blocking drugs can also 
be associated with a reversible parkinsonian syndrome 
for which anticholinergics are often concomitantly pre-
scribed, but there is concern that this may increase the 
risk of developing a tardive syndrome.
ACUTE
Dystonia is the most common acute hyperkinetic drug 
reaction. It is typically generalized in children and focal 
in adults (e.g., blepharospasm, torticollis, or oromandib-
ular dystonia). The reaction can develop within min-
utes of exposure, and can be successfully treated in most 
cases with parenteral administration of anticholinergics 
(benztropine or diphenhydramine) or benzodiazepines 
(lorazepam or diazepam). Choreas, stereotypic behav-
iors, and tics may also be seen, particularly following 
acute exposure to CNS stimulants such as methylpheni-
date, cocaine, or amphetamines.
SUBACUTE
Akathisia is the commonest reaction in this category. It 
consists of motor restlessness with a need to move that 
is alleviated by movement. Therapy consists of remov-
ing the offending agent. When this is not possible, 
symptoms may be ameliorated with benzodiazepines, 
anticholinergics, β blockers, or dopamine agonists.
TARDIVE SYNDROMES
These disorders develop months to years after initia-
tion of neuroleptic treatment. Tardive dyskinesia (TD) 
is the commonest and is typically composed of cho-
reiform movements involving the mouth, lips, and 
tongue. In severe cases, the trunk, limbs, and respira-
tory muscles may also be affected. In approximately 
one-third of patients, TD remits within 3 months of 
stopping the drug, and most patients gradually improve 
over the course of several years. In contrast, abnormal 
movements may develop after stopping the offend-
ing agent. The movements are often mild and more 
upsetting to the family than to the patient, but they can 
be severe and disabling, particularly in the context of an 
underlying psychiatric disorder. Atypical antipsychot-
ics (e.g., clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiap-
ine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole) are associated with 
a signiﬁcantly lower risk of TD in comparison to tra-
ditional antipsychotics. Younger patients have a lower 
risk of developing neuroleptic-induced TD, whereas 
the elderly, females, and those with underlying organic 
cerebral dysfunction have been reported to be at greater 
risk. In addition, chronic use is associated with increased 
risk, and speciﬁcally, the FDA has warned that use of 
metoclopramide for more than 12 weeks increases the 
risk of TD. Since TD can be permanent and resistant 
to treatment, antipsychotics should be used judiciously, 
atypical neuroleptics should be the preferred agent 
whenever possible, and the need for their continued use 
should be regularly monitored.
Treatment primarily consists of stopping the offend-
ing agent. If the patient is receiving a traditional anti-
psychotic and withdrawal is not possible, replacement 
with an atypical antipsychotic should be tried. Abrupt 
cessation of a neuroleptic should be avoided as acute 
withdrawal can induce worsening. TD can persist after 
withdrawal of antipsychotics and can be difﬁcult to 
treat. Beneﬁts may be achieved with valproic acid, anti-
cholinergics, or botulinum toxin injections. In refrac-
tory cases, catecholamine depleters such as tetrabenazine 
may be helpful. Tetrabenazine can be associated with 
dose-dependent sedation and orthostatic hypotension. 
Other approaches include baclofen (40–80 mg/d), clon-
azepam (1–8 mg/d), or valproic acid (750–3000 mg/d).
Chronic neuroleptic exposure can also be associated 
with tardive dystonia with preferential involvement of 
axial muscles and characteristic rocking movements of 
the trunk and pelvis. Tardive dystonia frequently per-
sists despite stopping medication and patients are often 
refractory to medical therapy. Valproic acid, anticholin-
ergics, and botulinum toxin may occasionally be ben-
eﬁcial. Tardive akathisia, tardive Tourette, and tardive 
tremor syndromes are rare but may also occur after 
chronic neuroleptic exposure.
Neuroleptic medications can also be associated with 
a neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). NMS is 
characterized by muscle rigidity, elevated temperature, 
altered mental status, hyperthermia, tachycardia, labile 
blood pressure, renal failure, and markedly elevated cre-
atine kinase levels. Symptoms typically evolve within 
days or weeks after initiating the drug. NMS can also 
be precipitated by the abrupt withdrawal of antiparkin-
sonian medications in PD patients. Treatment involves 
immediate cessation of the offending antipsychotic drug 
and the introduction of a dopaminergic agent (e.g., a 
dopamine agonist or levodopa), dantrolene, or a benzo-
diazepine. Treatment may need to be undertaken in an 
 
CHAPTER 30
Parkinson’s Disease and Other Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders
355
intensive care setting and includes supportive measures 
such as control of body temperature (antipyretics and 
cooling blankets), hydration, electrolyte replacement, 
and control of renal function and blood pressure.
Drugs that have serotonin-like activity (tryptophan, 
MDMA or “ecstasy,” meperidine) or that block sero-
tonin reuptake can induce a rare, but potentially fatal, 
serotonin syndrome that is characterized by confusion, 
hyperthermia, tachycardia, and coma as well as rigidity, 
ataxia, and tremor. Myoclonus is often a prominent fea-
ture, in contrast to NMS, which it resembles. Patients 
can be managed with propranolol, diazepam, diphen-
hydramine, chlorpromazine, or cyproheptadine as well 
as supportive measures.
A variety of drugs can also be associated with parkin-
sonism (see earlier) and hyperkinetic movement disor-
ders. Some examples include phenytoin (chorea, dystonia, 
tremor, myoclonus), carbamazepine (tics and dystonia), 
tricyclic antidepressants (dyskinesias, tremor, myoclonus), 
ﬂuoxetine (myoclonus, chorea, dystonia), oral contracep-
tives (dyskinesia), β adrenergics (tremor), buspirone (akathi-
sia, dyskinesias, myoclonus), and digoxin, cimetidine, 
diazoxide, lithium, methadone, and fentanyl (dyskinesias).
RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic disorder 
that affects approximately 10% of the adult population 
(it is rare in Asians) and can cause signiﬁcant morbid-
ity in some. It was ﬁrst described in the seventeenth 
century by an English physician (Thomas Willis), but 
has only recently been recognized as being a bona ﬁde 
movement disorder. The four core symptoms required 
for diagnosis are as follows: an urge to move the legs, 
usually caused or accompanied by an unpleasant sensa-
tion in the legs; symptoms begin or worsen with rest; 
partial or complete relief by movement; and worsening 
during the evening or night.
Symptoms most commonly begin in the legs, but 
can spread to or even begin in the upper limbs. The 
unpleasant sensation is often described as a creepy-
crawly feeling, paresthesia, or burning. In about 80% of 
patients, RLS is associated with periodic leg movements 
(PLMs) during sleep and occasionally while awake. 
These involuntary movements are usually brief, lasting 
no more than a few seconds, and recur every 5–90 s. 
The restlessness and PLMs are a major cause of sleep 
disturbance in patients, leading to poor-quality sleep 
and daytime sleepiness.
RLS is a heterogeneous condition. Primary RLS 
is genetic, and several loci have been found with an 
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, although 
penetrance may be variable. The mean age of onset in 
genetic forms is 27 years, although pediatric cases are 
recognized. The severity of symptoms is variable. Sec-
ondary RLS may be associated with pregnancy or a 
range of underlying disorders, including anemia, ferri-
tin deﬁciency, renal failure, and peripheral neuropathy. 
The pathogenesis probably involves disordered dopa-
mine function, which may be peripheral or central, in 
association with an abnormality of iron metabolism. 
Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds but can be sup-
ported by polysomnography and the demonstration of 
PLMs. The neurologic examination is normal. Second-
ary RLS should be excluded and ferritin levels, glucose, 
and renal function should be measured.
Most RLS sufferers have mild symptoms that do not 
require speciﬁc treatment. General measures to improve 
sleep hygiene and quality should be attempted ﬁrst. If 
symptoms remain intrusive, low doses of dopamine 
agonists, e.g., pramipexole (0.25–0.5 mg) and ropinirole 
(1–2 mg), are given 1–2 h before bedtime. Levodopa 
can be effective but is frequently associated with aug-
mentation (spread and worsening of restlessness and its 
appearance earlier in the day) or rebound (reappearance 
sometimes with worsening of symptoms at a time com-
patible with the drug’s short half-life). Other drugs that 
can be effective include anticonvulsants, analgesics, and 
even opiates. Management of secondary RLS should 
be directed to correcting the underlying disorder; for 
example, iron replacement for anemia. Iron infusion 
may also be helpful for severe primary RLS but requires 
expert supervision.
DISORDERS THAT PRESENT WITH 
PARKINSONISM AND HYPERKINETIC 
MOVEMENTS
WILSON’S DISEASE
Wilson’s disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inher-
ited disorder of copper metabolism that may manifest 
with neurologic, psychiatric, and liver disorders, alone 
or in combination. It is caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding a P-type ATPase. The disease was ﬁrst com-
prehensively described by the English neurologist Kin-
near Wilson at the beginning of the twentieth century, 
although at around the same time the German physi-
cians Kayser and Fleischer separately noted the charac-
teristic association of corneal pigmentation with hepatic 
and neurologic features. WD has a worldwide preva-
lence of approximately 1 in 30,000, with a gene car-
rier frequency of 1 in 90. About half of WD patients 
(especially younger patients) manifest with liver abnor-
malities. The remainder present with neurologic disease 
(with or without underlying liver abnormalities), and a 
small proportion have hematologic or psychiatric prob-
lems at disease onset.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
356
Neurologic onset usually manifests in the second 
decade with tremor and rigidity. The tremor is usually 
in the upper limbs, bilateral, and asymmetric. Tremor 
can be on intention or occasionally resting and, in 
advanced disease, can take on a wing-beating character-
istic. Other features include parkinsonism with bradyki-
nesia, dystonia (particularly facial grimacing), dysarthria, 
and dysphagia. More than half of those with neuro-
logic features have a history of psychiatric disturbances, 
including depression, mood swings, and overt psychosis. 
Kayser-Fleischer (KF) rings are seen in 80% of those 
with hepatic presentations and virtually all with neuro-
logic features. KF rings represent the deposition of cop-
per in Descemet’s membrane around the cornea. They 
consist of a characteristic grayish rim or circle at the 
limbus of the cornea and are best detected by slit-lamp 
examination. Neuropathologic examination is charac-
terized by neurodegeneration and astrogliosis, particu-
larly in the basal ganglia.
WD should always be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of a movement disorder in a child. Low levels 
of blood copper and ceruloplasmin and high levels of 
urinary copper may be present, but normal levels do 
not exclude the diagnosis. CT brain scan usually reveals 
generalized atrophy in established cases and ∼50% have 
hypointensity in the caudate head, globus pallidum, 
substantia nigra, and red nucleus. MRI shows symmet-
ric hyperintensity on T2-weighted images in the puta-
men, caudate, and pallidum. However, correlation of 
imaging changes with clinical features is not good. It is 
very rare for WD patients with neurologic features not 
to have KF rings. Nevertheless, liver biopsy with dem-
onstration of high copper levels remains the gold stan-
dard for the diagnosis.
In the absence of treatment, the course is progres-
sive and leads to severe neurologic dysfunction and 
early death. Treatment is directed at reducing tis-
sue copper levels and maintenance therapy to prevent 
reaccumulation. There is no clear consensus on treat-
ment and all patients should be managed in a unit with 
expertise in WD. Penicillamine is frequently used to 
increase copper excretion, but it may lead to a wors-
ening of symptoms in the initial stages of therapy. 
Side effects are common and can to some degree be 
attenuated by coadministration of pyridoxine. Tetra-
thiomolybdate blocks the absorption of copper and is 
used instead of penicillamine in many centers. Trien-
tine and zinc are useful drugs for maintenance therapy. 
Effective treatment can reverse the neurologic features 
in most patients, particularly when started early. Some 
patients stabilize and a few may still progress, espe-
cially those with hepatocerebral disease. KF rings tend 
to decrease after 3–6 months and disappear by 2 years. 
Adherence to maintenance therapy is a major chal-
lenge in long-term care.
OTHER DISORDERS
Pantothenate kinase (PANK)-associated neurodegenera-
tion, acanthocytosis, and Huntington’s disease can also 
present with parkinsonism associated with involuntary 
movements.
PSYCHOGENIC DISORDERS
Virtually all movement disorders including tremor, tics, 
dystonia, myoclonus, chorea, ballism, and parkinson-
ism can be psychogenic in origin. Tremor affecting the 
upper limbs is the most common psychogenic move-
ment disorder. Psychogenic movements can result from 
a somatoform or conversion disorder, malingering (e.g., 
seeking ﬁnancial gain), or a factitious disorder (e.g., 
seeking psychological gain). Psychogenic movement 
disorders are common (estimated 2–3% of patients in a 
movement disorder clinic), more frequent in women, 
disabling for the patient and family, and expensive for 
society (estimated $20 billion annually). Clinical features 
suggesting a psychogenic movement disorder include an 
acute onset and a pattern of abnormal movement that 
is inconsistent with a known movement disorder. Diag-
nosis is based on the nonorganic quality of the move-
ment, the absence of ﬁndings of an organic disease pro-
cess, and positive features that speciﬁcally point to a 
psychogenic illness such as variability and distractibility. 
For example, the magnitude of a psychogenic tremor is 
increased with attention and diminishes or even disap-
pears when the patient is distracted by being asked to 
perform a different task or is unaware that he or she is 
being observed. Other positive features suggesting a 
psychogenic problem include a tremor frequency that is 
variable or that entrains with the frequency of move-
ment in the contralateral limb, and a positive response 
to placebo medication. Associated features can include 
nonanatomic sensory ﬁndings, give-way weakness, and 
astasia-abasia (an odd, gyrating gait; Chap. 13). Comor-
bid psychiatric problems such as anxiety, depression, 
and emotional trauma may be present, but are not nec-
essary for the diagnosis of a psychogenic movement 
disorder to be made. Psychogenic movement disorders 
can occur as an isolated entity or in association with an 
underlying organic problem. The diagnosis can often be 
made based on clinical features alone and unnecessary 
tests or medications avoided. Underlying psychiatric 
problems may be present and should be identiﬁed and 
treated, but many patients with psychogenic movement 
disorders have no obvious psychiatric pathology. Psy-
chotherapy and hypnosis may be of value for patients 
with conversion reaction, and cognitive behavioral 
therapy may be helpful for patients with somatoform 
disorders. Patients with hypochondriasis, factitious dis-
orders, and malingering have a poor prognosis.
 Roger N. Rosenberg 
357
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
 Ataxic Disorders 
 Symptoms and signs of ataxia consist of gait impair-
ment, unclear (“scanning”) speech, visual blurring due 
to nystagmus, hand incoordination, and tremor with 
movement. These result from the involvement of the 
cerebellum and its aff erent and eff erent pathways, 
including the spinocerebellar pathways, and the fronto-
pontocerebellar pathway originating in the rostral fron-
tal lobe. True cerebellar ataxia must be distinguished 
from ataxia associated with vestibular nerve or labyrin-
thine disease, as the latter results in a disorder of gait 
associated with a signifi cant degree of dizziness, light-
headedness, or the perception of movement ( Chap. 11 ). 
True cerebellar ataxia is devoid of these vertiginous 
complaints and is clearly an unsteady gait due to imbal-
ance. Sensory disturbances can also on occasion simu-
late the imbalance of cerebellar disease; with sensory 
ataxia, imbalance dramatically worsens when visual 
input is removed (Romberg sign). Rarely, weakness of 
proximal leg muscles mimics cerebellar disease. In the 
patient who presents with ataxia, the rate and pattern 
of the development of cerebellar symptoms help to nar-
row the diagnostic possibilities  ( Table 31-1 ) . A gradual 
and progressive increase in symptoms with bilateral 
and symmetric involvement suggests a genetic, meta-
bolic, immune, or toxic etiology. Conversely, focal, uni-
lateral symptoms with headache and impaired level of 
consciousness accompanied by ipsilateral cranial nerve 
palsies and contralateral weakness imply a space-occu-
pying cerebellar lesion. 
SYMMETRIC ATAXIA  Progressive and symmetric 
ataxia can be classifi ed with respect to onset as acute 
(over hours or days), subacute (weeks or months), or 
chronic (months to years). Acute and reversible ataxias 
include those caused by intoxication with alcohol, phe-
nytoin, lithium, barbiturates, and other drugs. Intoxica-
tion caused by toluene exposure, gasoline sniffi  ng, glue 
 ATAXIC DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 31 
sniffi  ng, spray painting, or exposure to methyl mercury 
or bismuth are additional causes of acute or subacute 
ataxia, as is treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapeutic 
drugs such as fl uorouracil and paclitaxel. Patients with 
a postinfectious syndrome (especially after varicella) 
may develop gait ataxia and mild dysarthria, both of 
which are reversible ( Chap. 39 ). Rare infectious causes of 
acquired ataxia include poliovirus, coxsackievirus, echo-
virus, Epstein-Barr virus, toxoplasmosis,  Legionella , and 
Lyme disease. 
 The subacute development of ataxia of gait over 
weeks to months (degeneration of the cerebellar vermis) 
may be due to the combined eff ects of alcoholism and 
malnutrition, particularly with defi ciencies of vitamins 
B 1 and B 12 . Hyponatremia has also been associated with 
ataxia. Paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia is associated with 
a number of diff erent tumors (and autoantibodies) such 
as breast and ovarian cancers (anti-Yo), small cell lung 
cancer (anti-PQ type voltage-gated calcium channel), 
and Hodgkin’s disease (anti-Tr) ( Chap. 44 ). Another para-
neoplastic syndrome associated with myoclonus and 
opsoclonus occurs with breast (anti-Ri) and lung cancers 
and neuroblastoma. Elevated serum anti–glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies have been associated 
with a progressive ataxic syndrome aff ecting speech and 
gait. For all of these paraneoplastic ataxias, the neuro-
logic syndrome may be the presenting symptom of the 
cancer. Another immune-mediated progressive ataxia 
is associated with anti-gliadin (and anti-endomysium) 
antibodies and the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
DQB1*0201 haplotype; in some aff ected patients, biopsy 
of the small intestine reveals villus atrophy consistent 
with gluten-sensitive enteropathy. Finally, subacute pro-
gressive ataxia may be caused by a prion disorder, espe-
cially when an infectious etiology, such as transmission 
from contaminated human growth hormone, is respon-
sible ( Chap. 43 ). 
 Chronic symmetric gait ataxia suggests an inher-
ited ataxia (discussed later), a metabolic disorder, or a 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
358
chronic infection. Hypothyroidism must always be con-
sidered as a readily treatable and reversible form of gait 
ataxia. Infectious diseases that can present with ataxia 
are meningovascular syphilis and tabes dorsalis due to 
degeneration of the posterior columns and spinocer-
ebellar pathways in the spinal cord.
FOCAL 
ATAXIA Acute focal ataxia commonly 
results from cerebrovascular disease, usually ischemic 
infarction or cerebellar hemorrhage. These lesions typi-
cally produce cerebellar symptoms ipsilateral to the 
injured cerebellum and may be associated with an 
impaired level of consciousness due to brainstem com-
pression and increased intracranial pressure; ipsilateral 
pontine signs, including sixth and seventh nerve pal-
sies, may be present. Focal and worsening signs of acute 
ataxia should also prompt consideration of a posterior 
fossa subdural hematoma, bacterial abscess, or primary 
or metastatic cerebellar tumor. CT or MRI studies will 
reveal clinically significant processes of this type. Many 
of these lesions represent true neurologic emergencies, 
as sudden herniation, either rostrally through the tento-
rium or caudal herniation of cerebellar tonsils through 
the foramen magnum, can occur and is usually devas-
tating. Acute surgical decompression may be required 
(Chap. 28). Lymphoma or progressive multifocal leu-
koencephalopathy (PML) in a patient with AIDS may 
present with an acute or subacute focal cerebellar syn-
drome. Chronic etiologies of progressive ataxia include 
multiple sclerosis (Chap. 39) and congenital lesions such 
as a Chiari malformation (Chap. 35) or a congenital cyst 
of the posterior fossa (Dandy-Walker syndrome).
THE INHERITED ATAXIAS
These may show autosomal dominant, autosomal reces-
sive, or maternal (mitochondrial) modes of inheritance. 
A genomic classiﬁcation (Table 31-2) has now largely 
superseded previous ones based on clinical expression 
alone.
Although the clinical manifestations and neuropatho-
logic ﬁndings of cerebellar disease dominate the clinical 
picture, there may also be characteristic changes in the 
basal ganglia, brainstem, spinal cord, optic nerves, ret-
ina, and peripheral nerves. In large families with domi-
nantly inherited ataxias, many gradations are observed 
from purely cerebellar manifestations to mixed cerebel-
lar and brainstem disorders, cerebellar and basal ganglia 
syndromes, and spinal cord or peripheral nerve disease. 
Rarely, dementia is present as well. The clinical picture 
may be homogeneous within a family with dominantly 
inherited ataxia, but sometimes most affected family 
members show one characteristic syndrome, while one or 
several members have an entirely different phenotype.
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT ATAXIAS
The autosomal spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) include 
SCA types 1 through 28, dentatorubropallidoluysian 
TABLE 31-1
ETIOLOGY OF CEREBELLAR ATAXIA
SYMMETRIC AND PROGRESSIVE SIGNS
FOCAL AND IPSILATERAL CEREBELLAR SIGNS
ACUTE  
(HOURS TO DAYS)
SUBACUTE  
(DAYS TO WEEKS)
CHRONIC (MONTHS 
TO YEARS)
ACUTE 
(HOURS TO DAYS)
SUBACUTE  
(DAYS TO WEEKS)
CHRONIC  
(MONTHS TO YEARS)
Intoxication: 
alcohol, lithium, 
phenytoin, barbi-
turates (positive 
history and toxi-
cology screen)
Intoxication: mer-
cury, solvents, 
gasoline, glue; 
cytotoxic che-
motherapeutic, 
hemotherapeutic 
drugs
Paraneoplastic 
syndrome
Anti-gliadin  
antibody  
syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Vascular: cerebellar 
infarction, hemor-
rhage, or subdural 
hematoma
Infectious: cerebel-
lar abscess (mass 
lesion on MRI/CT, 
history in support 
of lesion)
Neoplastic: cer-
ebellar glioma or 
metastatic tumor 
(positive for neo-
plasm on MRI/CT)
Demyelinating: mul-
tiple sclerosis (his-
tory, CSF, and MRI 
are consistent)
Stable gliosis 
secondary to 
vascular lesion 
or demyelinating 
plaque (stable 
lesion on MRI/CT 
older than several 
months)
Acute viral cereb-
ellitis (CSF sup-
portive of acute 
viral infection)
Postinfection  
syndrome
Alcoholic- 
nutritional  
(vitamin B1 and 
B12 deﬁciency)
Lyme disease
Inherited diseases
Tabes dorsalis (ter-
tiary syphilis)
Phenytoin toxicity
Amiodarone
AIDS-related 
multifocal leuko-
encephalopathy 
(positive HIV test 
and CD4+ cell 
count for AIDS)
Congenital lesion: 
Chiari or Dandy-
Walker malforma-
tions (malforma-
tion noted on 
MRI/CT)
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
 
CHAPTER 31
Ataxic Disorders
359
TABLE 31-2
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIAS
NAME
LOCUS
PHENOTYPE
SCA1 (autosomal dominant type 1)
6p22-p23 with CAG repeats (exonic); 
leucine-rich acidic nuclear protein 
(LANP), region-speciﬁc interaction pro-
tein
Ataxin-1
Ataxia with ophthalmoparesis, pyramidal 
and extrapyramidal ﬁndings; genetic 
testing is available; 6% of all autosomal 
dominant (AD) cerebellar ataxia
SCA2 (autosomal dominant type 2)
12q23-q24.1 with CAG repeats (exonic)
Ataxin-2
Ataxia with slow saccades and minimal 
pyramidal and extrapyramidal ﬁndings; 
genetic testing available; 13% of all AD 
cerebellar ataxia
Machado-Joseph disease/SCA3  
(autosomal dominant type 3)
14q24.3-q32 with CAG repeats (exonic); 
codes for ubiquitin protease (inactive 
with polyglutamine expansion); altered 
turnover of cellular proteins due to pro-
teosome dysfunction
MJD–ataxin-3
Ataxia with ophthalmoparesis and vari-
able pyramidal, extrapyramidal, and 
amyotrophic signs; dementia (mild); 
23% of all AD cerebellar ataxia; genetic 
testing available
SCA4 (autosomal dominant type 4)
16q22.1-ter; pleckstrin homology 
domain-containing protein, family G, 
member 4 (PLEKHG4; puratrophin-1: 
Purkinje cell atrophy associated  
protein-1, including spectrin repeat and 
the guanine-nucleotide exchange  
factor, GEF for Rho GTPases)
Ataxia with normal eye movements, sen-
sory axonal neuropathy, and pyramidal 
signs; genetic testing available
SCA5 (autosomal dominant type 5)
11p12-q12; β-III spectrin mutations 
(SPTBN2); stabilizes glutamate trans-
porter EAAT4; descendants of Presi-
dent Abraham Lincoln
Ataxia and dysarthria; genetic testing 
available
SCA6 (autosomal dominant type 6)
19p13.2 with CAG repeats in α1A-
voltage–dependent calcium channel 
gene (exonic); CACNA1A protein, P/Q 
type calcium channel subunit
Ataxia and dysarthria, nystagmus, mild 
proprioceptive sensory loss; genetic 
testing available
SCA7 (autosomal dominant type 7)
3p14.1-p21.1 with CAG repeats (exonic); 
ataxin-7; subunit of GCN5, histone 
acetyltransferase-containing com-
plexes; ataxin-7 binding protein; Cbl-
associated protein (CAP; SH3D5)
Ophthalmoparesis, visual loss, ataxia, 
dysarthria, extensor plantar response, 
pigmentary retinal degeneration; 
genetic testing available
SCA8 (autosomal dominant type 8)
13q21 with CTG repeats; noncoding; 3′ 
untranslated region of transcribed RNA; 
KLHL1AS
Gait ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus, leg 
spasticity, and reduced vibratory sen-
sation; genetic testing available
SCA10 (autosomal dominant type 10)
22q13; pentanucleotide repeat ATTCT 
repeat; noncoding, intron 9
Gait ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus; par-
tial complex and generalized motor sei-
zures; polyneuropathy; genetic testing 
available
SCA11 (autosomal dominant type 11)
15q14-q21.3 by linkage
Slowly progressive gait and extremity 
ataxia, dysarthria, vertical nystagmus, 
hyperreﬂexia
SCA12 (autosomal dominant type 12)
5q31-q33 by linkage; CAG repeat; 
protein phosphatase 2A, regulatory 
subunit B (PPP2R2B); protein PP2A, 
serine/threonine phosphatase
Tremor, decreased movement, increased 
reﬂexes, dystonia, ataxia, dysautono-
mia, dementia, dysarthria; genetic test-
ing available
(continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
360
TABLE 31-2
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIAS (CONTINUED)
NAME
LOCUS
PHENOTYPE
SCA13 (autosomal dominant type 13)
19q13.3-q14.4
Ataxia, legs>arms; dysarthria, horizontal 
nystagmus; delayed motor develop-
ment; mental developmental delay;  
tendon reﬂexes increased; MRI: 
cerebellar and pontine atrophy; genetic 
testing available
SCA14 (autosomal dominant type 14)
19q-13.4; protein kinase Cγ (PRKCG), 
missense mutations including in-frame 
deletion and a splice site mutation 
among others; serine/threonine kinase
Gait ataxia; leg>arm ataxia; dysarthria; 
pure ataxia with later onset; myoclo-
nus; tremor of head and extremities; 
increased deep tendon reﬂexes at 
ankles; occasional dystonia and sensory 
neuropathy; genetic testing available
SCA15 (autosomal dominant type 15)
3p24.2-3pter
Gait and extremity ataxia, dysarthria; 
nystagmus; MRI: superior vermis 
atrophy; sparing of hemispheres and 
tonsils
SCA16 (autosomal dominant type 16)
8q22.1-24.1
Pure cerebellar ataxia and head tremor, 
gait ataxia, and dysarthria; horizontal 
gaze–evoked nystagmus; MR:  
cerebellar atrophy; no brainstem changes
SCA17 (autosomal dominant type 17)
6q27; CAG expansion in the TATA- 
binding protein (TBP) gene
Gait ataxia, dementia, parkinsonism, 
dystonia, chorea, seizures; hyperre-
ﬂexia; dysarthria and dysphagia; MRI 
shows cerebral and cerebellar atrophy; 
genetic testing available
SCA18 (autosomal dominant type 18)
7q22-q32
Ataxia; motor/sensory neuropathy; head 
tremor; dysarthria; extensor plantar 
responses in some patients; sensory 
axonal neuropathy; EMG denervation; 
MRI: cerebellar atrophy
SCA19 (autosomal dominant type 19)
1p21-q21
Ataxia, tremor, cognitive impairment, 
myoclonus; MRI: atrophy of cerebellum
SCA20 (autosomal dominant)
11p13-q11
Dysarthria; gait ataxia; ocular gaze–
evoked saccades; palatal tremor; den-
tate calciﬁcation on CT; MRI: cerebral 
atrophy
SCA21 (autosomal dominant)
7p21.3-p15.1
Ataxia, dysarthria, extrapyramidal 
features of akinesia, rigidity, tremor, 
cognitive defect; reduced deep tendon 
reﬂexes; MRI: cerebellar atrophy,  
normal basal ganglia and brainstem
SCA22 (autosomal dominant)
1p21-q23
Pure cerebellar ataxia; dysarthria; dys-
phagia; nystagmus; MRI: cerebellar 
atrophy
SCA23 (autosomal dominant)
20p13-12.3
Gait ataxia; dysarthria; extremity ataxia; 
ocular nystagmus, dysmetria; leg vibra-
tion loss; extensor plantar responses; 
MRI: cerebellar atrophy
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 31
Ataxic Disorders
361
TABLE 31-2
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIAS (CONTINUED)
NAME
LOCUS
PHENOTYPE
SCA25 (autosomal dominant)
2p15-p21
Ataxia, nystagmus; vibratory loss in the 
feet; pain loss in some; abdominal pain; 
nausea and vomiting may be promi-
nent; absent ankle reﬂexes; sensory 
nerve action potentials are absent; 
MRI: cerebellar atrophy, normal  
brainstem
SCA26 (autosomal dominant)
19p13.3
Gait ataxia; extremity ataxia; dysarthria; 
nystagmus; MRI: cerebellar atrophy
SCA27 (autosomal dominant)
13q34; ﬁbroblast growth factor 14 
protein; mutation F145S; produces 
reduced protein stability
Tremor extremities and head and oro-
facial dyskinesia; ataxia of arms>legs, 
gait ataxia; dysarthria; nystagmus; psy-
chiatric symptoms; cognitive defect; 
MRI: cerebellar atrophy; genetic testing 
available
SCA28 (autosomal dominant)
18p11.22-q11.2
Extremity and gait ataxia; dysarthria; 
nystagmus; ophthalmoparesis; leg 
hyperreﬂexia and extensor plantar 
responses; MRI: cerebellar atrophy
SCA30 (autosomal dominant)
4q34.3-q35.1
Candidate gene ODZ3; gait ataxia, dys-
arthria, saccades; nystagmus, brisk 
tendon reﬂexes in legs; MRI: cerebellar 
atrophy
SCA31 (autosomal dominant)
16q22.1
Pentanucleotide (TGGAA)N repeat inser-
tions; previously called SCA4; gait 
ataxia; limb dysmetria; MRI: cerebellar 
atrophy
Dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy 
(autosomal dominant)
12p13.31 with CAG repeats (exonic)
Atrophin 1
Ataxia, choreoathetosis, dystonia, sei-
zures, myoclonus, dementia; genetic 
testing available
Friedreich’s ataxia (autosomal recessive)
9q13-q21.1 with intronic GAA repeats,  
in intron at end of exon 1
Frataxin defective; abnormal regulation 
of mitochondrial iron metabolism; iron 
accumulates in mitochondria in yeast 
mutants
Ataxia, areﬂexia, extensor plantar 
responses, position sense deﬁcits, car-
diomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, sco-
liosis, foot deformities; optic atrophy; 
late-onset form, as late as 50 years 
with preserved deep tendon reﬂexes, 
slower progression, reduced skeletal 
deformities, associated with an inter-
mediate number of GAA repeats and 
missense mutations in one allele of 
frataxin; genetic testing available
Friedreich’s ataxia (autosomal recessive)
8q13.1-q13.3 (α-TTP deﬁciency)
Same as phenotype that maps to 9q but 
associated with vitamin E deﬁciency; 
genetic testing available
Sensory ataxic neuropathy and oph-
thalmoparesis (SANDO) with dysarthria 
(autosomal recessive)
15q25; mutations in DNA polymerase-
gamma (POLG) gene that leads to 
mtDNA deletions
Young adult–onset ataxia, sensory neu-
ropathy, ophthalmoparesis, hearing 
loss, gastric symptoms; a variant of 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia; 
MRI: cerebellar and thalamic abnor-
malities; mildly increased lactate and 
creatine kinase
(continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
362
TABLE 31-2
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIAS (CONTINUED)
NAME
LOCUS
PHENOTYPE
Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome  
(autosomal dominant)
3p26-p25
Cerebellar hemangioblastoma; pheo-
chromocytoma
Baltic myoclonus (Unverricht- 
Lundborg) (recessive)
21q22.3; cystatin B; extra repeats of 12–
base pair tandem repeats
Myoclonus epilepsy; late-onset ataxia; 
responds to valproic acid, clonazepam; 
phenobarbital
Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome  
(recessive)
5q31; SIL 1 protein, nucleotide 
exchange factor for the heat-shock 
protein 70 (HSP70); chaperone HSPA5; 
homozygous 4-nucleotide duplication 
in exon 6; also compound heterozygote
Ataxia, dysarthria; nystagmus; retarded 
motor and mental maturation; rhabdo-
myolysis after viral illness; weakness; 
hypotonia; areﬂexia; cataracts in child-
hood; short stature; kyphoscoliosis; 
contractures; hypogonadism
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of 
Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS)
Chromosome 13q12; SACS gene; loss 
of sacsin peptide activity
Childhood onset of ataxia, spasticity, 
dysarthria, distal muscle wasting, foot 
deformity, retinal striations, mitral valve 
prolapse
Kearns-Sayre syndrome (sporadic)
mtDNA deletion and duplication muta-
tions
Ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary  
retinal degeneration, cardiomyopathy, 
diabetes mellitus, deafness, heart 
block, increased CSF protein, ataxia
Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red ﬁber 
syndrome (MERRF) (maternal inheri-
tance)
Mutation in mtDNA of the tRNAlys at 
8344; also mutation at 8356
Myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red ﬁber 
myopathy, ataxia
Mitochondrial encephalopathy,  
lactic acidosis, and stroke syndrome 
(MELAS) (maternal inheritance)
tRNAleu mutation at 3243; also at 3271 
and 3252
Headache, stroke, lactic acidosis, ataxia
Neuropathy; ataxia; retinitis pigmentosa 
(NARP)
ATPase6 (Complex 5); mtDNA point 
mutation at 8993
Neuropathy; ataxia; retinitis pigmentosa; 
dementia; seizures
Episodic ataxia, type 1 (EA-1)  
(autosomal dominant)
12p13; potassium voltage-gated chan-
nel gene, KCNA1; Phe249Leu muta-
tion; variable syndrome
Episodic ataxia for minutes; provoked by 
startle or exercise; with facial and hand 
myokymia; cerebellar signs are not pro-
gressive; choreoathetotic movements; 
responds to phenytoin; genetic testing 
available
Episodic ataxia, type 2 (EA-2)  
(autosomal dominant)
19p-13(CACNA1A) (allelic with SCA6) 
(α1A-voltage–dependent calcium chan-
nel subunit); point mutations or small 
deletions; allelic with SCA6 and familial 
hemiplegic migraine
Episodic ataxia for days; provoked by 
stress, fatigue; with down-gaze nys-
tagmus; vertigo; vomiting; headache; 
cerebellar atrophy results; progressive 
cerebellar signs; responds to acetazol-
amide; genetic testing available
Episodic ataxia, type 3 (autosomal 
dominant)
1q42
Episodic ataxia; 1 min to over 6 h; 
induced by movement; vertigo and 
tinnitus; headache; responds to acet-
azolamide
Episodic ataxia, type 4 (autosomal 
dominant)
Not mapped
Episodic ataxia; vertigo; diplopia; ocular 
slow pursuit defect; no response to 
acetazolamide
Episodic ataxia, type 5 (autosomal 
dominant)
2q22-q23; CACNB4β4 protein
Episodic ataxia; hours to weeks; sei-
zures
Episodic ataxia, type 6
5p13; SLC1A3; glutamate transporter in 
astrocytes
Episodic ataxia; seizures; cognitive 
impairment; under 24 h
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 31
Ataxic Disorders
363
TABLE 31-2
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIAS (CONTINUED)
NAME
LOCUS
PHENOTYPE
Episodic ataxia, type 7 (autosomal 
dominant)
19q13
Episodic ataxia; vertigo, weakness; less 
than 24 h
Episodic ataxia with seizures, migraine, 
and alternating hemiplegia (autosomal 
dominant)
SLC1A3; 5p13; EAAT1 protein; missense 
mutations; glial glutamate transporter 
(GLAST); 1047 C to G; proline to argi-
nine
Ataxia, duration 2–4 days; episodic 
hypotonia; delayed motor milestones; 
seizures; migraine; alternating hemiple-
gia; mild truncal ataxia; coma; febrile 
illness as a trigger; MRI: cerebellar 
atrophy
Fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome 
(FXTAS) X-linked dominant
Xq27.3; CGG premutation expansion 
in FMR1 gene; expansions of 55–200 
repeats in 5′ UTR of the FMR-1 mRNA; 
presumed dominant toxic RNA effect
Late-onset ataxia with tremor, cognitive 
impairment, occasional parkinson-
ism; males typically affected, although 
affected females also reported; syn-
drome is of high concern if affected 
male has grandson with mental retar-
dation (fragile X syndrome); MRI shows 
increased T2 signal in middle cerebellar 
peduncles, cerebellar atrophy, and 
occasional widespread brain atrophy; 
genetic testing available
Ataxia telangiectasia (autosomal reces-
sive)
11q22-23; ATM gene for regulation of 
cell cycle; mitogenic signal transduc-
tion and meiotic recombination
Telangiectasia, ataxia, dysarthria, pulmo-
nary infections, neoplasms of lymphatic 
system; IgA and IgG deﬁciencies; dia-
betes mellitus, breast cancer; genetic 
testing available
Early-onset cerebellar ataxia with 
retained deep tendon reﬂexes (autoso-
mal recessive)
13q11-12
Ataxia; neuropathy; preserved deep 
tendon reﬂexes; impaired cognitive and 
visuospatial functions; MRI, cerebellar 
atrophy
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia (AOA1) 
(autosomal recessive)
9p13; protein is member of histidine 
triad superfamily, role in DNA repair
Ataxia; dysarthria; limb dysmetria; dys-
tonia; oculomotor apraxia; optic atro-
phy; motor neuropathy; late sensory 
loss (vibration); genetic testing avail-
able
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 2 (AOA2) 
(autosomal recessive)
9q34; senataxin protein, involved in RNA 
maturation and termination; helicase 
superfamily 1
Gait ataxia; choreoathetosis; dysto-
nia; oculomotor apraxia; neuropathy, 
vibration loss, position sense loss, 
and mild light touch loss; absent leg 
deep tendon reﬂexes; extensor plantar 
response; genetic testing available
Cerebellar ataxia with muscle coenzyme 
Q10 deﬁciency (autosomal recessive)
9p13
Ataxia; hypotonia; seizures; mental retar-
dation; increased deep tendon reﬂexes; 
extensor plantar responses; coenzyme 
Q10 levels reduced with about 25% 
of patients with a block in transfer of 
electrons to complex 3; may respond 
to coenzyme 10
Joubert syndrome (autosomal recessive)
9q34.3
Ataxia; ptosis; mental retardation; oculo-
motor apraxia; nystagmus; retinopathy; 
rhythmic tongue protrusion; episodic 
hyperpnea or apnea; dimples at wrists 
and elbows; telecanthus; micrognathia
(continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
364
atrophy (DRPLA), and episodic ataxia (EA) types 1 and 2 
(Table 31-2). SCA1, SCA2, SCA3 (Machado-Joseph dis-
ease [MJD]), SCA6, SCA7, and SCA17 are caused by 
CAG triplet repeat expansions in different genes. SCA8 
is due to an untranslated CTG repeat expansion, SCA12 
is linked to an untranslated CAG repeat, and SCA10 is 
caused by an untranslated pentanucleotide repeat. The 
clinical phenotypes of these SCAs overlap. The geno-
type has become the gold standard for diagnosis and clas-
siﬁcation. CAG encodes glutamine, and these expanded 
CAG triplet repeat expansions result in expanded poly-
glutamine proteins, termed ataxins, that produce a toxic 
gain of function with autosomal dominant inheritance. 
Although the phenotype is variable for any given dis-
ease gene, a pattern of neuronal loss with gliosis is pro-
duced that is relatively unique for each ataxia. Immu-
nohistochemical and biochemical studies have shown 
cytoplasmic (SCA2), neuronal (SCA1, MJD, SCA7), and 
nucleolar (SCA7) accumulation of the speciﬁc mutant 
polyglutamine-containing ataxin proteins. Expanded 
polyglutamine ataxins with more than ∼40 glutamines 
are potentially toxic to neurons for a variety of reasons 
including the following: high levels of gene expres-
sion for the mutant polyglutamine ataxin in affected 
neurons; conformational change of the aggregated pro-
tein to a β-pleated structure; abnormal transport of the 
ataxin into the nucleus (SCA1, MJD, SCA7); binding 
to other polyglutamine proteins, including the TATA-
binding transcription protein and the CREB-binding 
protein, impairing their functions; altering the efﬁciency 
of the ubiquitin-proteosome system of protein turnover; 
and inducing neuronal apoptosis. An earlier age of onset 
(anticipation) and more aggressive disease in subsequent 
generations are due to further expansion of the CAG 
triplet repeat and increased polyglutamine number in the 
mutant ataxin. The most common disorders are discussed 
later.
SCA1
SCA1 was previously referred to as olivopontocerebellar 
atrophy, but genomic data have shown that that entity 
represents several different genotypes with overlapping 
clinical features.
Symptoms and signs
SCA1 is characterized by the development in early or 
middle adult life of progressive cerebellar ataxia of the 
trunk and limbs, impairment of equilibrium and gait, 
slowness of voluntary movements, scanning speech, 
nystagmoid eye movements, and oscillatory tremor of 
the head and trunk. Dysarthria, dysphagia, and oculo-
motor and facial palsies may also occur. Extrapyramidal 
symptoms include rigidity, an immobile face, and par-
kinsonian tremor. The reﬂexes are usually normal, but 
knee and ankle jerks may be lost, and extensor plantar 
responses may occur. Dementia may be noted but is 
usually mild. Impairment of sphincter function is com-
mon, with urinary and sometimes fecal incontinence. 
Cerebellar and brainstem atrophy are evident on MRI 
(Fig. 31-1).
TABLE 31-2
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIAS (CONTINUED)
NAME
LOCUS
PHENOTYPE
Sideroblastic anemia and spinocerebel-
lar ataxia (X-linked recessive)
Xq13; ATP-binding cassette 7 (ABCB7; 
ABC7) transporter; mitochondrial inner 
membrane; iron homeostasis; export 
from matrix to the intermembrane 
space
Ataxia; elevated free erythrocyte proto-
porphyrin levels; ring sideroblasts in 
bone marrow; heterozygous females 
may have mild anemia but not ataxia
Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia of 
Nikali et al (autosomal recessive)
10q23.3-q24.1; twinkle protein (gene); 
homozygous for Tyr508Cys missense 
mutations
Infantile ataxia, sensory neuropathy; 
athetosis, hearing deﬁcit, reduced deep 
tendon reﬂexes; ophthalmoplegia, optic 
atrophy; seizures; primary hypogonad-
ism in females
Hypoceruloplasminemia with ataxia and 
dysarthria (autosomal recessive)
Ceruloplasmin gene; 3q23-q25  
(trp 858 ter)
Gait ataxia and dysarthria; hyperreﬂexia; 
cerebellar atrophy by MRI; iron deposi-
tion in cerebellum, basal ganglia, thala-
mus, and liver; onset in the 4th decade
Spinocerebellar ataxia with neuropathy 
(SCAN1) (autosomal recessive)
Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase-1  
(TDP-1) 14q31-q32
Onset in 2nd decade; gait ataxia, dysar-
thria, seizures, cerebellar vermis atro-
phy on MRI, dysmetria
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; EMG, electromyogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
 
CHAPTER 31
Ataxic Disorders
365
Marked shrinkage of the ventral half of the pons, dis-
appearance of the olivary eminence on the ventral sur-
face of the medulla, and atrophy of the cerebellum are 
evident on gross postmortem inspection of the brain. 
Variable loss of Purkinje cells, reduced numbers of cells 
in the molecular and granular layer, demyelination of 
the middle cerebellar peduncle and the cerebellar hemi-
spheres, and severe loss of cells in the pontine nuclei 
and olives are found on histologic examination. Degen-
erative changes in the striatum, especially the putamen, 
and loss of the pigmented cells of the substantia nigra 
may be found in cases with extrapyramidal features. 
More widespread degeneration in the central nervous 
system (CNS), including involvement of the posterior 
columns and the spinocerebellar ﬁbers, is often present.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
SCA1 encodes a gene product, called ataxin-1, 
which is a novel protein of unknown function. 
The mutant allele has 40 CAG repeats located 
within the coding region, whereas alleles from unaf-
fected individuals have f36 repeats. A few patients with 
38–40 CAG repeats have been described. There is a 
direct correlation between a larger number of repeats 
and a younger age of onset for SCA1. Juvenile patients 
have higher numbers of repeats, and anticipation is pres-
ent in subsequent generations. Transgenic mice carry-
ing SCA1 developed ataxia and Purkinje cell pathology. 
Nuclear localization, but not aggregation, of ataxin-1 
appears to be required for cell death initiated by the 
mutant protein.
SCA2
Symptoms and signs
Another clinical phenotype, SCA2, has been described in 
patients from Cuba and India. Cuban patients probably 
are descendants of a common ancestor, and the popula-
tion may be the largest homogeneous group of patients 
with ataxia yet described. The age of onset ranges from 
2–65 years, and there is considerable clinical variability 
within families. Although neuropathologic and clini-
cal ﬁndings are compatible with a diagnosis of SCA1, 
including slow saccadic eye movements, ataxia, dysar-
thria, parkinsonian rigidity, optic disc pallor, mild spastic-
ity, and retinal degeneration, SCA2 is a unique form of 
cerebellar degenerative disease.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The gene in SCA2 families also contains CAG 
repeat expansions coding for a polyglutamine-
containing protein, ataxin-2. Normal alleles con-
tain 15–32 repeats; mutant alleles have 35–77 repeats.
MACHADO-JOSEPH DISEASE/SCA3
MJD was ﬁrst described among the Portuguese and 
their descendants in New England and California. Sub-
sequently, MJD has been found in families from Portu-
gal, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, England, France, 
India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Spain, Taiwan, and the United 
States. In most populations, it is the most common 
autosomal dominant ataxia.
Symptoms and signs
MJD has been classiﬁed into three clinical types. In type 
I MJD (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis–parkinsonism–
dystonia type), neurologic deﬁcits appear in the ﬁrst 
two decades and involve weakness and spasticity of 
extremities, especially the legs, often with dystonia of 
the face, neck, trunk, and extremities. Patellar and ankle 
clonus are common, as are extensor plantar responses. 
The gait is slow and stiff, with a slightly broadened base 
and lurching from side to side; this gait results from 
spasticity, not true ataxia. There is no truncal titubation. 
Pharyngeal weakness and spasticity cause difﬁculty with 
speech and swallowing. Of note is the prominence of 
horizontal and vertical nystagmus, loss of fast saccadic 
eye movements, hypermetric and hypometric saccades, 
and impairment of upward vertical gaze. Facial fascicu-
lations, facial myokymia, lingual fasciculations without 
FIGURE 31-1 
Sagittal MRI of the brain of a 60-year-old man with gait 
ataxia and dysarthria due to SCA1, illustrating cerebellar 
atrophy (arrows). MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SCA1, 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 1.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
366
atrophy, ophthalmoparesis, and ocular prominence are 
common early manifestations.
In type II MJD (ataxic type), true cerebellar deﬁcits of 
dysarthria and gait and extremity ataxia begin in the sec-
ond to fourth decades along with corticospinal and extra-
pyramidal deﬁcits of spasticity, rigidity, and dystonia. Type 
II is the most common form of MJD. Ophthalmoparesis, 
upward vertical gaze deﬁcits, and facial and lingual fascicu-
lations are also present. Type II MJD can be distinguished 
from the clinically similar disorders SCA1 and SCA2.
Type III MJD (ataxic-amyotrophic type) presents 
in the ﬁfth to the seventh decades with a pancerebellar 
disorder that includes dysarthria and gait and extremity 
ataxia. Distal sensory loss involving pain, touch, vibra-
tion, and position senses and distal atrophy are promi-
nent, indicating the presence of peripheral neuropathy. 
The deep tendon reﬂexes are depressed to absent, and 
there are no corticospinal or extrapyramidal ﬁndings.
The mean age of onset of symptoms in MJD is 
25 years. Neurologic deﬁcits invariably progress and 
lead to death from debilitation within 15 years of onset, 
especially in patients with types I and II disease. Usually, 
patients retain full intellectual function.
The major pathologic ﬁndings are variable loss of 
neurons and glial replacement in the corpus striatum 
and severe loss of neurons in the pars compacta of the 
substantia nigra. A moderate loss of neurons occurs in 
the dentate nucleus of the cerebellum and in the red 
nucleus. Purkinje cell loss and granule cell loss occur in 
the cerebellar cortex. Cell loss also occurs in the den-
tate nucleus and in the cranial nerve motor nuclei. Spar-
ing of the inferior olives distinguishes MJD from other 
dominantly inherited ataxias.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The gene for MJD maps to 14q24.3-q32. Unstable 
CAG repeat expansions are present in the MJD 
gene coding for a polyglutamine-containing protein 
named ataxin-3, or MJD-ataxin. An earlier age of onset 
is associated with longer repeats. Alleles from normal 
individuals have between 12 and 37 CAG repeats, while 
MJD alleles have 60–84 CAG repeats. Polyglutamine-
containing aggregates of ataxin-3 (MJD-ataxin) have 
been described in neuronal nuclei undergoing degenera-
tion. MJD-ataxin codes for a ubiquitin protease, which 
is inactive due to expanded polyglutamines. Proteosome 
function is impaired, resulting in altered clearance of pro-
teins and cerebellar neuronal loss.
SCA6
Genomic screening for CAG repeats in other fami-
lies with autosomal dominant ataxia and vibratory and 
proprioceptive sensory loss have yielded another locus. Of 
interest is that different mutations in the same gene for the 
α1A voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit (CACN-
LIA4; also referred to as the CACNA1A gene) at 19p13 
result in different clinical disorders. CAG repeat expan-
sions (21–27 in patients; 4–16 triplets in normal individu-
als) result in late-onset progressive ataxia with cerebellar 
degeneration. Missense mutations in this gene result in 
familial hemiplegic migraine. Nonsense mutations result-
ing in termination of protein synthesis of the gene product 
yield hereditary paroxysmal cerebellar ataxia or EA. Some 
patients with familial hemiplegic migraine develop pro-
gressive ataxia and also have cerebellar atrophy.
SCA7
This disorder is distinguished from all other SCAs by the 
presence of retinal pigmentary degeneration. The visual 
abnormalities ﬁrst appear as blue-yellow color blindness 
and proceed to frank visual loss with macular degeneration. 
In almost all other respects, SCA7 resembles several other 
SCAs in which ataxia is accompanied by various noncer-
ebellar ﬁndings, including ophthalmoparesis and extensor 
plantar responses. The genetic defect is an expanded CAG 
repeat in the SCA7 gene at 3p14-p21.1. The expanded 
repeat size in SCA7 is highly variable. Consistent with 
this, the severity of clinical ﬁndings varies from essentially 
asymptomatic to mild late-onset symptoms to severe, 
aggressive disease in childhood with rapid progression. 
Marked anticipation has been recorded, especially with 
paternal transmission. The disease protein, ataxin-7, forms 
aggregates in nuclei of affected neurons, as has also been 
described for SCA1 and SCA3/MJD.
SCA8
This form of ataxia is caused by a CTG repeat expan-
sion in an untranslated region of a gene on chromosome 
13q21. There is marked maternal bias in transmission, 
perhaps reﬂecting contractions of the repeat during sper-
matogenesis. The mutation is not fully penetrant. Symp-
toms include slowly progressive dysarthria and gait ataxia 
beginning at ∼40 years of age with a range between 20 
and 65 years. Other features include nystagmus, leg spas-
ticity, and reduced vibratory sensation. Severely affected 
individuals are nonambulatory by the fourth to sixth 
decades. MRI shows cerebellar atrophy. The mechanism 
of disease may involve a dominant “toxic” effect occur-
ring at the RNA level, as occurs in myotonic dystrophy.
DENTATORUBROPALLIDOLUYSIAN 
ATROPHY
DRPLA has a variable presentation that may include 
progressive ataxia, choreoathetosis, dystonia, seizures, 
 
CHAPTER 31
Ataxic Disorders
367
myoclonus, and dementia. DRPLA is due to unstable 
CAG triplet repeats in the open reading frame of a 
gene named atrophin located on chromosome 12p12-
ter. Larger expansions are found in patients with ear-
lier onset. The number of repeats is 49 in patients with 
DRPLA and f26 in normal individuals. Anticipation 
occurs in successive generations, with earlier onset of 
disease in association with an increasing CAG repeat 
number in children who inherit the disease from their 
father. One well-characterized family in North Caro-
lina has a phenotypic variant known as the Haw River 
syndrome, now recognized to be due to the DRPLA 
mutation.
EPISODIC ATAXIA
EA types 1 and 2 are two rare dominantly inherited dis-
orders that have been mapped to chromosomes 12p (a 
potassium channel gene) for type 1 and 19p for type 2. 
Patients with EA-1 have brief episodes of ataxia with 
myokymia and nystagmus that last only minutes. Startle, 
sudden change in posture, and exercise can induce epi-
sodes. Acetazolamide or anticonvulsants may be thera-
peutic. Patients with EA-2 have episodes of ataxia with 
nystagmus that can last for hours or days. Stress, exer-
cise, or excessive fatigue may be precipitants. Acetazol-
amide may be therapeutic and can reverse the relative 
intracellular alkalosis detected by magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy. Stop codon, nonsense mutations causing 
EA-2 have been found in the CACNA1A gene, encod-
ing the α1A voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit 
(see “SCA6”).
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE ATAXIAS
Friedreich’s ataxia
This is the most common form of inherited ataxia, 
comprising one-half of all hereditary ataxias. It can 
occur in a classic form or in association with a geneti-
cally determined vitamin E deﬁciency syndrome; the 
two forms are clinically indistinguishable.
Symptoms and signs
Friedreich’s ataxia presents before 25 years of age 
with progressive staggering gait, frequent falling, and 
titubation. The lower extremities are more severely 
involved than the upper ones. Dysarthria occasionally 
is the presenting symptom; rarely, progressive scoliosis, 
foot deformity, nystagmus, or cardiopathy is the initial 
sign.
The neurologic examination reveals nystagmus, loss 
of fast saccadic eye movements, truncal titubation, dys-
arthria, dysmetria, and ataxia of trunk and limb move-
ments. Extensor plantar responses (with normal tone in 
trunk and extremities), absence of deep tendon reﬂexes, 
and weakness (greater distally than proximally) are usu-
ally found. Loss of vibratory and proprioceptive sen-
sation occurs. The median age of death is 35 years. 
Women have a signiﬁcantly better prognosis than men.
Cardiac involvement occurs in 90% of patients. Car-
diomegaly, symmetric hypertrophy, murmurs, and con-
duction defects are reported. Moderate mental retar-
dation or psychiatric syndromes are present in a small 
percentage of patients. A high incidence of diabetes 
mellitus (20%) is found and is associated with insulin 
resistance and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction. Musculo-
skeletal deformities are common and include pes cavus, 
pes equinovarus, and scoliosis. MRI of the spinal cord 
shows atrophy (Fig. 31-2).
The primary sites of pathology are the spinal cord, 
dorsal root ganglion cells, and the peripheral nerves. 
Slight atrophy of the cerebellum and cerebral gyri may 
occur. Sclerosis and degeneration occur predominantly 
in the spinocerebellar tracts, lateral corticospinal tracts, 
and posterior columns. Degeneration of the glossopha-
ryngeal, vagus, hypoglossal, and deep cerebellar nuclei 
is described. The cerebral cortex is histologically normal 
except for loss of Betz cells in the precentral gyri. The 
peripheral nerves are extensively involved, with a loss 
of large myelinated ﬁbers. Cardiac pathology consists of 
myocytic hypertrophy and ﬁbrosis, focal vascular ﬁbro-
muscular dysplasia with subintimal or medial deposition 
of periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)-positive material, myo-
cytopathy with unusual pleomorphic nuclei, and focal 
degeneration of nerves and cardiac ganglia.
FIGURE 31-2 
Sagittal MRI of the brain and spinal cord of a patient with 
Friedreich’s ataxia, demonstrating spinal cord atrophy.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
368
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The classic form of Friedreich’s ataxia has been 
mapped to 9q13-q21.1, and the mutant gene, 
frataxin, contains expanded GAA triplet repeats 
in the ﬁrst intron. There is homozygosity for expanded 
GAA repeats in >95% of patients. Normal persons have 
7–22 GAA repeats, and patients have 200–900 GAA 
repeats. A more varied clinical syndrome has been 
described in compound heterozygotes who have one 
copy of the GAA expansion and the other copy a point 
mutation in the frataxin gene. When the point muta-
tion is located in the region of the gene that encodes the 
amino-terminal half of frataxin, the phenotype is milder, 
often consisting of a spastic gait, retained or exaggerated 
reﬂexes, no dysarthria, and mild or absent ataxia.
Patients with Friedreich’s ataxia have undetectable or 
extremely low levels of frataxin mRNA, as compared 
with carriers and unrelated individuals; thus, disease 
appears to be caused by a loss of expression of the frataxin 
protein. Frataxin is a mitochondrial protein involved 
in iron homeostasis. Mitochondrial iron accumulation 
due to loss of the iron transporter coded by the mutant 
frataxin gene results in oxidized intramitochondrial iron. 
Excess oxidized iron results in turn in the oxidation of 
cellular components and irreversible cell injury.
Two forms of hereditary ataxia associated with abnor-
malities in the interactions of vitamin E (α-tocopherol) 
with very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) have been 
delineated. These are abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-
Kornzweig syndrome) and ataxia with vitamin E deﬁ-
ciency (AVED). Abetalipoproteinemia is caused by muta-
tions in the gene coding for the larger subunit of the 
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP). Defects 
in MTP result in impairment of formation and secre-
tion of VLDL in liver. This defect results in a deﬁciency 
of delivery of vitamin E to tissues, including the central 
and peripheral nervous system, as VLDL is the transport 
molecule for vitamin E and other fat-soluble substitutes. 
AVED is due to mutations in the gene for α-tocopherol 
transfer protein (α-TTP). These patients have an 
impaired ability to bind vitamin E into the VLDL pro-
duced and secreted by the liver, resulting in a deﬁciency 
of vitamin E in peripheral tissues. Hence, either absence 
of VLDL (abetalipoproteinemia) or impaired binding 
of vitamin E to VLDL (AVED) causes an ataxic syn-
drome. Once again, a genotype classiﬁcation has proved 
to be essential in sorting out the various forms of the 
Friedreich’s disease syndrome, which may be clinically 
indistinguishable.
Ataxia telangiectasia
Symptoms and signs
Patients with ataxia telangiectasia (AT) present in the 
ﬁrst decade of life with progressive telangiectatic lesions 
associated with deﬁcits in cerebellar function and nys-
tagmus. The neurologic manifestations correspond to 
those in Friedreich’s disease, which should be included 
in the differential diagnosis. Truncal and limb ataxia, 
dysarthria, extensor plantar responses, myoclonic jerks, 
areﬂexia, and distal sensory deﬁcits may develop. There 
is a high incidence of recurrent pulmonary infections 
and neoplasms of the lymphatic and reticuloendothe-
lial system in patients with AT. Thymic hypoplasia with 
cellular and humoral (IgA and IgG2) immunodeﬁcien-
cies, premature aging, and endocrine disorders such 
as type 1 diabetes mellitus are described. There is an 
increased incidence of lymphomas, Hodgkin’s disease, 
acute leukemias of the T cell type, and breast cancer.
The most striking neuropathologic changes include 
loss of Purkinje, granule, and basket cells in the cerebel-
lar cortex as well as of neurons in the deep cerebellar 
nuclei. The inferior olives of the medulla may also have 
neuronal loss. There is a loss of anterior horn neurons in 
the spinal cord and of dorsal root ganglion cells associ-
ated with posterior column spinal cord demyelination. 
A poorly developed or absent thymus gland is the most 
consistent defect of the lymphoid system.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The gene for AT (the ATM gene) encodes a pro-
tein that is similar to several yeast and mamma-
lian phosphatidylinositol-3′-kinases involved in 
mitogenic signal transduction, meiotic recombination, 
and cell cycle control. Defective DNA repair in AT 
ﬁbroblasts exposed to ultraviolet light has been demon-
strated. The discovery of ATM will make possible the 
identiﬁcation of heterozygotes who are at risk for can-
cer (e.g., breast cancer) and permit early diagnosis.
MITOCHONDRIAL ATAXIAS
Spinocerebellar syndromes have been identiﬁed with 
mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Thirty 
pathogenic mtDNA point mutations and 60 different 
types of mtDNA deletions are known, several of which 
cause or are associated with ataxia (Chap. 48).
TREATMENT 
Ataxic Disorders
The most important goal in management of patients 
with ataxia is to identify treatable disease entities. 
Mass lesions must be recognized promptly and treated 
appropriately. Paraneoplastic disorders can often be 
identified by the clinical patterns of disease that they 
produce, measurement of specific autoantibodies, 
and uncovering the primary cancer; these disorders 
 
CHAPTER 31
Ataxic Disorders
369
are often refractory to therapy, but some patients 
improve following removal of the tumor or immuno-
therapy (Chap. 44). Ataxia with anti-gliadin antibodies 
and gluten-sensitive enteropathy may improve with a 
gluten-free diet. Malabsorption syndromes leading to 
vitamin E deficiency may lead to ataxia. The vitamin E 
deficiency form of Friedreich’s ataxia must be consid-
ered, and serum vitamin E levels measured. Vitamin E 
therapy is indicated for these rare patients. Vitamin B1 
and B12 levels in serum should be measured, and the 
vitamins administered to patients having deficient 
levels. Hypothyroidism is easily treated. The cerebro-
spinal fluid should be tested for a syphilitic infection 
in patients with progressive ataxia and other fea-
tures of tabes dorsalis. Similarly, antibody titers for 
Lyme disease and Legionella should be measured and 
appropriate antibiotic therapy should be instituted in 
antibody-positive patients. Aminoacidopathies, leuko-
dystrophies, urea-cycle abnormalities, and mitochon-
drial encephalomyopathies may produce ataxia, and 
some dietary or metabolic therapies are available for 
these disorders. The deleterious effects of phenytoin 
and alcohol on the cerebellum are well known, and 
these exposures should be avoided in patients with 
ataxia of any cause.
There is no proven therapy for any of the autosomal 
dominant ataxias (SCA1 to SCA28). There is preliminary 
evidence that idebenone, a free-radical scavenger, can 
improve myocardial hypertrophy in patients with clas-
sic Friedreich ataxia; there is no current evidence, how-
ever, that it improves neurologic function. A small pre-
liminary study in a mixed population of patients with 
different inherited ataxias raised the possibility that the 
glutamate antagonist riluzole may offer modest benefit. 
Iron chelators and antioxidant drugs are potentially 
harmful in Friedreich’s patients as they may increase 
heart muscle injury. Acetazolamide can reduce the dura-
tion of symptoms of episodic ataxia. At present, identi-
fication of an at-risk person’s genotype, together with 
appropriate family and genetic counseling, can reduce 
the incidence of these cerebellar syndromes in future 
generations.
 Robert H. Brown, Jr. 
370
 AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common 
form of progressive motor neuron disease. It is a prime 
example of a neurodegenerative disease and is arguably 
the most devastating of the neurodegenerative disorders. 
 PATHOLOGY 
 The pathologic hallmark of motor neuron degenerative 
disorders is death of lower motor neurons (consisting of 
anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and their brainstem 
homologues innervating bulbar muscles) and upper, or 
corticospinal, motor neurons (originating in layer ﬁ ve 
of the motor cortex and descending via the pyrami-
dal tract to synapse with lower motor neurons, either 
directly or indirectly via interneurons) ( Chap. 12 ). 
Although at its onset ALS may involve selective loss 
of function of only upper or lower motor neurons, it 
ultimately causes progressive loss of both categories of 
motor neurons. Indeed, in the absence of clear involve-
ment of both motor neuron types, the diagnosis of ALS 
is questionable. 
 Other motor neuron diseases involve only particu-
lar subsets of motor neurons  ( Tables 32-1  and  32-2 ) . 
Thus, in bulbar palsy and spinal muscular atrophy 
(SMA; also called  progressive muscular atrophy ), the lower 
motor neurons of brainstem and spinal cord, respec-
tively, are most severely involved. By contrast, pseudo-
bulbar palsy, primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), and familial 
spastic paraplegia (FSP) affect only upper motor neurons 
innervating the brainstem and spinal cord. 
 In each of these diseases, the affected motor neu-
rons undergo shrinkage, often with accumulation of the 
pigmented lipid (lipofuscin) that normally develops in 
these cells with advancing age. In ALS, the motor neu-
ron cytoskeleton is typically affected early in the illness. 
 AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS AND 
OTHER MOTOR NEURON DISEASES 
 CHAPTER 32 
Focal enlargements are frequent in proximal motor 
axons; ultrastructurally, these “spheroids” are composed 
of accumulations of neuroﬁ laments and other proteins. 
Also seen is proliferation of astroglia and microglia, the 
inevitable accompaniment of all degenerative processes 
in the central nervous system (CNS). 
 The death of the peripheral motor neurons in the 
brainstem and spinal cord leads to denervation and con-
sequent atrophy of the corresponding muscle ﬁ bers. 
Histochemical and electrophysiologic evidence indi-
cates that in the early phases of the illness denervated 
muscle can be reinnervated by sprouting of nearby dis-
tal motor nerve terminals, although reinnervation in this 
disease is considerably less extensive than in most other 
disorders affecting motor neurons (e.g., poliomyelitis, 
peripheral neuropathy). As denervation progresses, mus-
cle atrophy is readily recognized in muscle biopsies and 
on clinical examination. This is the basis for the term 
amyotrophy . The loss of cortical motor neurons results 
in thinning of the corticospinal tracts that travel via the 
internal capsule  ( Fig. 32-1 ) and brainstem to the lateral 
and anterior white matter columns of the spinal cord. 
The loss of ﬁ bers in the lateral columns and resulting 
ﬁ brillary gliosis impart a particular ﬁ rmness ( lateral scle-
rosis ). A remarkable feature of the disease is the selec-
tivity of neuronal cell death. By light microscopy, the 
entire sensory apparatus, the regulatory mechanisms for 
the control and coordination of movement, and the 
components of the brain that are needed for cognitive 
processes, remain intact. However, immunostaining 
indicates that neurons bearing ubiquitin, a marker for 
degeneration, are also detected in nonmotor systems. 
Moreover, studies of glucose metabolism in the illness 
also indicate that there is neuronal dysfunction outside 
of the motor system. Within the motor system, there 
is some selectivity of involvement. Thus, motor neu-
rons required for ocular motility remain unaffected, as 
 
CHAPTER 32
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
371
do the parasympathetic neurons in the sacral spinal cord 
(the nucleus of Onufrowicz, or Onuf) that innervate the 
sphincters of the bowel and bladder.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The manifestations of ALS are somewhat variable 
depending on whether corticospinal neurons or lower 
motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord are 
more prominently involved. With lower motor neu-
ron dysfunction and early denervation, typically the ﬁrst 
evidence of the disease is insidiously developing asym-
metric weakness, usually ﬁrst evident distally in one of 
the limbs. A detailed history often discloses recent devel-
opment of cramping with volitional movements, typically 
in the early hours of the morning (e.g., while stretching 
in bed). Weakness caused by denervation is associated 
with progressive wasting and atrophy of muscles and, 
particularly early in the illness, spontaneous twitching of 
motor units, or fasciculations. In the hands, a preponder-
ance of extensor over ﬂexor weakness is common. When 
the initial denervation involves bulbar rather than limb 
TABLE 32-1
ETIOLOGY OF MOTOR NEURON DISORDERS
DIAGNOSTIC CATEGORY
INVESTIGATION
Structural lesions
 Parasagittal or foramen magnum tumors
 Cervical spondylosis
 Chiari malformation of syrinx
 Spinal cord arteriovenous malformation
MRI scan of head (including foramen magnum and cervi-
cal spine)
Infections
 Bacterial—tetanus, Lyme
 Viral—poliomyelitis, herpes zoster
 Retroviral—myelopathy
CSF exam, culture
Lyme titer
Anti-viral antibody
HTLV-1 titers
Intoxications, physical agents
 Toxins—lead, aluminum, others
 Drugs—strychnine, phenytoin
 Electric shock, x-irradiation
24-h urine for heavy metals
Serum lead level
Immunologic mechanisms
 Plasma cell dyscrasias
 Autoimmune polyradiculopathy
 Motor neuropathy with conduction block
 Paraneoplastic
 Paracarcinomatous
Complete blood counta
Sedimentation ratea
Total proteina
Anti-GM1 antibodiesa
Anti-Hu antibody
MRI scan, bone marrow biopsy
Metabolic
 Hypoglycemia
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Hyperthyroidism
 Deﬁciency of folate, vitamin B12, vitamin E
 Deﬁciency of copper, zinc
 Malabsorption
 Mitochondrial dysfunction
Fasting blood sugara
Routine chemistries including calciuma
PTH
Thyroid functiona
Vitamin B12, vitamin E, folatea
Serum zinc, coppera
24-h stool fat, carotene, prothrombin time
Fasting lactate, pyruvate, ammonia
Consider mtDNA
Hyperlipidemia
Lipid electrophoresis
Hyperglycinuria
Urine and serum amino acids
CSF amino acids
Hereditary disorders
 Superoxide dismutase
 TDP43
 FUS/TLS
 Androgen receptor defect (Kennedy’s disease)
 Hexosaminidase deﬁciency
 Infantile α-glucosidase deﬁciency (Pompe’s)
WBC DNA for mutational analysis
aDenotes studies that should be obtained in all cases.
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; FUS/TLS, fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma; HTLV-1, human T cell lymphotropic virus; 
PTH, parathyroid; WBC, white blood cell.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
372
muscles, the problem at onset is difﬁculty with chew-
ing, swallowing, and movements of the face and tongue. 
Early involvement of the muscles of respiration may lead 
to death before the disease is far advanced elsewhere. 
With prominent corticospinal involvement, there is 
hyperactivity of the muscle-stretch reﬂexes (tendon jerks) 
and, often, spastic resistance to passive movements of the 
affected limbs. Patients with signiﬁcant reﬂex hyperactiv-
ity complain of muscle stiffness often out of proportion to 
weakness. Degeneration of the corticobulbar projections 
innervating the brainstem results in dysarthria and exag-
geration of the motor expressions of emotion. The latter 
leads to involuntary excess in weeping or laughing (pseu-
dobulbar affect).
Virtually any muscle group may be the ﬁrst to show 
signs of disease, but, as time passes, more and more mus-
cles become involved until ultimately the disorder takes 
on a symmetric distribution in all regions. It is character-
istic of ALS that, regardless of whether the initial disease 
involves upper or lower motor neurons, both will even-
tually be implicated. Even in the late stages of the illness, 
sensory, bowel and bladder, and cognitive functions are 
preserved. Even when there is severe brainstem disease, 
ocular motility is spared until the very late stages of the 
illness. Dementia is not a component of sporadic ALS. In 
some families, ALS is co-inherited with frontotemporal 
dementia, characterized by early behavioral abnormalities 
with prominent behavioral features indicative of frontal 
lobe dysfunction.
A committee of the World Federation of Neurology 
has established diagnostic guidelines for ALS. Essen-
tial for the diagnosis is simultaneous upper and lower 
motor neuron involvement with progressive weakness, 
and the exclusion of all alternative diagnoses. The dis-
order is ranked as “deﬁnite” ALS when three or four 
of the following are involved: bulbar, cervical, thoracic, 
and lumbosacral motor neurons. When two sites are 
involved, the diagnosis is “probable,” and when only 
one site is implicated, the diagnosis is “possible.” An 
exception is made for those who have progressive upper 
and lower motor neuron signs at only one site and a 
mutation in the gene encoding superoxide dismutase 
(SOD1; see later).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The illness is relentlessly progressive, leading to death 
from respiratory paralysis; the median survival is from 
3–5 years. There are very rare reports of stabilization 
or even regression of ALS. In most societies there is an 
incidence of 1–3 per 100,000 and a prevalence of 3–5 
per 100,000. Several endemic foci of higher prevalence 
exist in the western Paciﬁc (e.g., in speciﬁc regions of 
Guam or Papua New Guinea). In the United States and 
Europe, males are somewhat more frequently affected 
FIGURE 32-1 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Axial T2-weighted MRI scan 
through the lateral ventricles of the brain reveals abnormal 
high signal intensity within the corticospinal tracts (arrows). 
This MRI feature represents an increase in water content in 
myelin tracts undergoing Wallerian degeneration second-
ary to cortical motor neuronal loss. This ﬁnding is com-
monly present in ALS, but can also be seen in AIDS-related 
encephalopathy, infarction, or other disease processes that 
produce corticospinal neuronal loss in a symmetric fashion.
TABLE 32-2
SPORADIC MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
Chronic
Upper and lower motor neuron
Predominantly upper motor 
neuron
Predominantly lower motor 
neuron
Entity
Amyotrophic lateral  
sclerosis
Primary lateral sclerosis
Multifocal motor neu-
ropathy with conduction 
block
Motor neuropathy with 
paraproteinemia or  
cancer
Motor predominant 
peripheral neuropathies
Other
Associated with other neurodegenerative disorders
Secondary motor neuron disorders (see Table 32-1)
Acute
Poliomyelitis
Herpes zoster
Coxsackie virus
 
CHAPTER 32
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
373
than females. Epidemiologic studies have incriminated 
risk factors for this disease including exposure to pes-
ticides and insecticides, smoking, and, in one report, 
service in the military. While ALS is overwhelmingly a 
sporadic disorder, some 5–10% of cases are inherited as 
an autosomal dominant trait.
FAMILIAL ALS
Several forms of selective motor neuron disease are 
inheritable (Table 32-3). Familial ALS (FALS) involves 
both corticospinal and lower motor neurons. Apart 
from its inheritance as an autosomal dominant trait, it is 
clinically indistinguishable from sporadic ALS. Genetic 
studies have identiﬁed mutations in the genes encod-
ing the cytosolic enzyme SOD1 (superoxide dismutase), 
and the RNA binding proteins TDP43 (encoded by 
the TAR DNA binding protein gene), and FUS/TLS 
(fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma), as the 
most common causes of FALS. Mutations in SOD1 
account for about 20% of cases of FALS, while TDP43 
and FUS/TLS each represent about 5% of familial cases.
Rare mutations in other genes are also clearly impli-
cated in ALS-like diseases. Thus, a familial, dominantly 
inherited motor disorder that in some individuals closely 
mimics the ALS phenotype arises from mutations in a 
gene that encodes a vesicle-binding protein. A predom-
inantly lower motor neuron disease with early hoarse-
ness due to laryngeal dysfunction has been ascribed to 
mutations in the gene encoding the cellular accessory 
motor protein dynactin. Mutations in senataxin, a heli-
case, cause an early adult-onset, slowly evolving ALS 
variant. Kennedy’s syndrome is an X-linked, adult-
onset disorder that may mimic ALS, as described later.
Genetic analyses are also beginning to illuminate the 
pathogenesis of some childhood-onset motor neuron 
diseases. For example, a slowly disabling degenerative, 
predominantly upper motor neuron disease that starts in 
the ﬁrst decade is caused by mutations in a gene that 
expresses a novel signaling molecule with properties of a 
guanine-exchange factor, termed alsin.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Because ALS is currently untreatable, it is imperative 
that potentially remediable causes of motor neuron dys-
function be excluded (Table  32-1). This is particularly 
true in cases that are atypical by virtue of (1) restriction 
to either upper or lower motor neurons, (2) involve-
ment of neurons other than motor neurons, and (3) 
evidence of motor neuronal conduction block on elec-
trophysiologic testing. Compression of the cervical spi-
nal cord or cervicomedullary junction from tumors in 
the cervical regions or at the foramen magnum or from 
cervical spondylosis with osteophytes projecting into 
the vertebral canal can produce weakness, wasting, and 
fasciculations in the upper limbs and spasticity in the 
legs, closely resembling ALS. The absence of cranial 
nerve involvement may be helpful in differentiation, 
although some foramen magnum lesions may compress 
the twelfth cranial (hypoglossal) nerve, with resulting 
paralysis of the tongue. Absence of pain or of sensory 
changes, normal bowel and bladder function, normal 
roentgenographic studies of the spine, and normal cere-
brospinal ﬂuid (CSF) all favor ALS. Where doubt exists, 
MRI scans and contrast myelography should be per-
formed to visualize the cervical spinal cord.
Another important entity in the differential diagnosis 
of ALS is multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block 
(MMCB), discussed later. A diffuse, lower motor axonal 
neuropathy mimicking ALS sometimes evolves in asso-
ciation with hematopoietic disorders such as lymphoma 
or multiple myeloma. In this clinical setting, the pres-
ence of an M-component in serum should prompt con-
sideration of a bone marrow biopsy. Lyme disease may 
also cause an axonal, lower motor neuropathy, although 
typically with intense proximal limb pain and a CSF 
pleocytosis.
Other treatable disorders that occasionally mimic 
ALS are chronic lead poisoning and thyrotoxicosis. 
These disorders may be suggested by the patient’s social 
or occupational history or by unusual clinical features. 
When the family history is positive, disorders involv-
ing the genes encoding cytosolic SOD1, TDP43, FUS/
TLS, as well as adult hexosaminidase A or α-glucosidase 
deﬁciency must be excluded. These are readily identi-
ﬁed by appropriate laboratory tests. Benign fascicula-
tions are occasionally a source of concern because on 
inspection they resemble the fascicular twitchings that 
accompany motor neuron degeneration. The absence 
of weakness, atrophy, or denervation phenomena on 
electrophysiologic examination usually excludes ALS 
or other serious neurologic disease. Patients who have 
recovered from poliomyelitis may experience a delayed 
deterioration of motor neurons that presents clinically 
with progressive weakness, atrophy, and fasciculations. 
Its cause is unknown, but it is thought to reﬂect sub-
lethal prior injury to motor neurons by poliovirus.
Rarely, ALS develops concurrently with features 
indicative of more widespread neurodegeneration. 
Thus, one infrequently encounters otherwise typical 
ALS patients with a parkinsonian movement disorder 
or dementia. It remains unclear whether this reﬂects 
the unlikely simultaneous occurrence of two disorders 
or a primary defect triggering two forms of neuro-
degeneration. The latter is suggested by the observa-
tion that multisystem neurodegenerative diseases may 
be inherited. For example, prominent amyotrophy 
has been described as a dominantly inherited disorder 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
374
TABLE 32-3
GENETIC MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
DISEASE
LOCUS
GENE
INHERITANCE
ONSET
GENE FUNCTION
UNUSUAL 
FEATURES
I. Upper and Lower Motor Neurons (familial ALS)
ALS1
21q
Superoxide  
dismutase
AD
Adult
Protein anti-  
oxidant
ALS2
2q
Alsin
AR
Juvenile
GEF signalling
Severe cor-
ticobulbar, 
corticospinal 
features
ALS4
9q
Senataxin
AD
Late juvenile
DNA helicase
Late childhood 
onset
ALS6
16p
FUS/TLS
AD
Adult
DNA, RNA bind-
ing
ALS8
20q
Vesicle-associ-
ated protein B
AD
Adult
Vesicular traf-
ﬁcking
ALS9
14q
Angiogenin
AD
Adult
RNAse, angio-
genesis
ALS10
1q
TARDBP
AD
Adult
DNA, RNA  
binding
ALS
2p
Dynactin
AD
Adult
Axonal trans-
port
Vocal cord  
stridor in some 
families
ALS
17q
Paraoxonases 
1-3
AD
Adult
Detoxify  
intoxicants
ALS
mtDNA
Cytochrome c 
oxidase
Adult
ATP generation
ALS
mtDNA
tRNA-isoleucine
Adult
ATP generation
II. Lower Motor Neurons
Spinal muscular 
atrophies
5q
Survival motor 
neuron
AR
Infancy
RNA metabo-
lism
GM2-gangliosi-
dosis
1.  Sandhoff  
disease
5q
Hexosamini-
dase B
AR
Childhood
Ganglioside 
recycling
2. AB variant
5q
GM2-activator 
protein
AR
Childhood
Ganglioside 
recycling
3.  Adult Tay-
Sachs disease
15q
Hexosamini-
dase A
AR
Childhood
Ganglioside 
recycling
X-linked spino-
bulbar muscu-
lar atrophy
Xq
Androgen 
receptor
XR
Adult
Nuclear signal-
ling
III. Upper Motor Neuron (Selected FSPs)
SPG3A
14q
Atlastin
AD
Childhood
GTPase— 
vesicle  
recycling
Some periph-
eral neuropa-
thy
SPG4
2p
Spastin
AD
Early adulthood
ATPase family—
microtubule 
associate
± mental retar-
dation, motor 
neuropathy
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 32
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
375
TABLE 32-3
GENETIC MOTOR NEURON DISEASES (CONTINUED)
DISEASE
LOCUS
GENE
INHERITANCE
ONSET
GENE FUNCTION
UNUSUAL 
FEATURES
SPG6
15q
NIPA1
AD
Early adulthood
Membrane 
transporter or 
receptor
Deleted in 
Prader-Willi, 
Angelman
SPG8
8q
Strumpellin
AD
Early adulthood
Ubiquitous, 
spectrin-like
SPG10
12q
Kinesin heavy 
chain KIF5A
AD
2nd–3rd decade
Motor-associ-
ated protein
± peripheral 
neuropathy, 
retardation
SPG13
2q
Heat shock pro-
tein 60
AD
Early adulthood
Chaperone  
protein
SPG17
11q
Silver (BSCL2)
AD
Variable
Membrane pro-
tein in ER
Amyotrophy 
hands, feet
SPG31
2p
REEP1
AD
Early
Mitochondrial 
protein
Rarely, amyo-
trophy
SPG33
10q
ZFYVE27
AD
Adult
Interacts with 
spastin
Pes equinus
SPG42
3q
Acetyl-CoA-
transporter
AD
Variable
Solute carrier
SPG5
8q
Cytochrome 
P450
AR
Variable
Degrades 
endogenous 
substances
Sensory loss
SPG7
16q
Paraplegin
AR
Variable
Mitochondrial 
protein
Rarely, optic 
atrophy, ataxia, 
neuropathy
SPG11
15q
Spatacsin
AR
Childhood
Cytosolic, ? 
membrane-
associated
Some sensory 
loss, thin cor-
pus callosum
SPG15
14q
Spastizin
AR
Childhood
Zinc ﬁnger pro-
tein
Some amyo- 
trophy, some 
CNS features 
including thin 
corpus callosum
SPG20
13q
Spartin
AR
Childhood
Endosomal-traf-
ﬁcking protein
Cerebellar, 
extrapyramidal 
signs, short 
stature, MR
SPG21
15q
Maspardin
AR
Childhood
Endosomal-traf-
ﬁcking protein
Cerebellar, 
extrapyramidal 
signs, short 
stature, MR
SPG35
16q
Fatty acid 2 
hydrolase
AR
Childhood
Membrane pro-
tein
Multiple CNS 
features
SPG39
19p
Neuropathy tar-
get esterase
AR
Early childhood
Esterase
SPG44
1q
Connexin 47
AR
Childhood
Gap junction 
protein
Possible mild 
CNS features
SPG2
Xq
Proteolipid pro-
tein
XR
Early childhood
Myelin protein
Sometimes 
multiple CNS 
features
(continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
376
TABLE 32-3
GENETIC MOTOR NEURON DISEASES (CONTINUED)
DISEASE
LOCUS
GENE
INHERITANCE
ONSET
GENE FUNCTION
UNUSUAL 
FEATURES
SPG1
Xq
L1-CAM
XR
Infancy
Cell-adhesion 
molecule
Xq
Adrenoleuko-
dystrophy
XR
Early adulthood
ATP-binding 
transporter 
protein
Possible adre-
nal insuf-
ﬁciency, CNS 
inﬂammation
IV. ALS-Plus Syndromes
Amyotrophy 
with behavioral 
disorders
17q
Tau protein
Parkinsonism
Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; BSCL2, Bernadelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy 2B; FSP, familial spastic paraplegia; FUS/
TLS, fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma; TDP43, Tar DNA binding protein 43 kd.
in individuals with bizarre behavior and a move-
ment disorder suggestive of parkinsonism; many such 
cases have now been ascribed to mutations that alter 
the expression of tau protein in brain (Chap. 29). In 
other cases, ALS develops simultaneously with a strik-
ing frontotemporal dementia. These disorders may be 
dominantly co-inherited; in some families, this trait 
is linked to a locus on chromosome 9p, although the 
underlying genetic defect is not established. An ALS-
like disorder has also been described in some individu-
als with chronic traumatic encephalopathy, associated 
with deposition of TDP43 and neuroﬁbrillary tangles 
in motor neurons.
PATHOGENESIS
The cause of sporadic ALS is not well deﬁned. Several 
mechanisms that impair motor neuron viability have 
been elucidated in mice and rats induced to develop 
motor neuron disease by SOD1 transgenes with ALS-
associated mutations. It is evident that excitotoxic neu-
rotransmitters such as glutamate participate in the death 
of motor neurons in ALS. This may be a consequence 
of diminished uptake of synaptic glutamate by an astro-
glial glutamate transporter, EAAT2. It is striking that 
one cellular defense against such excitotoxicity is the 
enzyme SOD1, which detoxiﬁes the free radical super-
oxide anion. Precisely why SOD1 mutations are toxic 
to motor nerves is not established, although it is clear 
the effect is not simply loss of normal scavenging of the 
superoxide anion. The mutant protein is conformation-
ally unstable and prone to aberrant catalytic reactions. 
In turn, these features lead to aggregation of SOD1 
protein, impairment of axonal transport, reduced pro-
duction of ATP and other perturbations of mitochon-
drial function, activation of neuroinﬂammatory cascades 
within the ALS spinal cord, and ultimately induction of 
cell death via pathways that are at least partially depen-
dent on caspases.
It has recently been observed that mutations in the 
TDP43 and FUS/TLS genes also cause ALS. These 
multifunctional proteins bind RNA and DNA and 
shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, playing 
multiple roles in the control of cell proliferation, DNA 
repair and transcription, and gene translation, both in 
the cytoplasm and locally in dendritic spines in response 
to electrical activity. How mutations in FUS/TLS pro-
voke motor neuron cell death is not clear, although 
this may represent loss of function of FUS/TLS in the 
nucleus or an acquired, toxic function of the mutant 
proteins in the cytosol.
Multiple recent studies have convincingly demon-
strated that non-neuronal cells importantly inﬂuence 
the disease course, at least in ALS transgenic mice. A 
striking additional ﬁnding in neurodegenerative disor-
ders is that miscreant proteins arising from gene defects 
in familial forms of these diseases are often implicated 
in sporadic forms of the same disorder. For example, 
germline mutations in the genes encoding beta-amyloid 
and alpha-synuclein cause familial forms of Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s diseases (AD and PD), and posttrans-
lational, noninherited abnormalities in these proteins 
are also central to sporadic AD and PD. Analogously, 
recent reports propose that nonheritable, posttransla-
tional modiﬁcations in SOD1 are pathogenic in spo-
radic ALS.
 
CHAPTER 32
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
377
TREATMENT 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
No treatment arrests the underlying pathologic process in 
ALS. The drug riluzole (100 mg/d) was approved for ALS 
because it produces a modest lengthening of survival. In 
one trial, the survival rate at 18 months with riluzole was 
similar to placebo at 15 months. The mechanism of this 
effect is not known with certainty; riluzole may reduce 
excitotoxicity by diminishing glutamate release. Riluzole 
is generally well tolerated; nausea, dizziness, weight loss, 
and elevated liver enzymes occur occasionally. Pathophysi-
ologic studies of mutant SOD1–related ALS in mice have 
disclosed diverse targets for therapy; consequently, mul-
tiple therapies are presently in clinical trials for ALS. These 
include studies of ceftriaxone, which may augment astro-
glial glutamate transport and thereby be anti-excitotoxic, 
and pramipexole and tamoxifen, which are neuroprotec-
tive. Interventions such as antisense oligonucleotides 
(ASO) that diminish expression of mutant SOD1 protein 
prolong survival in transgenic ALS mice and rats and are 
also now in trial for SOD1-mediated ALS.
In the absence of a primary therapy for ALS, a vari-
ety of rehabilitative aids may substantially assist ALS 
patients. Foot-drop splints facilitate ambulation by obvi-
ating the need for excessive hip flexion and by prevent-
ing tripping on a floppy foot. Finger extension splints 
can potentiate grip. Respiratory support may be life- 
sustaining. For patients electing against long-term ven-
tilation by tracheostomy, positive-pressure ventilation 
by mouth or nose provides transient (several weeks) 
relief from hypercarbia and hypoxia. Also extremely 
beneficial for some patients is a respiratory device 
(Cough Assist Device) that produces an artificial cough. 
This is highly effective in clearing airways and prevent-
ing aspiration pneumonia. When bulbar disease pre-
vents normal chewing and swallowing, gastrostomy is 
uniformly helpful, restoring normal nutrition and hydra-
tion. Fortunately, an increasing variety of speech syn-
thesizers are now available to augment speech when 
there is advanced bulbar palsy. These facilitate oral com-
munication and may be effective for telephone use.
In contrast to ALS, several of the disorders (Tables 
32-1 and 32-3) that bear some clinical resemblance to 
ALS are treatable. For this reason, a careful search for 
causes of secondary motor neuron disease is warranted.
OTHER MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
SELECTED LOWER MOTOR NEURON 
DISORDERS
In these motor neuron diseases, the peripheral motor 
neurons are affected without evidence of involvement 
of the corticospinal motor system (Tables 32-1 to 32-3).
X-Linked spinobulbar muscular atrophy 
(Kennedy’s disease)
This is an X-linked lower motor neuron disorder in 
which progressive weakness and wasting of limb and 
bulbar muscles begins in males in mid-adult life and 
is conjoined with androgen insensitivity manifested 
by gynecomastia and reduced fertility. In addition to 
gynecomastia, which may be subtle, two ﬁndings dis-
tinguishing this disorder from ALS are the absence of 
signs of pyramidal tract disease (spasticity) and the pres-
ence of a subtle sensory neuropathy in some patients. 
The underlying molecular defect is an expanded trinu-
cleotide repeat (-CAG-) in the ﬁrst exon of the andro-
gen receptor gene on the X chromosome. DNA test-
ing is available. An inverse correlation appears to exist 
between the number of -CAG- repeats and the age of 
onset of the disease.
Adult Tay-Sach’s disease
Several reports have described adult-onset, predomi-
nantly lower motor neuropathies arising from deﬁ-
ciency of the enzyme β-hexosaminidase (hex A). These 
tend to be distinguishable from ALS because they are 
very slowly progressive; dysarthria and radiographically 
evident cerebellar atrophy may be prominent. In rare 
cases, spasticity may also be present, although it is gen-
erally absent.
Spinal muscular atrophy
The SMAs are a family of selective lower motor neuron 
diseases of early onset. Despite some phenotypic vari-
ability (largely in age of onset), the defect in the majority 
of families with SMA maps to a locus on chromosome 
5 encoding a putative motor neuron survival protein 
(SMN, for survival motor neuron) that is important in 
the formation and trafﬁcking of RNA complexes across 
the nuclear membrane. Neuropathologically these dis-
orders are characterized by extensive loss of large motor 
neurons; muscle biopsy reveals evidence of denervation 
atrophy. Several clinical forms exist.
Infantile SMA (SMA I, Werdnig-Hoffmann disease) 
has the earliest onset and most rapidly fatal course. In 
some instances it is apparent even before birth, as indi-
cated by decreased fetal movements late in the third 
trimester. Though alert, afﬂicted infants are weak and 
ﬂoppy (hypotonic) and lack muscle stretch reﬂexes. 
Death generally ensues within the ﬁrst year of life. 
Chronic childhood SMA (SMA II) begins later in child-
hood and evolves with a more slowly progressive 
course. Juvenile SMA (SMA III, Kugelberg-Welander 
disease) manifests during late childhood and runs a slow, 
indolent course. Unlike most denervating diseases, in 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
378
this chronic disorder weakness is greatest in the proxi-
mal muscles; indeed, the pattern of clinical weakness 
can suggest a primary myopathy such as limb-girdle dys-
trophy. Electrophysiologic and muscle biopsy evidence 
of denervation distinguish SMA III from the myopathic 
syndromes. There is no primary therapy for SMA, 
although remarkable recent experimental data indicate 
that it may be possible to deliver the missing SMN gene 
to motor neurons using intravenously delivered adeno-
associated viruses (e.g., AAV9) immediately after birth.
Multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction 
block
In this disorder lower motor neuron function is region-
ally and chronically disrupted by remarkably focal 
blocks in conduction. Many cases have elevated serum 
titers of mono- and polyclonal antibodies to ganglioside 
GM1; it is hypothesized that the antibodies produce 
selective, focal, paranodal demyelination of motor neu-
rons. MMCB is not typically associated with corticospi-
nal signs. In contrast with ALS, MMCB may respond 
dramatically to therapy such as IV immunoglobulin or 
chemotherapy; it is thus imperative that MMCB be 
excluded when considering a diagnosis of ALS.
Other forms of lower motor neuron disease
In individual families, other syndromes character-
ized by selective lower motor neuron dysfunction in 
an SMA-like pattern have been described. There are 
rare X-linked and autosomal dominant forms of appar-
ent SMA. There is an ALS variant of juvenile onset, 
the Fazio-Londe syndrome, that involves mainly the 
musculature innervated by the brainstem. A compo-
nent of lower motor neuron dysfunction is also found 
in degenerative disorders such as Machado-Joseph dis-
ease and the related olivopontocerebellar degenerations 
(Chap. 31).
SELECTED DISORDERS OF THE UPPER 
MOTOR NEURON
Primary lateral sclerosis
This exceedingly rare disorder arises sporadically in 
adults in mid to late life. Clinically PLS is characterized 
by progressive spastic weakness of the limbs, preceded 
or followed by spastic dysarthria and dysphagia, indicat-
ing combined involvement of the corticospinal and cor-
ticobulbar tracts. Fasciculations, amyotrophy, and sen-
sory changes are absent; neither electromyography nor 
muscle biopsy shows denervation. On neuropathologic 
examination there is selective loss of the large pyramidal 
cells in the precentral gyrus and degeneration of the 
corticospinal and corticobulbar projections. The periph-
eral motor neurons and other neuronal systems are 
spared. The course of PLS is variable; while long-term 
survival is documented, the course may be as aggressive 
as in ALS, with ∼3-year survival from onset to death. 
Early in its course, PLS raises the question of multiple 
sclerosis or other demyelinating diseases such as adre-
noleukodystrophy as diagnostic considerations (Chap. 
39). A myelopathy suggestive of PLS is infrequently 
seen with infection with the retrovirus human T cell 
lymphotropic virus (HTLV-I) (Chap. 35). The clini-
cal course and laboratory testing will distinguish these 
possibilities.
Familial spastic paraplegia
In its pure form, FSP is usually transmitted as an auto-
somal trait; most adult-onset cases are dominantly 
inherited. Symptoms usually begin in the third or 
fourth decade, presenting as progressive spastic weak-
ness beginning in the distal lower extremities; however, 
there are variants with onset so early that the differen-
tial diagnosis includes cerebral palsy. FSP typically has a 
long survival, presumably because respiratory function is 
spared. Late in the illness there may be urinary urgency 
and incontinence and sometimes fecal incontinence; 
sexual function tends to be preserved.
In pure forms of FSP, the spastic leg weakness is 
often accompanied by posterior column (vibration and 
position) abnormalities and disturbance of bowel and 
bladder function. Some family members may have spas-
ticity without clinical symptoms.
By contrast, particularly when recessively inher-
ited, FSP may have complex or complicated forms in 
which altered corticospinal and dorsal column func-
tion is accompanied by signiﬁcant involvement of 
other regions of the nervous system, including amyo-
trophy, mental retardation, optic atrophy, and sensory 
neuropathy.
Neuropathologically, in FSP there is degeneration 
of the corticospinal tracts, which appear nearly normal 
in the brainstem but show increasing atrophy at more 
caudal levels in the spinal cord; in effect, the pathologic 
picture is of a dying-back or distal axonopathy of long 
neuronal ﬁbers within the CNS.
Defects at numerous loci underlie both dominantly 
and recessively inherited forms of FSP (Table  32-3). 
More than 20 FSP genes have now been identiﬁed. 
The gene most commonly implicated in dominantly 
inherited FSP is spastin, which encodes a microtubule 
interacting protein. The most common childhood-onset 
dominant form arises from mutations in the atlastin 
 
CHAPTER 32
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Diseases
379
gene. A kinesin heavy-chain protein implicated in 
microtubule motor function was found to be defective 
in a family with dominantly inherited FSP of variable 
onset age.
An infantile-onset form of X-linked, recessive FSP 
arises from mutations in the gene for myelin proteolipid 
protein. This is an example of rather striking allelic vari-
ation, as most other mutations in the same gene cause 
not FSP but Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a widespread 
disorder of CNS myelin. Another recessive variant is 
caused by defects in the paraplegin gene. Paraplegin has 
homology to metalloproteases that are important in 
mitochondrial function in yeast.
WEBSITES
Several websites provide valuable information on ALS 
including those offered by the Muscular Dystrophy Asso-
ciation (www.mdausa.org), the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclero-
sis Association (www.alsa.org), and the World Federation of 
Neurology and the Neuromuscular Unit at Washington 
University in St. Louis (www.neuro.wustl.edu/neuromuscular).
 Phillip A. Low  ■    John W. Engstrom 
380
 The autonomic nervous system (ANS) innervates the 
entire neuraxis and permeates all organ systems. It regu-
lates blood pressure (BP), heart rate, sleep, and bladder 
and bowel function. It operates automatically; its full 
importance becomes recognized only when ANS func-
tion is compromised, resulting in dysautonomia. Hypo-
thalamic disorders that cause disturbances in homeostasis 
are discussed in  Chap. 38. 
 ANATOMIC ORGANIZATION 
 The activity of the ANS is regulated by central neurons 
responsive to diverse afferent inputs. After central inte-
gration of afferent information, autonomic outﬂ ow is 
adjusted to permit the functioning of the major organ 
systems in accordance with the needs of the organism 
as a whole. Connections between the cerebral cortex 
and the autonomic centers in the brainstem coordinate 
autonomic outﬂ ow with higher mental functions. 
 The preganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic 
nervous system leave the central nervous system (CNS) 
in the third, seventh, ninth, and tenth cranial nerves 
as well as the second and third sacral nerves, while the 
preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem exit the spinal cord between the ﬁ rst thoracic and 
the second lumbar segments  ( Fig. 33-1 ) . These are 
thinly myelinated. The postganglionic neurons, located 
in ganglia outside the CNS, give rise to the postgan-
glionic unmyelinated autonomic nerves that innervate 
organs and tissues throughout the body. Responses to 
sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulation are fre-
quently antagonistic  ( Table 33-1 ) , reﬂ ecting highly 
coordinated interactions within the CNS; the resultant 
changes in parasympathetic and sympathetic activity 
provide more precise control of autonomic responses 
than could be achieved by the modulation of a single 
system. 
 Acetylcholine (ACh) is the preganglionic neurotrans-
mitter for both divisions of the ANS as well as the post-
ganglionic neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic neu-
rons; the preganglionic receptors are nicotinic, and the 
postganglionic are muscarinic in type. Norepinephrine 
(NE) is the neurotransmitter of the postganglionic sym-
pathetic neurons, except for cholinergic neurons inner-
vating the eccrine sweat glands. 
 CLINICAL EVALUATION 
 CLASSIFICATION 
 Disorders of the ANS may result from pathology of 
either the CNS or the peripheral nervous system (PNS) 
( Table 33-2 ) . Signs and symptoms may result from 
interruption of the afferent limb, CNS processing cen-
ters, or efferent limb of reﬂ ex arcs controlling auto-
nomic responses. For example, a lesion of the medulla 
produced by a posterior fossa tumor can impair BP 
responses to postural changes and result in orthostatic 
hypotension (OH). OH can also be caused by lesions 
of the spinal cord or peripheral vasomotor nerve ﬁ bers 
(e.g., diabetic autonomic neuropathy). Lesions of the 
efferent limb cause the most consistent and severe OH. 
The site of reﬂ ex interruption is usually established by 
the clinical context in which the dysautonomia arises, 
combined with judicious use of ANS testing and neuro-
imaging studies. The presence or absence of CNS signs, 
association with sensory or motor polyneuropathy, 
medical illnesses, medication use, and family history are 
often important considerations. Some syndromes do not 
ﬁ t easily into any classiﬁ cation scheme. 
 DISORDERS OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 
 CHAPTER 33 
 
CHAPTER 33
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System
381
SYMPTOMS OF AUTONOMIC 
DYSFUNCTION
Clinical manifestations can result from loss of function, 
overactivity, or dysregulation of autonomic circuits. 
Disorders of autonomic function should be consid-
ered in all patients with unexplained orthostatic hypo-
tension, syncope, sleep dysfunction, altered sweating 
(hyperhidrosis or hypohidrosis), constipation, upper gas-
trointestinal symptoms (bloating, nausea, vomiting of 
old food), impotence, or bladder disorders (urinary fre-
quency, hesitancy, or incontinence). Symptoms may be 
widespread or regional in distribution. An autonomic his-
tory focuses on systemic functions (BP, heart rate, sleep, 
fever, sweating) and involvement of individual organ sys-
tems (pupils, bowel, bladder, sexual function). The auto-
nomic symptom proﬁle is a self-report questionnaire that 
can be used for formal assessment. It is also important to 
recognize the modulating effects of age. For example, 
OH typically produces lightheadedness in the young, 
whereas cognitive slowing is more common in the 
elderly. Speciﬁc symptoms of orthostatic intolerance are 
diverse (Table 33-3). Autonomic symptoms may vary 
dramatically, reﬂecting the dynamic nature of autonomic 
control over homeostatic function. For example, OH 
might be manifest only in the early morning, following 
a meal, with exercise, or with raised ambient tempera-
ture, depending upon the regional vascular bed affected 
by dysautonomia.
Early symptoms may be overlooked. Impotence, al- 
though not speciﬁc for autonomic failure, often heralds 
autonomic failure in men and may precede other symp-
toms by years. A decrease in the frequency of spon-
taneous early morning erections may occur months 
before loss of nocturnal penile tumescence and devel-
opment of total impotence. Bladder dysfunction may 
appear early in men and women, particularly in those 
with CNS involvement. Cold feet may indicate periph-
eral vasomotor constriction. Brain and spinal cord dis-
ease above the level of the lumbar spine results ﬁrst in 
A Ciliary ganglion
B Sphenopalatine
(pterygopalatine) ganglion
C Submandibular ganglion
D Otic ganglion
E Vagal ganglion cells
in the heart wall
F Vagal ganglion cells in
bowel wall
G Pelvic ganglia
H Superior cervical ganglion
J
Middle cervical ganglion and
inferior cervical (stellate)
ganglion including T1
ganglion
K Coeliac and other
abdominal ganglia
L Lower abdominal
sympathetic ganglia
Parasympathetic system
from cranial nerves III, VII, IX, X
and from sacral nerves 2 and 3
Sympathetic system
from T1-L2
Preganglionic fibers
Postganglionic fibers
T1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
L1
2
Parasympathetic 
Sympathetic 
A
B
C
Heart
E
Arm
Heart
Leg
G
D
Terminal ganglion
(coccygeal)
Sympathetic
chain
H
Bowel
Adrenal medulla
(preganglionic
supply)
Viscera
F
J
L
S2
3
K
III
VII IX
X
FIGURE 33-1 
Schematic representation of the autonomic nervous system. 
(From M Moskowitz: Clin Endocrinol Metab 6:77, 1977.)
TABLE 33-1
FUNCTIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF NORMAL ANS 
ACTIVATION
SYMPATHETIC
PARASYMPATHETIC
Heart rate
Increased
Decreased
Blood pressure
Increased
Mildly decreased
Bladder
Increased sphinc-
ter tone
Voiding (decreased 
tone)
Bowel motility
Decreased motility
Increased
Lung
Bronchodilation
Bronchoconstric-
tion
Sweat glands
Sweating
—
Pupils
Dilation
Constriction
Adrenal glands
Catecholamine 
release
—
Sexual function
Ejaculation, 
orgasm
Erection
Lacrimal glands
—
Tearing
Parotid glands
—
Salivation
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
382
urinary frequency and small bladder volumes and even-
tually in incontinence (upper motor neuron or spas-
tic bladder). By contrast, PNS disease of autonomic 
nerve ﬁbers results in large bladder volumes, urinary 
frequency, and overﬂow incontinence (lower motor 
neuron ﬂaccid bladder). Measurement of bladder vol-
ume (postvoid residual) is a useful bedside test for dis-
tinguishing between upper and lower motor neuron 
bladder dysfunction in the early stages of dysautonomia. 
Gastrointestinal autonomic dysfunction typically pres-
ents as severe constipation. Diarrhea occurs occasionally 
(as in diabetes mellitus) due to rapid transit of contents 
or uncoordinated small-bowel motor activity, or on an 
osmotic basis from bacterial overgrowth associated with 
small-bowel stasis. Impaired glandular secretory function 
may cause difﬁculty with food intake due to decreased 
salivation or eye irritation due to decreased lacrimation. 
Occasionally, temperature elevation and vasodilation 
TABLE 33-2
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINICAL AUTONOMIC DISORDERS
I. Autonomic disorders with brain involvement
 A. Associated with multisystem degeneration
 1.  Multisystem degeneration: autonomic failure  
clinically prominent
 a. Multiple system atrophy (MSA)
 b. Parkinson’s disease with autonomic failure
 c. Diffuse Lewy body disease (some cases)
 2.  Multisystem degeneration: autonomic failure  
clinically not usually prominent
 a. Parkinson’s disease
 b.  Other extrapyramidal disorders (inherited  
spinocerebellar atrophies, progressive  
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration,  
Machado-Joseph disease, fragile X syndrome  
[FXTAS])
 B.  Unassociated with multisystem degeneration  
(focal CNS disorders)
 1.  Disorders mainly due to cerebral cortex  
involvement
 a.  Frontal cortex lesions causing urinary/bowel  
incontinence
 b.  Partial complex seizures (temporal lobe or  
anterior cingulate)
c. Cerebral infarction of the insula
 2. Disorders of the limbic and paralimbic circuits
 a.  Shapiro’s syndrome (agenesis of corpus  
callosum, hyperhidrosis, hypothermia)
 b. Autonomic seizures
 c. Limbic encephalitis
 3. Disorders of the hypothalamus
 a. Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
 b. Diencephalic syndrome
 c. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
 d. Serotonin syndrome
 e. Fatal familial insomnia
 f.   Antidiuretic hormone syndromes (diabetes 
 insipidus, inappropriate ADH secretion)
 g.  Disturbances of temperature regulation  
(hyperthermia, hypothermia)
 h. Disturbances of sexual function
 i. Disturbances of appetite
 j.  Disturbances of BP/HR and gastric function
 k. Horner’s syndrome
 4. Disorders of the brainstem and cerebellum
 a. Posterior fossa tumors
 b. Syringobulbia and Arnold-Chiari malformation
 c.  Disorders of BP control (hypertension,  
hypotension)
 d. Cardiac arrhythmias
 e. Central sleep apnea
 f. Baroreﬂex failure
 g. Horner’s syndrome
 h.  Vertebrobasilar and Wallenberg syndromes
 i. Brainstem encephalitis
II.   Autonomic disorders with spinal cord involvement
A. Traumatic quadriplegia
B. Syringomyelia
C. Subacute combined degeneration
D. Multiple sclerosis and Devic’s disease
E. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
F. Tetanus
G. Stiff-man syndrome
H. Spinal cord tumors
III. Autonomic neuropathies
A. Acute/subacute autonomic neuropathies
1.  Subacute autoimmune autonomic  
ganglionopathy (AAG)
a.  Subacute paraneoplastic autonomic  
neuropathy
b. Guillain-Barré syndrome
c. Botulism
d. Porphyria
e.  Drug-induced autonomic  
neuropathies-stimulants, drug withdrawal, 
vasoconstrictor, vasodilators, beta-receptor 
antagonists, beta-agonists
f. Toxic autonomic neuropathies
g. Subacute cholinergic neuropathy
B. Chronic peripheral autonomic neuropathies
1. Distal small ﬁber neuropathy
2.  Combined sympathetic and parasympathetic 
failure
a. Amyloid
b. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
c.  Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy  
(paraneoplastic and idiopathic)
d. Sensory neuronopathy with autonomic failure
e. Familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day syndrome)
f. Diabetic, uremic, or nutritional deﬁciency
g. Dysautonomia of old age
3.  Disorders of reduced orthostatic intolerance-reﬂex 
syncope, POTS, associated with prolonged bed 
rest, associated with space ﬂight, chronic fatigue
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate; POTS, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome.
 
CHAPTER 33
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System
383
can result from anhidrosis because sweating is normally 
important for heat dissipation. Lack of sweating after a 
hot bath, during exercise, or on a hot day can suggest 
sudomotor failure.
OH (also called orthostatic or postural hypotension) is 
perhaps the most disabling feature of autonomic dys-
function. The prevalence of OH is relatively high, espe-
cially when OH associated with aging and diabetes mel-
litus is included (Table 33-4). OH can cause a variety 
of symptoms, including dimming or loss of vision, light-
headedness, diaphoresis, diminished hearing, pallor, and 
weakness. Syncope results when the drop in BP impairs 
cerebral perfusion. Other manifestations of impaired 
baroreﬂexes are supine hypertension, a heart rate that 
is ﬁxed regardless of posture, postprandial hypotension, 
and an excessively high nocturnal BP. Many patients 
with OH have a preceding diagnosis of hypertension or 
have concomitant supine hypertension, reﬂecting the 
great importance of baroreﬂexes in maintaining postural 
and supine normotension. The appearance of OH in 
patients receiving antihypertensive treatment may indi-
cate overtreatment or the onset of an autonomic dis-
order. The most common causes of OH are not neu-
rologic in origin; these must be distinguished from the 
neurogenic causes (Table 33-5). Neurocardiogenic and 
cardiac causes of syncope are considered in Chap. 10.
TABLE 33-3
SYMPTOMS OF ORTHOSTATIC INTOLERANCE
Lightheadedness (dizziness)
88%
Weakness or tiredness
72%
Cognitive difﬁculty (thinking/concentrating)
47%
Blurred vision
47%
Tremulousness
38%
Vertigo
37%
Pallor
31%
Anxiety
29%
Palpitations
26%
Clammy feeling
19%
Nausea
18%
Source: From PA Low et al: Mayo Clin Proc 70:617, 1995.
TABLE 33-4
PREVALENCE OF ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION IN 
DIFFERENT DISORDERS
DISORDER
PREVALENCE
Aging
14–20%
Diabetic neuropathy
10%
Other autonomic neuropathies
10–50 per 100,000
Multiple system atrophy
5–15 per 100,000
Pure autonomic failure
10–30 per 100,000
TABLE 33-5
NONNEUROGENIC CAUSES OF ORTHOSTATIC 
HYPOTENSION
Cardiac pump failure
 Myocardial infarction
 Myocarditis
 Constrictive pericarditis
 Aortic stenosis
 Tachyarrhythmias
 Bradyarrhythmias
 Salt-losing nephropathy
 Adrenal insufﬁciency
 Diabetes insipidus
 Venous obstruction
Reduced intravascular 
volume
 Straining or heavy lifting, 
urination, defecation
 Dehydration
 Diarrhea, emesis
 Hemorrhage
 Burns
Metabolic
 Adrenocortical insufﬁ-
ciency
 Hypoaldosteronism
 Pheochromocytoma
 Severe potassium  
depletion
Venous pooling
 Alcohol
 Postprandial dilation of 
splanchnic vessel beds
 Vigorous exercise with 
dilation of skeletal vessel 
beds
 Heat: hot environment, 
hot showers and baths, 
fever
 Prolonged recumbency 
or standing
 Sepsis
Medications
 Antihypertensives
 Diuretics
 Vasodilators: nitrates, 
hydralazine
 Alpha- and beta-blocking 
agents
 CNS sedatives:  
barbiturates, opiates
 Tricyclic antidepressants
 Phenothiazines
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
 Orthostatic Hypotension and Other ANS 
Disorders
The first step in the evaluation of symptomatic OH is 
the exclusion of treatable causes. The history should 
include a review of medications that may affect the auto-
nomic system (Table 33-6). The main classes of drugs 
that may cause OH are diuretics, antihypertensives, 
antidepressants, phenothiazines, ethanol, narcotics, in- 
sulin, dopamine agonists, barbiturates, and calcium 
channel-blocking agents. However, the precipitation 
of OH by medications may also be the first sign of an 
underlying autonomic disorder. The history may reveal 
an underlying cause for symptoms (e.g., diabetes, Par-
kinson’s disease) or specific underlying mechanisms (e.g., 
cardiac pump failure, reduced intravascular volume). The 
relationship of symptoms to meals (splanchnic pooling), 
standing on awakening in the morning (intravascular 
volume depletion), ambient warming (vasodilatation), 
or exercise (muscle arteriolar vasodilatation) should be 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
384
sought. Standing time to first symptom and presyncope 
should be followed for management.
Physical examination includes measurement of supine 
and standing pulse and BP. OH is defined as a sustained 
drop in systolic (≥20 mmHg) or diastolic (≥10 mmHg) BP 
within 3 min of standing. In nonneurogenic causes of OH 
(such as hypovolemia), the BP drop is accompanied by a 
compensatory increase in heart rate of >15 beats/min. A 
clue that the patient has neurogenic OH is the aggravation 
or precipitation of OH by autonomic stressors (such as a 
meal, hot tub/hot bath, and exercise). Neurologic examina-
tion should include mental status (neurodegenerative dis-
orders), cranial nerves (impaired downgaze with progres-
sive supranuclear palsy; abnormal pupils with Horner’s or 
Adie’s syndrome), motor tone (Parkinson’s disease and par-
kinsonian syndromes), and reflexes and sensation (poly-
neuropathies). In patients without a clear diagnosis initially, 
follow-up evaluations may reveal the underlying cause.
Disorders of autonomic function should be consid-
ered in patients with symptoms of altered sweating 
(hyperhidrosis or hypohidrosis), gastroparesis (bloating, 
nausea, vomiting of old food), constipation, impotence, 
or bladder dysfunction (urinary frequency, hesitancy, or 
incontinence).
AUTONOMIC TESTING Autonomic function tests 
are helpful when the history and examination findings 
are inconclusive; to detect subclinical involvement; or to 
follow the course of an autonomic disorder.
Heart Rate Variation with Deep Breath-
ing This is a test of the parasympathetic component 
of cardiovascular reflexes, via the vagus nerve. Results 
are influenced by multiple factors including the sub-
ject’s position (recumbent, sitting, or standing), rate and 
depth of respiration (6 breaths per minute and a forced 
vital capacity [FVC] >1.5 L are optimal), age, medica-
tions, weight, and degree of hypocapnia. Interpretation 
of results requires comparison of test data with results 
from age-matched controls collected under identical 
test conditions. For example, the lower limit of normal 
heart rate variation with deep breathing in persons <20 
years is >15–20 beats/min, but for persons over age 
60 it is 5–8 beats/min. Heart rate variation with deep 
breathing (respiratory sinus arrhythmia) is abolished by 
the muscarinic acetylcholine (ACh)-receptor antagonist 
atropine but is unaffected by sympathetic postgangli-
onic blockade (e.g., propranolol).
Valsalva Response This response (Table 33-7) 
assesses integrity of the baroreflex control of heart 
rate (parasympathetic) and BP (adrenergic). Under nor-
mal conditions, increases in BP at the carotid bulb trig-
ger a reduction in heart rate (increased vagal tone), and 
decreases in BP trigger an increase in heart rate (reduced 
vagal tone). The Valsalva response is tested in the supine 
position. The subject exhales against a closed glottis (or 
into a manometer maintaining a constant expiratory 
pressure of 40 mmHg) for 15 s while measuring changes 
in heart rate and beat-to-beat BP. There are four phases 
of BP and heart rate response to the Valsalva maneuver. 
Phases I and III are mechanical and related to changes in 
intrathoracic and intraabdominal pressure. In early phase 
II, reduced venous return results in a fall in stroke volume 
and BP, counteracted by a combination of reflex tachycar-
dia and increased total peripheral resistance. Increased 
total peripheral resistance arrests the BP drop ∼5–8 s 
after the onset of the maneuver. Late phase II begins with 
a progressive rise in BP toward or above baseline. Venous 
return and cardiac output return to normal in phase IV. 
Persistent peripheral arteriolar vasoconstriction and 
increased cardiac adrenergic tone result in a temporary 
BP overshoot and phase IV bradycardia (mediated by the 
baroreceptor reflex).
Autonomic function during the Valsalva maneuver 
can be measured using beat-to-beat blood pressure or 
heart rate changes. The Valsalva ratio is defined as the 
maximum phase II tachycardia divided by the minimum 
phase IV bradycardia (Table 33-8). The ratio reflects the 
integrity of the entire baroreceptor reflex arc and of 
sympathetic efferents to blood vessels.
Sudomotor Function Sweating is induced by 
release of ACh from sympathetic postganglionic fibers. 
The quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test (QSART) is 
a measure of regional autonomic function mediated by 
TABLE 33-6
SOME DRUGS THAT AFFECT AUTONOMIC FUNCTION
SYMPTOM
DRUG CLASS
SPECIFIC EXAMPLES
Impotence
Opioids
Anabolic steroids
Some antiarrhyth-
mics
Some antihyperten-
sives
Some diuretics
Some SSRIs
Tylenol #3
—
Prazosin
Clonidine
Benazepril
Venlafaxine
Urinary 
retention
Opioids
Decongestants
Fentanyl
Brompheniramine
Diphenhydramine
Diaphoresis
Some antihyperten-
sives
Some SSRIs
Opioids
Amlodipine
Citalopram
Morphine
Hypotension
Tricyclics
Beta blockers
Diuretics
CCBs
Amitriptyline
Propranolol
HCTZ
Verapamil
Abbreviations: CCBs, calcium channel blockers; HCTZ, hydrochlo-
rothiazide; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
 
CHAPTER 33
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System
385
ACh-induced sweating. A reduced or absent response 
indicates a lesion of the postganglionic sudomotor 
axon. For example, sweating may be reduced in the 
feet as a result of distal polyneuropathy (e.g., diabe-
tes). The thermoregulatory sweat test (TST) is a qualita-
tive measure of regional sweat production in response 
to an elevation of body temperature under controlled 
conditions. An indicator powder placed on the anterior 
TABLE 33-7
NORMAL BLOOD PRESSURE AND HEART RATE CHANGES DURING THE VALSALVA MANEUVER
PHASE
MANEUVER
BLOOD PRESSURE
HEART RATE
COMMENTS
I
Forced expiration against 
a partially closed glottis
Rises; aortic compression 
from raised intrathoracic 
pressure
Decreases
Mechanical
II early
Continued expiration
Falls; decreased venous 
return to the heart
Increases (reﬂex tachycardia)
Reduced vagal tone
II late
Continued expiration
Rises; reﬂex increase in 
peripheral vascular  
resistance
Increases at slower rate
Requires intact efferent 
sympathetic response
III
End of expiration
Falls; increased capaci-
tance of pulmonary bed
Increases further
Mechanical
IV
Recovery
Rises; persistent vasocon-
striction and increased 
cardiac output
Compensatory bradycardia
Requires intact efferent 
sympathetic response
surface of the body changes color with sweat produc-
tion during temperature elevation. The pattern of color 
changes is a measure of regional sweat secretion. A 
postganglionic lesion is present if both QSART and TST 
show absent sweating. In a preganglionic lesion, QSART 
is normal but TST shows anhidrosis.
Orthostatic BP Recordings Beat-to-beat BP mea-
surements determined in supine, 70° tilt, and tilt-back 
positions are useful to quantitate orthostatic failure of 
BP control. Allow a 20-min period of rest in the supine 
position before assessing changes in BP during tilting. 
The BP change combined with heart rate monitoring is 
useful for the evaluation of patients with suspected OH 
or unexplained syncope.
Tilt Table Testing for Syncope The great ma-
jority of patients with syncope do not have autonomic 
failure. Tilt table testing can be used to make the diag-
nosis of vasovagal syncope with sensitivity, specificity, 
and reproducibility. A standardized protocol is used 
that specifies the tilt apparatus, angle and duration of 
tilt, and procedure for provocation of vasodilation (e.g., 
sublingual or spray nitroglycerin). A positive nitroglyc-
erin-stimulated test predicts recurrence of syncope. 
Recommendations for the performance of tilt stud-
ies for syncope have been incorporated in consensus 
guidelines.
SPECIFIC SYNDROMES OF ANS 
DYSFUNCTION
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY (CHAP. 30)
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is an entity that com-
prises autonomic failure (OH or a neurogenic blad-
der) and either parkinsonism (MSA-p) or a cerebellar 
TABLE 33-8
NEURAL PATHWAYS UNDERLYING SOME 
STANDARDIZED AUTONOMIC TESTS
TEST EVALUATED
PROCEDURE
AUTONOMIC 
FUNCTION
HRDB
6 deep breaths/min
Cardiovagal 
function
Valsalva ratio
Expiratory pressure, 
40 mmHg  
for 10–15 s
Cardiovagal 
function
QSART
Axon-reﬂex test  
4 limb sites
Postganglionic 
sudomotor 
function
BPBB to VM
BPBB response to 
VM
Adrenergic 
function: baro-
reﬂex adren-
ergic control 
of vagal and 
vasomotor 
function
HUT
BPBB and heart rate 
response to HUT
Adrenergic and 
cardiovagal 
responses to 
HUT
Abbreviations: BPBB, beat-to-beat blood pressure; HRDB, heart 
rate response to deep breathing; HUT, head-up tilt; QSART, quanti-
tative sudomotor axon-reﬂex test; VM, Valsalva maneuver.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
386
syndrome (MSA-c). MSA-p is the more common form; 
the parkinsonism is atypical in that it is usually unasso-
ciated with signiﬁcant tremor or response to levodopa. 
Symptomatic OH within 1 year of onset of parkinson-
ism predicts eventual development of MSA-p in 75% of 
patients. Although autonomic abnormalities are com-
mon in advanced Parkinson’s disease (Chap. 30), the 
severity and distribution of autonomic failure is more 
severe and more generalized in MSA. Brain MRI is a 
useful diagnostic adjunct; in MSA-p, iron deposition in 
the striatum may be evident as T2 hypointensity, and in 
MSA-c cerebellar atrophy is present with a character-
istic T2 hyperintense signal (“hot cross buns sign”) in 
the pons (Fig. 33-2). Cardiac postganglionic adrener-
gic innervation, measured by uptake of ﬂuorodopamine 
on positron emission tomography, is markedly impaired 
in the dysautonomia of Parkinson’s disease but is usually 
normal in MSA.
MSA generally progresses relentlessly to death 7–10 
years after onset. Neuropathologic changes include neu-
ronal loss and gliosis in many CNS regions, including 
the brainstem, cerebellum, striatum, and intermediolat-
eral cell column of the thoracolumbar spinal cord. Man-
agement is symptomatic for neurogenic OH (see later 
in the chapter), gastrointestinal (GI), and urinary dys-
function. GI management includes frequent small meals, 
soft diet, stool softeners, and bulk agents. Gastroparesis 
is difﬁcult to treat; metoclopramide stimulates gastric 
emptying but worsens parkinsonism by blocking cen-
tral dopamine receptors. Domperidone has been used in 
other countries but is not available in the United States.
Autonomic dysfunction is also a common feature in 
dementia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 29); the severity is 
usually less than that found in MSA or Parkinson’s dis-
ease. In multiple sclerosis (MS; Chap. 39), autonomic 
complications reﬂect the CNS location of MS involve-
ment and generally worsen with disease duration and 
disability.
SPINAL CORD
Spinal cord lesions from any cause may result in focal 
autonomic deﬁcits or autonomic hyperreﬂexia (e.g., 
spinal cord transection or hemisection) affecting bowel, 
bladder, sexual, temperature-regulation, or cardiovascu-
lar functions. Quadriparetic patients exhibit both supine 
hypertension and OH after upward tilting. Autonomic 
dysreﬂexia describes a dramatic increase in blood pressure 
in patients with traumatic spinal cord lesions above the 
C6 level, often in response to stimulation of the blad-
der, skin, or muscles. Suprapubic palpation of the blad-
der, a distended bladder, catheter insertion, catheter 
obstruction, or urinary infection are common triggers. 
Associated symptoms can include ﬂushing, headache, or 
piloerection. Potential complications include intracra-
nial vasospasm or hemorrhage, cardiac arrhythmia, and 
death. Awareness of the syndrome and monitoring of 
blood pressure during procedures in patients with acute 
or chronic spinal cord injury is essential. In patients 
with supine hypertension, BP can be lowered by tilt-
ing the head upward. Vasodilator drugs may be used to 
treat acute elevations in BP. Clonidine can be used pro-
phylactically to reduce the hypertension resulting from 
bladder stimulation. Dangerous increases or decreases 
in body temperature may result from an inability to 
experience the sensory accompaniments of heat or cold 
exposure or the ability to control peripheral vasocon-
striction or sweating below the level of the spinal cord 
injury.
PERIPHERAL NERVE AND 
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION DISORDERS
Peripheral neuropathies (Chap. 45) are the most com-
mon cause of chronic autonomic insufﬁciency. Poly-
neuropathies that affect small myelinated and unmy-
elinated ﬁbers of the sympathetic and parasympathetic 
nerves commonly occur in diabetes mellitus, amyloido-
sis, chronic alcoholism, porphyria, and Guillain-Barré 
syndrome. Neuromuscular junction disorders with 
autonomic involvement include botulism and Lambert-
Eaton syndrome (Chap. 47).
Diabetes mellitus
Autonomic neuropathy typically begins ∼10 years after 
the onset of diabetes and is slowly progressive. 
FIGURE 33-2 
Multiple system atrophy, cerebellar type (MSA-c). Axial 
T2-weighted MRI at the level of the pons shows a character-
istic hyperintense signal, the “hot cross buns” sign.
 
CHAPTER 33
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System
387
Amyloidosis
Autonomic neuropathy occurs in both sporadic and 
familial forms of amyloidosis. The AL (immunoglobulin 
light chain) type is associated with primary amyloido-
sis or amyloidosis secondary to multiple myeloma. The 
ATTR type, with transthyretin as the primary protein 
component, is responsible for the most common form 
of inherited amyloidosis. Although patients usually pres-
ent with a distal painful neuropathy accompanied by 
sensory loss, autonomic insufﬁciency can precede the 
development of the polyneuropathy or occur in isola-
tion. Diagnosis can be made by protein electrophore-
sis of blood and urine, tissue biopsy (abdominal fat pad, 
rectal mucosa, or sural nerve) to search for amyloid 
deposits, and genetic testing for transthyretin muta-
tions in familial cases. Treatment of familial cases with 
liver transplantation can be successful. The response of 
primary amyloidosis to melphalan and stem cell trans-
plantation has been mixed. Death is usually due to car-
diac or renal involvement. Postmortem studies reveal 
amyloid deposition in many organs, including two sites 
that contribute to autonomic failure: intraneural blood 
vessels and autonomic ganglia. Pathologic examination 
reveals a loss of unmyelinated and myelinated nerve 
ﬁbers.
Alcoholic neuropathy
Abnormalities in parasympathetic vagal and effer-
ent sympathetic function are usually mild in individu-
als with alcoholic polyneuropathy. Pathologic changes 
can be demonstrated in the parasympathetic (vagus) and 
sympathetic ﬁbers, and in ganglia. OH is usually due to 
brainstem involvement. Impotence is a major problem, 
but concurrent gonadal hormone abnormalities may 
obscure the parasympathetic component. Clinical symp-
toms of autonomic failure generally appear when the 
polyneuropathy is severe, and there is usually coexist-
ing Wernicke’s encephalopathy (Chap. 28). Autonomic 
involvement may contribute to the high mortality rates 
associated with alcoholism (Chap. 56).
Porphyria
Although each of the porphyrias can cause autonomic 
dysfunction, the condition is most extensively docu-
mented in the acute intermittent type. Autonomic 
symptoms include tachycardia, sweating, urinary reten-
tion, hypertension, or (less commonly) hypotension. 
Other prominent symptoms include anxiety, abdomi-
nal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Abnormal autonomic 
function can occur both during acute attacks and during 
remissions. Elevated catecholamine levels during acute 
attacks correlate with the degree of tachycardia and 
hypertension that is present.
Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 46)
BP ﬂuctuations and arrhythmias can be severe. It is esti-
mated that between 2 and 10% of patients with severe 
Guillain-Barré syndrome suffer fatal cardiovascular col-
lapse. Gastrointestinal autonomic involvement, sphinc-
ter disturbances, abnormal sweating, and pupillary dys-
function also occur. Demyelination has been described 
in the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves, the sympa-
thetic chain, and the white rami communicantes. Inter-
estingly, the degree of autonomic involvement appears 
to be independent of the severity of motor or sensory 
neuropathy.
Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy (AAN)
This disorder presents with the subacute development 
of autonomic disturbances with OH, enteric neuropa-
thy (gastroparesis, ileus, constipation/diarrhea), and 
cholinergic failure; the latter consists of loss of sweating, 
sicca complex, and a tonic pupil. Autoantibodies against 
the ganglionic ACh receptor (A3 AChR) are present in 
the serum of many patients and are now considered to 
be diagnostic of this syndrome. In general, the antibody 
titer correlates with the severity of autonomic failure. 
Symptoms of cholinergic failure are also associated with 
a high antibody titer. Onset of the neuropathy follows 
a viral infection in approximately half of cases. AAN is 
almost always monophasic; up to one-third of untreated 
patients experience signiﬁcant functional improvement 
over time. There are isolated case reports of a beneﬁ-
cial response to plasmapheresis or intravenous immune 
globulin, but there are no clinical trials that system-
atically assess the effectiveness of immunomodulatory 
therapies. Symptomatic management of OH, gastro-
paresis, and sicca symptoms is essential. The spectrum 
of AAN is now broader than originally thought; some 
antibody-positive cases have an insidious onset and slow 
progression with a pure autonomic failure (see later) 
phenotype. A dramatic clinical response to repeated 
plasma exchange combined with immunosuppression 
was described in one patient with longstanding AAN.
AAN can have a paraneoplastic basis (Chap. 44). The 
clinical features of the autonomic neuropathy may be 
indistinguishable from a coexisting paraneoplastic syn-
drome, although quite often in the paraneoplastic cases, 
distinctive additional central features, such as cerebellar 
involvement or dementia, may be present (see Tables 
44-1, 44-2, and 44-3). The neoplasm may be truly 
occult and possibly suppressed by the autoantibody.
Botulism
Botulinum toxin binds presynaptically to choliner-
gic nerve terminals and, after uptake into the cytosol, 
blocks ACh release. Manifestations consist of motor 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
388
paralysis and autonomic disturbances that include 
blurred vision, dry mouth, nausea, unreactive or slug-
gishly reactive pupils, constipation, and urinary 
retention.
PURE AUTONOMIC FAILURE (PAF)
This sporadic syndrome consists of postural hypoten-
sion, impotence, bladder dysfunction, and defective 
sweating. The disorder begins in the middle decades 
and occurs in women more often than men. The 
symptoms can be disabling, but the disease does not 
shorten life span. The clinical and pharmacologic char-
acteristics suggest primary involvement of postgangli-
onic sympathetic neurons. There is a severe reduction 
in the density of neurons within sympathetic ganglia 
that results in low supine plasma NE levels and norad-
renergic supersensitivity. Some studies have questioned 
the speciﬁcity of PAF as a distinct clinical entity. Some 
cases are ganglionic antibody–positive and thus rep-
resent a type of AAN. Between 10 and 15% of cases 
evolve into MSA.
POSTURAL ORTHOSTATIC TACHYCARDIA 
SYNDROME (POTS)
This syndrome is characterized by symptomatic ortho-
static intolerance (not OH) and by either an increase 
in heart rate to >120 beats/min or an increase of 30 
beats/min with standing that subsides on sitting or lying 
down. Women are affected approximately ﬁve times 
more often than men, and most develop the syndrome 
between the ages of 15 and 50. Approximately half of 
affected patients report an antecedent viral infection. 
Syncopal symptoms (lightheadedness, weakness, blurred 
vision) combined with symptoms of autonomic overac-
tivity (palpitations, tremulousness, nausea) are common. 
Recurrent unexplained episodes of dysautonomia and 
fatigue also occur. The pathogenesis is unclear in most 
cases; hypovolemia, deconditioning, venous pooling, 
impaired brainstem regulation, or β-receptor super-
sensitivity may play a role. In one affected individual, 
a mutation in the NE transporter, which resulted in 
impaired NE clearance from synapses, was responsible. 
Some cases are due to an underlying limited autonomic 
neuropathy. Although ∼80% of patients improve, only 
one-quarter eventually resume their usual daily activities 
(including exercise and sports). Expansion of ﬂuid vol-
ume and postural training (see “Treatment: Autonomic 
Failure”) are initial approaches to treatment. If these 
approaches are inadequate, then midodrine, ﬂudrocorti-
sone, phenobarbital, beta blockers, or clonidine may be 
used with some success. Reconditioning and a sustained 
exercise program are very important.
INHERITED DISORDERS
There are ﬁve known hereditary sensory and auto-
nomic neuropathies (HSAN I–V). The most impor-
tant ones are HSAN I and HSAN III (Riley-Day syn-
drome; familial dysautonomia). HSAN I is dominantly 
inherited and often presents as a distal small-ﬁber neu-
ropathy (burning feet syndrome). The responsible gene, 
on chromosome 9q, is designated SPTLC1. SPTLC 
is an important enzyme in the regulation of ceramide. 
Cells from HSAN I patients affected by mutation of 
SPTLC1 produce higher-than-normal levels of glucosyl 
ceramide, perhaps triggering apoptosis.
HSAN III, an autosomal recessive disorder of infants 
and children that occurs among Ashkenazi Jews, is 
much less prevalent than HSAN I. Decreased tearing, 
hyperhidrosis, reduced sensitivity to pain, areﬂexia, 
absent fungiform papillae on the tongue, and labile BP 
may be present. Episodic abdominal crises and fever are 
common. Pathologic examination of nerves reveals a 
loss of small myelinated and unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers. 
The defective gene, named IKBKAP, is also located on 
the long arm of chromosome 9. Pathogenic mutations 
may prevent normal transcription of important mol-
ecules in neural development.
PRIMARY HYPERHIDROSIS
This syndrome presents with excess sweating of the 
palms of the hands and soles of the feet. The disor-
der affects 0.6–1.0% of the population; the etiology is 
unclear, but there may be a genetic component. While 
not dangerous, the condition can be socially embarrass-
ing (e.g., shaking hands) or disabling (e.g., inability to 
write without soiling the paper). Onset of symptoms is 
usually in adolescence; the condition tends to improve 
with age. Topical antiperspirants are occasionally help-
ful. More useful are potent anticholinergic drugs such 
as glycopyrrolate (1–2 mg PO tid). T2 ganglionectomy 
or sympathectomy is successful in >90% of patients 
with palmar hyperhidrosis. The advent of endoscopic 
transaxillary T2 sympathectomy has lowered the com-
plication rate of the procedure. The most common 
postoperative complication is compensatory hyperhi-
drosis, which improves spontaneously over months; 
other potential complications include recurrent hyper-
hidrosis (16%), Horner’s syndrome (<2%), gustatory 
sweating, wound infection, hemothorax, and intercostal 
neuralgia. Local injection of botulinum toxin has also 
been used to block cholinergic, postganglionic sym-
pathetic ﬁbers to sweat glands in patients with palmar 
hyperhidrosis. This approach is limited by the need for 
repetitive injections (the effect usually lasts 4 months 
before waning), pain with injection, the high cost 
of botulinum toxin, and the possibility of temporary 
intrinsic hand muscle weakness.
 
CHAPTER 33
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System
389
ACUTE AUTONOMIC SYNDROMES
The physician may be confronted occasionally with an 
acute autonomic syndrome, either acute autonomic 
failure (acute AAN syndrome) or a state of sympathetic 
overactivity. An autonomic storm is an acute state of sus-
tained sympathetic surge that results in variable combi-
nations of alterations in blood pressure and heart rate, 
body temperature, respiration, and sweating. Causes of 
autonomic storm are brain and spinal cord injury, toxins 
and drugs, autonomic neuropathy, and chemodectomas 
(e.g., pheochromocytoma).
Brain injury is most commonly a cause of autonomic 
storm following severe head trauma and in postresusci-
tation encephalopathy following anoxic-ischemic brain 
injury. Autonomic storm can also occur with other 
acute intracranial lesions such as hemorrhage, cere-
bral infarction, rapidly expanding tumors, subarach-
noid hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, or (less commonly) 
an acute spinal cord lesion. Lesions involving the dien-
cephalon may be more prone to present with dysauto-
nomia, but the most consistent setting is that of an acute 
intracranial catastrophe of sufﬁcient size and rapidity to 
produce a massive catecholaminergic surge. The surge 
can cause seizures, neurogenic pulmonary edema, and 
myocardial injury. Manifestations include fever, tachy-
cardia, hypertension, tachypnea, hyperhidrosis, pupillary 
dilatation, and ﬂushing. Lesions of the afferent limb of 
the baroreﬂex can result in milder recurrent autonomic 
storms; many of these follow neck irradiation.
Drugs and toxins may also be responsible, includ-
ing sympathomimetics such as phenylpropanolamine, 
cocaine, amphetamines, and tricyclic antidepressants; 
tetanus; and, less often, botulinum. Phenylpropanol-
amine, now off the market, was in the past a potent 
cause of this syndrome. Cocaine, including “crack,” 
can cause a hypertensive state with CNS hyperstimula-
tion. Tricyclic overdose, such as amitriptyline, can cause 
ﬂushing, hypertension, tachycardia, fever, mydriasis, 
anhidrosis, and a toxic psychosis. Neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome refers to a syndrome of muscle rigidity, hyper-
thermia, and hypertension in psychotic patients treated 
with phenothiazines.
The hyperadrenergic state with Guillain-Barré syn-
drome can produce a moderate autonomic storm. 
Pheochromocytoma presents with a paroxysmal or sus-
tained hyperadrenergic state, headache, hyperhidrosis, 
palpitations, anxiety, tremulousness, and hypertension.
Management of autonomic storm includes ruling out 
other causes of autonomic instability, including malig-
nant hyperthermia, porphyria, and epilepsy. Sepsis and 
encephalitis need to be excluded with appropriate stud-
ies. An electroencephalogram (EEG) should be done 
to detect epileptiform activity; MRI of the brain and 
spine is often necessary. The patient should be managed 
in an intensive care unit. Management with morphine 
sulphate (10 mg every 4 h) and labetalol (100–200 mg 
twice daily) have worked relatively well. Treatment 
may need to be maintained for several weeks. For 
chronic and milder autonomic storm, propranolol and/
or clonidine can be effective.
MISCELLANEOUS
Other conditions associated with autonomic fail-
ure include infections, poisoning (organophosphates), 
malignancy, and aging. Disorders of the hypothalamus 
can affect autonomic function and produce abnormali-
ties in temperature control, satiety, sexual function, and 
circadian rhythms (Chap. 38).
REFLEX SYMPATHETIC DYSTROPHY  
AND CAUSALGIA
The failure to identify a primary role of the ANS in 
the pathogenesis of these disorders has resulted in a 
change of nomenclature. Complex regional pain syn-
drome (CRPS) types I and II are now used in place 
of reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) and causalgia, 
respectively.
CRPS type I is a regional pain syndrome that usu-
ally develops after tissue trauma. Examples of associated 
trauma include myocardial infarction, minor shoulder 
or limb injury, and stroke. Allodynia (the perception of 
a nonpainful stimulus as painful), hyperpathia (an exag-
gerated pain response to a painful stimulus), and spon-
taneous pain occur. The symptoms are unrelated to the 
severity of the initial trauma and are not conﬁned to the 
distribution of a single peripheral nerve. CRPS type II 
is a regional pain syndrome that develops after injury to 
a speciﬁc peripheral nerve, usually a major nerve trunk. 
Spontaneous pain initially develops within the territory 
of the affected nerve but eventually may spread outside 
the nerve distribution.
Pain is the primary clinical feature of CRPS. Vaso-
motor dysfunction, sudomotor abnormalities, or focal 
edema may occur alone or in combination but must 
be present for diagnosis. Limb pain syndromes that do 
not meet these criteria are best classiﬁed as “limb pain—
not otherwise speciﬁed.” In CRPS, localized sweating 
(increased resting sweat output) and changes in blood 
ﬂow may produce temperature differences between 
affected and unaffected limbs.
CRPS type I (RSD) has classically been divided into 
three clinical phases but is now considered to be more 
variable. Phase I consists of pain and swelling in the dis-
tal extremity occurring within weeks to 3 months after 
the precipitating event. The pain is diffuse, spontane-
ous, and either burning, throbbing, or aching in qual-
ity. The involved extremity is warm and edematous, 
and the joints are tender. Increased sweating and hair 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
390
growth develop. In phase II (3–6 months after onset), 
thin, shiny, cool skin appears. After an additional 3–6 
months (phase III), atrophy of the skin and subcutane-
ous tissue plus ﬂexion contractures complete the clinical 
picture.
The natural history of typical CRPS may be more 
benign than reﬂected in the literature. A variety of sur-
gical and medical treatments have been developed, with 
conﬂicting reports of efﬁcacy. Clinical trials suggest that 
early mobilization with physical therapy or a brief course 
of glucocorticoids may be helpful for CRPS type I. 
Other medical treatments include the use of adrenergic 
blockers, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, calcium 
channel blockers, phenytoin, opioids, and calcitonin. 
Stellate ganglion blockade is a commonly used invasive 
technique that often provides temporary pain relief, but 
the efﬁcacy of repetitive blocks is uncertain.
TREATMENT 
Autonomic Failure
Management of autonomic failure is aimed at specific 
treatment of the cause and alleviation of symptoms. Of 
particular importance is the removal of drugs or amelio-
ration of underlying conditions that cause or aggravate 
the autonomic symptoms, especially in the elderly. For 
example, OH can be caused or aggravated by angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, calcium channel-
blocking agents, tricyclic antidepressants, levodopa, 
alcohol, or insulin. A summary of drugs that can cause 
OH by class, putative mechanism, and magnitude of the 
BP drop, is shown in Table 33-6.
PATIENT EDUCATION Only a minority of patients 
with OH require drug treatment. All patients should 
be taught the mechanisms of postural normotension 
(volume status, resistance and capacitance bed, auto-
regulation) and the nature of orthostatic stressors (time 
of day and the influence of meals, heat, standing, and 
exercise). Patients should learn to recognize orthostatic 
symptoms early (especially subtle cognitive symptoms, 
weakness, and fatigue) and to modify or avoid activi-
ties that provoke episodes. Other helpful measures may 
include keeping a BP log and dietary education (salt/
fluids). Learning physical countermaneuvers that reduce 
standing OH and practicing postural and resistance 
training are helpful measures.
SYMPTOMATIC 
TREATMENT Nonpharmaco-
logic approaches are summarized in Table 33-9. Ade-
quate intake of salt and fluids to produce a voiding vol-
ume between 1.5 and 2.5 L of urine (containing >170 
meq/L of Na+) each 24 h is essential. Sleeping with the 
head of the bed elevated will minimize the effects of 
supine nocturnal hypertension. Prolonged recumbency 
should be avoided when possible. Patients are advised to 
sit with legs dangling over the edge of the bed for sev-
eral minutes before attempting to stand in the morning; 
other postural stresses should be similarly approached in 
a gradual manner. One maneuver that can reduce OH is 
leg-crossing with maintained contraction of leg muscles 
for 30 s; this compresses leg veins and increases systemic 
resistance. Compressive garments, such as compression 
stockings and abdominal binders, are helpful on occasion 
but uncomfortable for some patients. Anemia should be 
corrected with erythropoietin, administered subcutane-
ously at doses of 25–75 U/kg three times per week. The 
hematocrit increases after 2–6 weeks. A weekly mainte-
nance dose is usually necessary. The increased intravas-
cular volume that accompanies the rise in hematocrit can 
exacerbate supine hypertension.
If these measures are not sufficient, drug treat-
ment may be necessary. Midodrine, a directly acting 
α1-agonist that does not cross the blood-brain barrier, is 
effective. It has a duration of action of 2–4 h. The usual 
dose is 5–10 mg orally tid, but some patients respond 
best to a decremental dose (e.g., 15 mg on awakening, 
10 mg at noon, and 5 mg in the afternoon). Midodrine 
should not be taken after 6 P.M. Side effects include pru-
ritus, uncomfortable piloerection, and supine hyperten-
sion especially at higher doses. Pyridostigmine appears 
to improve OH without aggravating supine hypertension 
by enhancing ganglionic transmission (maximal when 
orthostatic, minimal supine). Fludrocortisone will reduce 
OH, but it aggravates supine hypertension. At doses 
between 0.1 mg/d and 0.3 mg bid orally, it enhances 
renal sodium conservation and increases the sensitiv-
ity of arterioles to NE. Susceptible patients may develop 
fluid overload, congestive heart failure, supine hyperten-
sion, or hypokalemia. Potassium supplements are often 
necessary with chronic administration of fludrocortisone. 
Sustained elevations of supine BP >180/110 mmHg 
should be avoided.
Postprandial OH may respond to several measures. 
Frequent, small, low-carbohydrate meals may diminish 
TABLE 33-9
INITIAL TREATMENT OF ORTHOSTATIC 
HYPOTENSION (OH)
Patient education: mechanisms and stressors of OH
High-salt diet (10–20 g/d)
High-ﬂuid intake (2 L/D)
Elevate head of bed 10 cm (4 in.)
Maintain postural stimuli
Learn physical countermaneuvers
Compression garments
Correct anemia
 
CHAPTER 33
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System
391
splanchnic shunting of blood after meals and reduce 
postprandial OH. Prostaglandin inhibitors (ibuprofen or 
indomethacin) taken with meals or midodrine (10 mg 
with the meal) can be helpful. The somatostatin ana-
logue octreotide can be useful in the treatment of post-
prandial syncope by inhibiting the release of gastroin-
testinal peptides that have vasodilator and hypotensive 
effects. The subcutaneous dose ranges from 25 μg bid 
to 200 μg tid.
The patient should be taught to self-treat transient 
worsening of OH. Drinking two 250-mL (8-oz) glasses 
of water can raise standing BP 20–30 mmHg for about 
2 h, beginning ∼20 min after the fluid load. The patient 
can increase intake of salt and fluids (bouillon treat-
ment), increase use of physical countermaneuvers, 
temporarily resort to a full-body stocking (compression 
pressure 30–40 mmHg), or increase the dose of mido-
drine. Supine hypertension (>180/110 mmHg) can be 
self-treated by avoiding the supine position and reduc-
ing fludrocortisone. A daily glass of wine, if requested 
by the patient, can be taken shortly before bedtime. If 
these simple measures are not adequate, drugs to be 
considered include oral hydralazine (25 mg qhs), oral 
Procardia (10 mg qhs), or a nitroglycerin patch.
 M. Flint Beal 
■  Stephen L. Hauser 
392
 Symptoms and signs of cranial nerve pathology are com-
mon in internal medicine. They often develop in the 
context of a widespread neurologic disturbance, and in 
such situations cranial nerve involvement may represent 
the initial manifestation of the illness. In other disorders, 
involvement is largely restricted to one or several cranial 
nerves; these distinctive disorders are reviewed in this 
chapter. Disorders of ocular movement are discussed in 
 Chap. 21 , disorders of hearing in  Chap. 24 , and vertigo 
and disorders of vestibular function in  Chap. 11 . 
 FACIAL PAIN OR NUMBNESS 
 ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS 
 The trigeminal (ﬁ fth cranial) nerve supplies sensation 
to the skin of the face and anterior half of the head 
 ( Fig. 34-1 ) . Its motor part innervates the masseter and 
pterygoid masticatory muscles. 
 TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 
(TIC DOULOUREUX) 
 Clinical manifestations 
 Trigeminal neuralgia is characterized by excruciating 
paroxysms of pain in the lips, gums, cheek, or chin and, 
very rarely, in the distribution of the ophthalmic division 
of the ﬁ fth nerve. The pain seldom lasts more than a few 
seconds or a minute or two but may be so intense that 
the patient winces, hence the term  tic . The paroxysms, 
experienced as single jabs or clusters, tend to recur fre-
quently, both day and night, for several weeks at a time. 
They may occur spontaneously or with movements of 
affected areas evoked by speaking, chewing, or smiling. 
Another characteristic feature is the presence of trigger 
zones, typically on the face, lips, or tongue, that provoke 
attacks; patients may report that tactile stimuli—e.g., 
washing the face, brushing the teeth, or exposure to a 
draft of air—generate excruciating pain.  An essential fea-
ture of trigeminal neuralgia is that objective signs of sensory loss 
cannot be demonstrated on examination . 
 Trigeminal neuralgia is relatively common, with an 
estimated annual incidence of 4.5 per 100,000 individuals. 
Middle-aged and elderly persons are affected primarily, 
and ∼60% of cases occur in women. Onset is typically sud-
den, and bouts tend to persist for weeks or months before 
remitting spontaneously. Remissions may be long-lasting, 
but in most patients the disorder ultimately recurs. 
 TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA, BELL’S PALSY, AND 
OTHER CRANIAL NERVE DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 34 
M
a
xillar
y (
V2)
 
C2
C3
C4
O
phth
a
l
m
i
c
 (
V1
)
 
Mand
i
b
u
l
ar 
(V3) 
 FIGURE 34-1  
 The three major sensory divisions of the trigeminal nerve 
consist of the ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular nerves. 
393
 
CHAPTER 34
Trigeminal Neuralgia, Bell’s Palsy, and Other Cranial Nerve Disorders
Pathophysiology
Symptoms result from ectopic generation of action 
potentials in pain-sensitive afferent ﬁbers of the ﬁfth 
cranial nerve root just before it enters the lateral sur-
face of the pons. Compression or other pathology in 
the nerve leads to demyelination of large myelinated 
ﬁbers that do not themselves carry pain sensation but 
become hyperexcitable and electrically coupled with 
smaller unmyelinated or poorly myelinated pain ﬁbers 
in close proximity; this may explain why tactile stimuli, 
conveyed via the large myelinated ﬁbers, can stimu-
late paroxysms of pain. Compression of the trigeminal 
nerve root by a blood vessel, most often the superior 
cerebellar artery or on occasion a tortuous vein, is the 
source of trigeminal neuralgia in a substantial proportion 
of patients. In cases of vascular compression, age-related 
brain sagging and increased vascular thickness and tortu-
osity may explain the prevalence of trigeminal neuralgia 
in later life.
Differential diagnosis
Trigeminal neuralgia must be distinguished from other 
causes of face and head pain (Chap. 8) and from pain 
arising from diseases of the jaw, teeth, or sinuses. Pain 
from migraine or cluster headache tends to be deep-
seated and steady, unlike the superﬁcial stabbing quality 
of trigeminal neuralgia; rarely, cluster headache is asso-
ciated with trigeminal neuralgia, a syndrome known as 
cluster-tic. In temporal arteritis, superﬁcial facial pain is 
present but is not typically shocklike, the patient fre-
quently complains of myalgias and other systemic symp-
toms, and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR) is usually present. When trigeminal neuralgia 
develops in a young adult or is bilateral, multiple scle-
rosis (MS) is a key consideration, and in such cases the 
cause is a demyelinating plaque at the root entry zone 
of the ﬁfth nerve in the pons; often, evidence of facial 
sensory loss can be found on careful examination. Cases 
that are secondary to mass lesions—such as aneurysms, 
neuroﬁbromas, acoustic schwannomas, or meningio-
mas—usually produce objective signs of sensory loss in 
the trigeminal nerve distribution (trigeminal neuropathy, 
see later in the chapter).
Laboratory evaluation
An ESR is indicated if temporal arteritis is suspected. In 
typical cases of trigeminal neuralgia, neuroimaging stud-
ies are usually unnecessary but may be valuable if MS is 
a consideration or in assessing overlying vascular lesions 
in order to plan for decompression surgery.
TREATMENT 
Trigeminal Neuralgia
Drug therapy with carbamazepine is effective in ∼50–
75% of patients. Carbamazepine should be started 
as a single daily dose of 100 mg taken with food and 
increased gradually (by 100 mg daily in divided doses 
every 1–2 days) until substantial (>50%) pain relief is 
achieved. Most patients require a maintenance dose of 
200 mg qid. Doses >1200 mg daily provide no additional 
benefit. Dizziness, imbalance, sedation, and rare cases of 
agranulocytosis are the most important side effects of 
carbamazepine. If treatment is effective, it is usually con-
tinued for 1 month and then tapered as tolerated. Oxcar-
bazepine (300–1200 mg bid) is an alternative to carbam-
azepine, has less bone marrow toxicity, and probably is 
equally efficacious. If these agents are not well tolerated 
or are ineffective, lamotrigine 400 mg daily or phenytoin, 
300–400 mg daily, are other options. Baclofen may also 
be administered, either alone or in combination with an 
anticonvulsant. The initial dose is 5–10 mg tid, gradually 
increasing as needed to 20 mg qid.
If drug treatment fails, surgical therapy should be 
offered. The most widely used method currently is micro-
vascular decompression to relieve pressure on the trigem-
inal nerve as it exits the pons. This procedure requires a 
suboccipital craniotomy. Based on limited data, this proce-
dure appears to have a >70% efficacy rate and a low rate 
of pain recurrence in responders; the response is better 
for classic tic-like symptoms than for nonlancinating facial 
pains. In a small number of cases, there is perioperative 
damage to the eighth or seventh cranial nerves or to the 
cerebellum, or a postoperative CSF leak syndrome. High-
resolution magnetic resonance angiography is useful pre-
operatively to visualize the relationships between the fifth 
cranial nerve root and nearby blood vessels.
Gamma knife radiosurgery is also utilized for treat-
ment and results in complete pain relief in more than 
two-thirds of patients and a low risk of persistent facial 
numbness; the response is sometimes long-lasting, 
but recurrent pain develops over 2–3 years in half 
of patients. Compared with surgical decompression, 
gamma knife surgery appears to be somewhat less 
effective but has few serious complications.
Another procedure, radiofrequency thermal rhizotomy, 
creates a heat lesion of the trigeminal (gasserian) gan-
glion or nerve. It is used less often now than in the past. 
Short-term relief is experienced by >95% of patients; 
however, long-term studies indicate that pain recurs in up 
to one-third of treated patients. Postoperatively, partial 
numbness of the face is common, masseter (jaw) weak-
ness may occur especially following bilateral procedures, 
and corneal denervation with secondary keratitis can fol-
low rhizotomy for first-division trigeminal neuralgia.
394
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
TRIGEMINAL NEUROPATHY
A variety of diseases may affect the trigeminal nerve 
(Table 34-1). Most present with sensory loss on the 
face or with weakness of the jaw muscles. Deviation of 
the jaw on opening indicates weakness of the pterygoids 
on the side to which the jaw deviates. Some cases are 
due to Sjögren’s syndrome or a collagen-vascular dis-
ease such as systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, 
or mixed connective tissue disease. Among infectious 
causes, herpes zoster and leprosy should be considered. 
Tumors of the middle cranial fossa (meningiomas), of 
the trigeminal nerve (schwannomas), or of the base of 
the skull (metastatic tumors) may cause a combination 
of motor and sensory signs. Lesions in the cavernous 
sinus can affect the ﬁrst and second divisions of the tri-
geminal nerve, and lesions of the superior orbital ﬁssure 
can affect the ﬁrst (ophthalmic) division; the accompa-
nying corneal anesthesia increases the risk of ulceration 
(neuro keratitis).
Loss of sensation over the chin (mental neuropathy) 
can be the only manifestation of systemic malignancy. 
Rarely, an idiopathic form of trigeminal neuropathy is 
observed. It is characterized by numbness and paresthe-
sias, sometimes bilaterally, with loss of sensation in the 
territory of the trigeminal nerve but without weakness 
of the jaw. Gradual recovery is the rule. Tonic spasm 
of the masticatory muscles, known as trismus, is symp-
tomatic of tetanus or may occur in patients treated with 
phenothiazine drugs.
TABLE 34-1 
TRIGEMINAL NERVE DISORDERS
Nuclear (brainstem) 
lesions
Multiple sclerosis
Stroke
Syringobulbia
Glioma
Lymphoma
Preganglionic lesions
Acoustic neuroma
Meningioma
Metastasis
Chronic meningitis
Cavernous carotid  
aneurysm
Gasserian ganglion 
lesions
Trigeminal neuroma
Herpes zoster
Infection (spread from otitis 
media or mastoiditis)
Peripheral nerve lesions
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Trauma
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Sjögren’s syndrome
Collagen-vascular diseases
Sarcoidosis
Leprosy
Drugs (stilbamidine,  
trichloroethylene)
Idiopathic trigeminal  
neuropathy
FACIAL WEAKNESS
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
(Fig. 34-2) The seventh cranial nerve supplies all the 
muscles concerned with facial expression. The sensory 
component is small (the nervus intermedius); it con-
veys taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds of 
the tongue and probably cutaneous impulses from the 
anterior wall of the external auditory canal. The motor 
nucleus of the seventh nerve lies anterior and lateral to 
the abducens nucleus. After leaving the pons, the sev-
enth nerve enters the internal auditory meatus with 
the acoustic nerve. The nerve continues its course in 
its own bony channel, the facial canal, and exits from 
the skull via the stylomastoid foramen. It then passes 
through the parotid gland and subdivides to supply the 
facial muscles.
A complete interruption of the facial nerve at the sty-
lomastoid foramen paralyzes all muscles of facial expres-
sion. The corner of the mouth droops, the creases and 
skinfolds are effaced, the forehead is unfurrowed, and 
the eyelids will not close. Upon attempted closure of the 
lids, the eye on the paralyzed side rolls upward (Bell’s 
phenomenon). The lower lid sags and falls away from the 
conjunctiva, permitting tears to spill over the cheek. 
Food collects between the teeth and lips, and saliva may 
dribble from the corner of the mouth. The patient com-
plains of a heaviness or numbness in the face, but sensory 
loss is rarely demonstrable and taste is intact.
If the lesion is in the middle-ear portion, taste is lost 
over the anterior two-thirds of the tongue on the same 
side. If the nerve to the stapedius is interrupted, there is 
hyperacusis (sensitivity to loud sounds). Lesions in the 
internal auditory meatus may affect the adjacent audi-
tory and vestibular nerves, causing deafness, tinnitus, or 
dizziness. Intrapontine lesions that paralyze the face usu-
ally affect the abducens nucleus as well, and often the 
corticospinal and sensory tracts.
If the peripheral facial paralysis has existed for some 
time and recovery of motor function is incomplete, a 
continuous diffuse contraction of facial muscles may 
appear. The palpebral ﬁssure becomes narrowed, and 
the nasolabial fold deepens. Attempts to move one 
group of facial muscles may result in contraction of all 
(associated movements, or synkinesis). Facial spasms, ini-
tiated by movements of the face, may develop (hemifacial 
spasm). Anomalous regeneration of seventh nerve ﬁbers 
may result in other troublesome phenomena. If ﬁbers 
originally connected with the orbicularis oculi come 
to innervate the orbicularis oris, closure of the lids may 
cause a retraction of the mouth, or if ﬁbers originally 
connected with muscles of the face later innervate the 
lacrimal gland, anomalous tearing (“crocodile tears”) 
may occur with any activity of the facial muscles, such 
395
 
CHAPTER 34
Trigeminal Neuralgia, Bell’s Palsy, and Other Cranial Nerve Disorders
as eating. Another facial synkinesia is triggered by jaw 
opening, causing closure of the eyelids on the side of 
the facial palsy (jaw-winking).
BELL’S PALSY
The most common form of facial paralysis is Bell’s palsy. 
The annual incidence of this idiopathic disorder is ∼25 per 
100,000 annually, or about 1 in 60 persons in a lifetime.
Clinical manifestations
The onset of Bell’s palsy is fairly abrupt, maximal weak-
ness being attained by 48 h as a general rule. Pain 
behind the ear may precede the paralysis for a day or 
two. Taste sensation may be lost unilaterally, and hyper-
acusis may be present. In some cases there is mild cere-
brospinal ﬂuid lymphocytosis. MRI may reveal swelling 
and uniform enhancement of the geniculate ganglion 
and facial nerve and, in some cases, entrapment of the 
swollen nerve in the temporal bone. Approximately 
80% of patients recover within a few weeks or months. 
Electromyography may be of some prognostic value; 
evidence of denervation after 10 days indicates there 
has been axonal degeneration, that there will be a long 
delay (3 months as a rule) before regeneration occurs, 
and that it may be incomplete. The presence of incom-
plete paralysis in the ﬁrst week is the most favorable 
prognostic sign.
Pathophysiology
In acute Bell’s palsy there is inﬂammation of the facial 
nerve with mononuclear cells, consistent with an infec-
tious or immune cause. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 
1 DNA was frequently detected in endoneurial ﬂuid and 
posterior auricular muscle, suggesting that a reactivation 
of this virus in the geniculate ganglion may be respon-
sible for most cases. Reactivation of varicella zoster virus 
is associated with Bell’s palsy in up to one-third of cases, 
and may represent the second most frequent cause. A 
variety of other viruses have also been implicated less 
commonly. An increased incidence of Bell’s palsy was 
also reported among recipients of inactivated intranasal 
inﬂuenza vaccine, and it was hypothesized that this could 
have resulted from the Escherichia coli enterotoxin used as 
adjuvant or to reactivation of latent virus.
Differential diagnosis
There are many other causes of acute facial palsy that 
must be considered in the differential diagnosis of Bell’s 
palsy. Lyme disease can cause unilateral or bilateral facial 
Lacrimal gland
Sublingual gland
Submandibular gland
Submandibular
ganglion
Nucleus
fasciculus
solitarius
Motor nucleus
VII n.
Motor nucleus
VI n.
Superior
salivatory
nucleus
Fasciculus
solitarius
Geniculate
ganglion
Trigeminal
ganglion
Major superficial
petrosal nerve
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Lingual
nerve
Chorda
tympani
To nasal and
palatine glands
VII n.
V n.
1
2
3
B
C
A
FIGURE 34-2 
The facial nerve. A, B, and C denote lesions of the facial 
nerve at the stylomastoid foramen, distal and proximal to the 
geniculate ganglion, respectively. Green lines indicate the 
parasympathetic ﬁbers, red line indicates motor ﬁbers, and 
purple lines indicate visceral afferent ﬁbers (taste). (Adapted 
from MB Carpenter: Core Text of Neuroanatomy, 2nd ed. 
Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1978.)
396
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
palsies; in endemic areas, 10% or more of cases of facial 
palsy are likely due to infection with Borrelia burgdorferi. 
The Ramsay Hunt syndrome, caused by reactivation of 
herpes zoster in the geniculate ganglion, consists of a 
severe facial palsy associated with a vesicular eruption in 
the external auditory canal and sometimes in the phar-
ynx and other parts of the cranial integument; often the 
eighth cranial nerve is affected as well. Facial palsy that 
is often bilateral occurs in sarcoidosis and in Guillain-
Barré syndrome (Chap. 46). Leprosy frequently involves 
the facial nerve, and facial neuropathy may also occur 
in diabetes mellitus, connective tissue diseases includ-
ing Sjögren’s syndrome, and amyloidosis. The rare 
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome consists of recurrent facial 
paralysis; recurrent—and eventually permanent—facial 
(particularly labial) edema; and, less constantly, plication 
of the tongue. Its cause is unknown. Acoustic neuromas 
frequently involve the facial nerve by local compression. 
Infarcts, demyelinating lesions of multiple sclerosis, and 
tumors are the common pontine lesions that interrupt 
the facial nerve ﬁbers; other signs of brainstem involve-
ment are usually present. Tumors that invade the tem-
poral bone (carotid body, cholesteatoma, dermoid) may 
produce a facial palsy, but the onset is insidious and the 
course progressive.
All these forms of nuclear or peripheral facial palsy 
must be distinguished from the supranuclear type. In 
the latter, the frontalis and orbicularis oculi muscles are 
involved less than those of the lower part of the face, 
since the upper facial muscles are innervated by corti-
cobulbar pathways from both motor cortices, whereas 
the lower facial muscles are innervated only by the 
opposite hemisphere. In supranuclear lesions there may 
be a dissociation of emotional and voluntary facial move- 
ments and often some degree of paralysis of the arm and 
leg, or an aphasia (in dominant hemisphere lesions) is 
present.
Laboratory evaluation
The diagnosis of Bell’s palsy can usually be made clini-
cally in patients with (1) a typical presentation, (2) no 
risk factors or preexisting symptoms for other causes of 
facial paralysis, (3) absence of cutaneous lesions of her-
pes zoster in the external ear canal, and (4) a normal 
neurologic examination with the exception of the facial 
nerve. Particular attention to the eighth cranial nerve, 
which courses near to the facial nerve in the pontomed-
ullary junction and in the temporal bone, and to other 
cranial nerves is essential. In atypical or uncertain cases, 
an ESR, testing for diabetes mellitus, a Lyme titer, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme and chest imaging stud-
ies for possible sarcoidosis, a lumbar puncture for possi-
ble Guillain-Barré syndrome, or MRI scanning may be 
indicated. MRI often shows swelling and enhancement 
of the facial nerve in idiopathic Bell’s palsy (Fig. 34-3).
TREATMENT 
Bell’s Palsy
Symptomatic measures include (1) the use of paper 
tape to depress the upper eyelid during sleep and pre-
vent corneal drying, and (2) massage of the weakened 
muscles. A course of glucocorticoids, given as predni-
sone 60–80 mg daily during the first 5 days and then 
tapered over the next 5 days, modestly shortens the 
recovery period and improves the functional outcome. 
Although two large recently published randomized tri-
als found no added benefit of antiviral agents valacy-
clovir (1000 mg daily for 5–7 days) or acyclovir (400 mg 
five times daily for 10 days) compared to glucocorticoids 
alone, the overall weight of evidence suggests that the 
combination therapy with prednisone plus valacyclovir 
may be marginally better than prednisone alone, espe-
cially in patients with severe clinical presentations.
FIGURE 34-3 
Axial and coronal T1-weighted images post-Gadolin-
ium with fat suppression demonstrate diffuse smooth lin-
ear enhancement of the left facial nerve, involving the genu, 
tympanic, and mastoid segments within the temporal bone 
(arrows), without evidence of mass lesion. Although highly 
suggestive of Bell’s palsy, similar ﬁndings may be seen with 
other etiologies such as Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, and peri-
neural malignant spread.
397
 
CHAPTER 34
Trigeminal Neuralgia, Bell’s Palsy, and Other Cranial Nerve Disorders
OTHER MOTOR DISORDERS OF THE FACE
Hemifacial spasm consists of painless irregular involun-
tary contractions on one side of the face. Most cases 
appear related to vascular compression of the exit-
ing facial nerve in the pons. Other cases develop as a 
sequela to Bell’s palsy or are secondary to compression 
and/or demyelination of the nerve by tumor, infec-
tion or multiple sclerosis. Mild cases can be treated 
with carbamazepine, gabapentin, or, if these drugs fail, 
with baclofen. Local injections of botulinum toxin into 
affected muscles can relieve spasms for 3–4 months, 
and the injections can be repeated. Refractory cases 
due to vascular compression usually respond to surgical 
decompression of the facial nerve. Blepharospasm is an 
involuntary recurrent spasm of both eyelids that usu-
ally occurs in elderly persons as an isolated phenom-
enon or with varying degrees of spasm of other facial 
muscles. Severe, persistent cases of blepharospasm can 
be treated by local injection of botulinum toxin into 
the orbicularis oculi. Facial myokymia refers to a ﬁne 
rippling activity of the facial muscles; it may be caused 
by multiple sclerosis or follow Guillain-Barré syndrome 
(Chap. 46).
Facial hemiatrophy occurs mainly in women and 
is characterized by a disappearance of fat in the der-
mal and subcutaneous tissues on one side of the face. 
It usually begins in adolescence or early adult years and 
is slowly progressive. In its advanced form, the affected 
side of the face is gaunt, and the skin is thin, wrinkled, 
and brown. The facial hair may turn white and fall 
out, and the sebaceous glands become atrophic. Bilat-
eral involvement may occur. A limited form of systemic 
sclerosis (scleroderma) may be the cause of some cases. 
Treatment is cosmetic, consisting of transplantation of 
skin and subcutaneous fat.
OTHER CRANIAL NERVE DISORDERS
GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NEURALGIA
This form of neuralgia involves the ninth (glosso-
pharyngeal) and sometimes portions of the tenth 
(vagus) cranial nerves. It resembles trigeminal neu-
ralgia in many respects but is much less common. 
The pain is intense and paroxysmal; it originates on 
one side of the throat, approximately in the tonsil-
lar fossa. In some cases the pain is localized in the ear 
or may radiate from the throat to the ear because of 
involvement of the tympanic branch of the glosso-
pharyngeal nerve. Spasms of pain may be initiated by 
swallowing or coughing. There is no demonstrable 
motor or sensory deﬁcit; the glossopharyngeal nerve 
supplies taste sensation to the posterior third of the 
tongue and, together with the vagus nerve, sensation 
to the posterior pharynx. Cardiac symptoms—brady-
cardia or asystole, hypotension, and fainting—have 
been reported. Medical therapy is similar to that for tri-
geminal neuralgia, and carbamazepine is generally the 
ﬁrst choice. If drug therapy is unsuccessful, surgical 
procedures—including microvascular decompression if 
vascular compression is evident—or rhizotomy of glos-
sopharyngeal and vagal ﬁbers in the jugular bulb is fre-
quently successful.
Very rarely, herpes zoster involves the glossopharyn-
geal nerve. Glossopharyngeal neuropathy in conjunc-
tion with vagus and accessory nerve palsies may also 
occur with a tumor or aneurysm in the posterior fossa 
or in the jugular foramen. Hoarseness due to vocal cord 
paralysis, some difﬁculty in swallowing, deviation of the 
soft palate to the intact side, anesthesia of the posterior 
wall of the pharynx, and weakness of the upper part of 
the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles make up 
the jugular foramen syndrome (Table 34-2).
DYSPHAGIA AND DYSPHONIA
When the intracranial portion of one vagus (tenth cra-
nial) nerve is interrupted, the soft palate droops ipsi-
laterally and does not rise in phonation. There is loss 
of the gag reﬂex on the affected side, as well as of the 
“curtain movement” of the lateral wall of the phar-
ynx, whereby the faucial pillars move medially as the 
palate rises in saying “ah.” The voice is hoarse and 
slightly nasal, and the vocal cord lies immobile midway 
between abduction and adduction. Loss of sensation at 
the external auditory meatus and the posterior pinna 
may also be present.
The pharyngeal branches of both vagal nerves may 
be affected in diphtheria; the voice has a nasal quality, 
and regurgitation of liquids through the nose occurs 
during the act of swallowing.
The vagus nerve may be involved at the meningeal 
level by neoplastic and infectious processes and within the 
medulla by tumors, vascular lesions (e.g., the lateral med-
ullary syndrome), and motor neuron disease. This nerve 
may be involved by infection with varicella zoster virus. 
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis, which cause hoarse-
ness and dysphagia by direct involvement of laryngeal 
and pharyngeal muscles, may be confused with diseases 
of the vagus nerves. Dysphagia is also a symptom in some 
patients with myotonic dystrophy. 
The recurrent laryngeal nerves, especially the left, are 
most often damaged as a result of intrathoracic disease. 
Aneurysm of the aortic arch, an enlarged left atrium, 
and tumors of the mediastinum and bronchi are much 
more frequent causes of an isolated vocal cord palsy 
than are intracranial disorders. However, a substan-
tial number of cases of recurrent laryngeal palsy remain 
idiopathic.
398
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
When confronted with a case of laryngeal palsy, the 
physician must attempt to determine the site of the 
lesion. If it is intramedullary, there are usually other 
signs, such as ipsilateral cerebellar dysfunction, loss of 
pain and temperature sensation over the ipsilateral face 
and contralateral arm and leg, and an ipsilateral Horner 
syndrome. If the lesion is extramedullary, the glosso-
pharyngeal and spinal accessory nerves are frequently 
involved (jugular foramen syndrome). If it is extracranial 
in the posterior laterocondylar or retroparotid space, 
there may be a combination of ninth, tenth, eleventh, 
and twelfth cranial nerve palsies and a Horner syndrome 
(Table 34-2). If there is no sensory loss over the palate 
and pharynx and no palatal weakness or dysphagia, the 
lesion is below the origin of the pharyngeal branches, 
which leave the vagus nerve high in the cervical region; 
the usual site of disease is then the mediastinum.
NECK WEAKNESS
Isolated involvement of the accessory (eleventh cranial) 
nerve can occur anywhere along its route, resulting in 
partial or complete paralysis of the sternocleidomas-
toid and trapezius muscles. More commonly, involve-
ment occurs in combination with deﬁcits of the ninth 
and tenth cranial nerves in the jugular foramen or after 
exit from the skull (Table 34-2). An idiopathic form 
of accessory neuropathy, akin to Bell’s palsy, has been 
described, and it may be recurrent in some cases. Most 
but not all patients recover.
TONGUE PARALYSIS
The hypoglossal (twelfth cranial) nerve supplies the ipsi-
lateral muscles of the tongue. The nucleus of the nerve 
or its ﬁbers of exit may be involved by intramedul-
lary lesions such as tumor, poliomyelitis, or most often 
motor neuron disease. Lesions of the basal meninges and 
the occipital bones (platybasia, invagination of occipital 
condyles, Paget’s disease) may compress the nerve in its 
extramedullary course or in the hypoglossal canal. Iso-
lated lesions of unknown cause can occur. Atrophy and 
fasciculation of the tongue develop weeks to months 
after interruption of the nerve.
MULTIPLE CRANIAL NERVE PALSIES
Several cranial nerves may be affected by the same dis-
ease process. In this situation, the main clinical problem 
is to determine whether the lesion lies within the brain-
stem or outside it. Lesions that lie on the surface of the 
brainstem are characterized by involvement of adjacent 
cranial nerves (often occurring in succession) and late 
and rather slight involvement of the long sensory and 
motor pathways and segmental structures lying within 
the brainstem. The opposite is true of primary lesions 
within the brainstem. The extramedullary lesion is 
more likely to cause bone erosion or enlargement of the 
foramens of exit of cranial nerves. The intramedullary 
lesion involving cranial nerves often produces a crossed 
TABLE 34-2 
CRANIAL NERVE SYNDROMES
SITE
CRANIAL NERVES
USUAL CAUSE
Sphenoid ﬁssure (superior orbital)
III, IV, ﬁrst division V, VI
Invasive tumors of sphenoid bone; aneurysms
Lateral wall of cavernous sinus
III, IV, ﬁrst division V, VI, often with 
proptosis
Infection, thrombosis, aneurysm, or ﬁstula  
of cavernous sinus; invasive tumors from 
sinuses and sella turcica; benign granuloma 
responsive to glucocorticoids
Retrosphenoid space
II, III, IV, V, VI
Large tumors of middle cranial fossa
Apex of petrous bone
V, VI
Petrositis; tumors of petrous bone
Internal auditory meatus
VII, VIII
Tumors of petrous bone (dermoids, etc.);  
infectious processes; acoustic neuroma
Pontocerebellar angle
V, VII, VIII, and sometimes IX
Acoustic neuroma; meningioma
Jugular foramen
IX, X, XI
Tumors and aneurysms
Posterior laterocondylar space
IX, X, XI, XII
Tumors of parotid gland and carotid body  
and metastatic tumors
Posterior retroparotid space
IX, X, XI, XII, and Horner syndrome
Tumors of parotid gland, carotid body, lymph 
nodes; metastatic tumor; tuberculous adenitis
399
 
CHAPTER 34
Trigeminal Neuralgia, Bell’s Palsy, and Other Cranial Nerve Disorders
sensory or motor paralysis (cranial nerve signs on one 
side of the body and tract signs on the opposite side).
Involvement of multiple cranial nerves outside the 
brainstem is frequently the result of trauma, localized 
infections including varicella zoster virus, infectious and 
noninfectious (especially carcinomatous) causes of men-
ingitis (Chaps. 40 and 41), granulomatous diseases such 
as granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), Behçet’s 
disease, vascular disorders including those associated with 
diabetes, enlarging saccular aneurysms, or locally inﬁltrat-
ing tumors. Among the tumors, nasopharyngeal cancers, 
lymphomas, neuroﬁbromas, meningiomas, chordomas, 
cholesteatomas, carcinomas, and sarcomas have all been 
observed to involve a succession of lower cranial nerves. 
Owing to their anatomic relationships, the multiple cra-
nial nerve palsies form a number of distinctive syn-
dromes, listed in Table 34-2. Sarcoidosis is the cause of 
some cases of multiple cranial neuropathy, and chronic 
glandular tuberculosis the cause of a few others. Platyba-
sia, basilar invagination of the skull, and the Chiari mal-
formation are additional causes. A purely motor disorder 
without atrophy always raises the question of myasthenia 
gravis (Chap. 47). As noted earlier, Guillain-Barré syn-
drome commonly affects the facial nerves bilaterally. In 
the Fisher variant of the Guillain-Barré syndrome, oculo-
motor paresis occurs with ataxia and areﬂexia in the limbs 
(Chap. 46). Wernicke encephalopathy can cause a severe 
ophthalmoplegia combined with other brainstem signs 
(Chap. 28).
The cavernous sinus syndrome (Fig. 34-4) is a dis-
tinctive and frequently life-threatening disorder. It 
often presents as orbital or facial pain; orbital swell-
ing and chemosis due to occlusion of the ophthalmic 
veins; fever; oculomotor neuropathy affecting the third, 
fourth, and sixth cranial nerves; and trigeminal neuropa-
thy affecting the ophthalmic (V1) and occasionally the 
maxillary (V2) divisions of the trigeminal nerve. Cav-
ernous sinus thrombosis, often secondary to infection 
from orbital cellulitis (frequently Staphylococcus aureus), 
a cutaneous source on the face, or sinusitis (especially 
with mucormycosis in diabetic patients), is the most fre-
quent cause; other etiologies include aneurysm of the 
carotid artery, a carotid-cavernous ﬁstula (orbital bruit 
may be present), meningioma, nasopharyngeal carci-
noma, other tumors, or an idiopathic granulomatous 
disorder (Tolosa-Hunt syndrome). The two cavernous 
sinuses directly communicate via intercavernous chan-
nels; thus, involvement on one side may extend to 
become bilateral. Early diagnosis is essential, especially 
when due to infection, and treatment depends on the 
underlying etiology.
In infectious cases, prompt administration of broad-
spectrum antibiotics, drainage of any abscess cavities, 
and identiﬁcation of the offending organism are essen-
tial. Anticoagulant therapy may beneﬁt cases of primary 
thrombosis. Repair or occlusion of the carotid artery may 
be required for treatment of ﬁstulas or aneurysms. The 
Tolosa-Hunt syndrome generally responds to glucocorti-
coids. A dramatic improvement in pain is usually evident 
within a few days; oral prednisone (60 mg daily) is usually 
continued for 2 weeks and then gradually tapered over a 
month, or longer if pain recurs.
An idiopathic form of multiple cranial nerve involve-
ment on one or both sides of the face is occasionally 
seen. The syndrome consists of a subacute onset of bor-
ing facial pain, followed by paralysis of motor cranial 
nerves. The clinical features overlap those of the Tolosa-
Hunt syndrome and appear to be due to idiopathic 
inﬂammation of the dura mater, which may be visual-
ized by MRI. The syndrome is frequently responsive to 
glucocorticoids.
Ant. cerebral a.
Int. carotid a.
Ant. clinoid process
Subarachnoid
space
Oculomotor (III) n.
Trochlear (IV) n.
Ophthalmic (VI) n.
Abducens (VI) n.
Maxillary (V2) n.
Pia
Dura
Arachnoid
Sphenoid
  sinus
Optic
  chiasma
Hypophysis
FIGURE 34-4 
Anatomy of the cavernous sinus in coronal section, illus-
trating the location of the cranial nerves in relation to the vas-
cular sinus, internal carotid artery (which loops anteriorly to 
the section), and surrounding structures.
 APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Spinal Cord Disease 
 SPINAL CORD ANATOMY RELEVANT TO 
CLINICAL SIGNS  The spinal cord is a thin, tubu-
lar extension of the central nervous system contained 
within the bony spinal canal. It originates at the medulla 
and continues caudally to the conus medullaris at the 
lumbar level; its fi brous extension, the fi lum terminale, 
terminates at the coccyx. The adult spinal cord is ∼46 cm 
(18 in.) long, oval in shape, and enlarged in the cervical 
and lumbar regions, where neurons that innervate the 
upper and lower extremities, respectively, are located. 
The white matter tracts containing ascending sensory 
and descending motor pathways are located peripher-
ally, whereas nerve cell bodies are clustered in an inner 
region shaped like a four-leaf clover that surrounds the 
central canal (anatomically an extension of the fourth 
ventricle). The membranes that cover the spinal cord—
the pia, arachnoid, and dura—are continuous with 
those of the brain. 
 The spinal cord has 31 segments, each defi ned 
by a pair of exiting ventral motor roots and entering 
 Stephen L. Hauser 
■  Allan H. Ropper 
400
 Diseases of the spinal cord are frequently devastating. 
They produce quadriplegia, paraplegia, and sensory deﬁ -
cits far beyond the damage they would inﬂ ict elsewhere 
in the nervous system because the spinal cord contains, 
in a small cross-sectional area, almost the entire motor 
output and sensory input of the trunk and limbs. Many 
spinal cord diseases are reversible if recognized and 
treated at an early stage  ( Table 35-1 ) ; thus, they are 
among the most critical of neurologic emergencies. The 
efﬁ cient use of diagnostic procedures, guided by knowl-
edge of the anatomy and the clinical features of spinal 
cord diseases, is required for a successful outcome. 
 DISEASES OF THE SPINAL CORD 
 CHAPTER 35 
dorsal sensory roots. During embryologic development, 
growth of the cord lags behind that of the vertebral 
column, and the mature spinal cord ends at approxi-
TABLE 35-1
 TREATABLE SPINAL CORD DISORDERS 
Compressive 
 Epidural, intradural, or intramedullary neoplasm 
 Epidural abscess 
 Epidural hemorrhage 
 Cervical spondylosis 
 Herniated disk 
 Posttraumatic compression by fractured or displaced 
vertebra or hemorrhage 
Vascular 
 Arteriovenous malformation 
 Antiphospholipid syndrome and other hypercoagulable 
states 
Inﬂ ammatory 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Neuromyelitis optica 
 Transverse myelitis 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Sjögren-related myelopathy 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Vasculitis 
Infectious 
 Viral: VZV, HSV-1 and -2, CMV, HIV, HTLV-I, others 
 Bacterial and mycobacterial:  Borrelia, Listeria, syphilis, 
others 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
 Parasitic: schistosomiasis, toxoplasmosis 
Developmental 
 Syringomyelia 
 Meningomyelocele 
 Tethered cord syndrome 
Metabolic 
 Vitamin B 12 deﬁ ciency (subacute combined degeneration) 
 Copper deﬁ ciency 
Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; 
HTLV, human T cell lymphotropic virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
401
mately the first lumbar vertebral body. The lower spinal 
nerves take an increasingly downward course to exit 
via intervertebral foramens. The first seven pairs of cer-
vical spinal nerves exit above the same-numbered ver-
tebral bodies, whereas all the subsequent nerves exit 
below the same-numbered vertebral bodies because 
of the presence of eight cervical spinal cord segments 
but only seven cervical vertebrae. The relationship 
between spinal cord segments and the corresponding 
vertebral bodies is shown in Table 35-2. These relation-
ships assume particular importance for localization of 
lesions that cause spinal cord compression. Sensory 
loss below the circumferential level of the umbilicus, for 
example, corresponds to the T10 cord segment but indi-
cates involvement of the cord adjacent to the seventh 
or eighth thoracic vertebral body (Figs. 15-2 and 15-3). 
In addition, at every level the main ascending and 
descending tracts are somatotopically organized with a 
laminated distribution that reflects the origin or destina-
tion of nerve fibers.
Determining the Level of the Lesion The 
presence of a horizontally defined level below which 
sensory, motor, and autonomic function is impaired 
is a hallmark of spinal cord disease. This sensory level is 
sought by asking the patient to identify a pinprick or 
cold stimulus applied to the proximal legs and lower 
trunk and successively moved up toward the neck on 
each side. Sensory loss below this level is the result of 
damage to the spinothalamic tract on the opposite side 
one to two segments higher in the case of a unilateral 
spinal cord lesion, and at the level of a bilateral lesion. 
The discrepancy in the level of a unilateral lesion is the 
result of the course of the second-order sensory fibers, 
which originate in the dorsal horn, and ascend for one 
or two levels as they cross anterior to the central canal 
to join the opposite spinothalamic tract. Lesions that 
transect the descending corticospinal and other motor 
tracts cause paraplegia or quadriplegia with height-
TABLE 35-2
SPINAL CORD LEVELS RELATIVE TO THE 
VERTEBRAL BODIES
SPINAL CORD LEVEL
CORRESPONDING VERTEBRAL BODY
Upper cervical
Same as cord level
Lower cervical
1 level higher
Upper thoracic
2 levels higher
Lower thoracic
2 to 3 levels higher
Lumbar
T10-T12
Sacral
T12-L1
ened deep tendon reflexes, Babinski signs, and eventual 
spasticity (the upper motor neuron syndrome). Trans-
verse damage to the cord also produces autonomic 
disturbances consisting of absent sweating below the 
implicated cord level and bladder, bowel, and sexual 
dysfunction.
The uppermost level of a spinal cord lesion can also 
be localized by attention to the segmental signs corre-
sponding to disturbed motor or sensory innervation by 
an individual cord segment. A band of altered sensation 
(hyperalgesia or hyperpathia) at the upper end of the 
sensory disturbance, fasciculations or atrophy in mus-
cles innervated by one or several segments, or a muted 
or absent deep tendon reflex may be noted at this level. 
These signs also can occur with focal root or peripheral 
nerve disorders; thus, they are most useful when they 
occur together with signs of long tract damage. With 
severe and acute transverse lesions, the limbs initially 
may be flaccid rather than spastic. This state of “spinal 
shock” lasts for several days, rarely for weeks, and should 
not be mistaken for extensive damage to the anterior 
horn cells over many segments of the cord or for an 
acute polyneuropathy.
The main features of transverse damage at each level 
of the spinal cord are summarized next.
Cervical Cord Upper cervical cord lesions produce 
quadriplegia and weakness of the diaphragm. Lesions 
at C4-C5 produce quadriplegia; at C5-C6, there is loss 
of power and reflexes in the biceps; at C7 weakness 
affects finger and wrist extensors and triceps; and at C8, 
finger and wrist flexion are impaired. Horner’s syndrome 
(miosis, ptosis, and facial hypohidrosis) may accompany 
a cervical cord lesion at any level.
Thoracic Cord Lesions here are localized by the 
sensory level on the trunk and by the site of midline 
back pain that may accompany the syndrome. Useful 
markers for localization are the nipples (T4) and umbi-
licus (T10). Leg weakness and disturbances of bladder 
and bowel function accompany the paralysis. Lesions 
at T9-T10 paralyze the lower—but not the upper—
abdominal muscles, resulting in upward movement 
of the umbilicus when the abdominal wall contracts 
(Beevor’s sign).
Lumbar Cord Lesions at the L2-L4 spinal cord lev-
els paralyze flexion and adduction of the thigh, weaken 
leg extension at the knee, and abolish the patellar reflex. 
Lesions at L5-S1 paralyze only movements of the foot 
and ankle, flexion at the knee, and extension of the 
thigh, and abolish the ankle jerks (S1).
Sacral Cord/Conus Medullaris The conus med-
ullaris is the tapered caudal termination of the spinal 
cord, comprising the lower sacral and single coccygeal 
segments. The distinctive conus syndrome consists of  
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
402
bilateral saddle anesthesia (S3-S5), prominent bladder and 
bowel dysfunction (urinary retention and incontinence 
with lax anal tone), and impotence. The bulbocaverno-
sus (S2-S4) and anal (S4-S5) reflexes are absent (Chap. 1). 
Muscle strength is largely preserved. By contrast, lesions 
of the cauda equina, the nerve roots derived from the 
lower cord, are characterized by low back and radicular 
pain, asymmetric leg weakness and sensory loss, variable 
areflexia in the lower extremities, and relative sparing of 
bowel and bladder function. Mass lesions in the lower 
spinal canal often produce a mixed clinical picture with 
elements of both cauda equina and conus medullaris syn-
dromes. Cauda equina syndromes are also discussed in 
Chap. 9.
Special Patterns of Spinal Cord Disease 
The locations of the major ascending and descend-
ing pathways of the spinal cord are shown in Fig. 35-1. 
Most fiber tracts—including the posterior columns and 
the spinocerebellar and pyramidal tracts—are situated 
on the side of the body they innervate. However, affer-
ent fibers mediating pain and temperature sensation 
ascend in the spinothalamic tract contralateral to the 
side they supply. The anatomic configurations of these 
tracts produce characteristic syndromes that provide 
clues to the underlying disease process.
Brown-Sequard Hemicord Syndrome This 
consists of ipsilateral weakness (corticospinal tract) 
and loss of joint position and vibratory sense (poste-
rior column), with contralateral loss of pain and tem-
perature sense (spinothalamic tract) one or two levels 
below the lesion. Segmental signs, such as radicular 
pain, muscle atrophy, or loss of a deep tendon reflex, 
are unilateral. Partial forms are more common than the 
fully developed syndrome.
Central Cord Syndrome This syndrome results 
from selective damage to the gray matter nerve cells 
and crossing spinothalamic tracts surrounding the 
central canal. In the cervical cord, the central cord syn-
drome produces arm weakness out of proportion to leg 
weakness and a “dissociated” sensory loss, meaning loss 
of pain and temperature sensations over the shoulders, 
lower neck, and upper trunk (cape distribution), in con-
trast to preservation of light touch, joint position, and 
vibration sense in these regions. Spinal trauma, syringo-
myelia, and intrinsic cord tumors are the main causes.
FIGURE 35-1 
Transverse section through the spinal cord, compos-
ite representation, illustrating the principal ascending (left) 
and descending (right) pathways. The lateral and ventral 
Anterior horn
(motor neurons)
Lateral
corticospinal
(pyramidal) tract
Dorsal root
Dorsal 
spinocerebellar
tract
Ventral
spinocerebellar
tract
Lateral
spinothalamic
tract
C
T
L S
Ventral
spinothalamic
tract
Pressure, touch
(minor role)
Ventral
(uncrossed)
corticospinal
tract
Tectospinal
tract
S L T C
C
T
L
S
Fasciculus
cuneatus
Rubrospinal
tract
Lateral
reticulospinal
tract
Vestibulospinal
tract
Ventral 
root
Axial and 
proximal
limb 
movements
(Joint Position, Vibration, Pressure)
Posterior Columns
Distal limb
movements
(minor role)
Pain, 
temperature
Ventral
reticulospinal
tract
Fasciculus
gracilis
S
L T C
Distal limb
movements
L/
S
L/
S
P
E
D
F
spinothalamic tracts ascend contralateral to the side of the 
body that is innervated. C, cervical; D, distal; E, extensors; F, 
ﬂexors; L, lumbar; P, proximal; S, sacral; T, thoracic.
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
403
Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Infarction 
of the cord is generally the result of occlusion or dimin-
ished flow in this artery. The result is extensive bilateral 
tissue destruction that spares the posterior columns. All 
spinal cord functions—motor, sensory, and autonomic—
are lost below the level of the lesion, with the striking 
exception of retained vibration and position sensation.
Foramen Magnum Syndrome Lesions in this 
area interrupt decussating pyramidal tract fibers des-
tined for the legs, which cross caudal to those of the 
arms, resulting in weakness of the legs (crural paresis). 
Compressive lesions near the foramen magnum may 
produce weakness of the ipsilateral shoulder and arm 
followed by weakness of the ipsilateral leg, then the 
contralateral leg, and finally the contralateral arm, an 
“around-the-clock” pattern that may begin in any of the 
four limbs. There is typically suboccipital pain spreading 
to the neck and shoulders.
Intramedullary and Extramedullary Syn-
dromes It is useful to differentiate intramedullary 
processes, arising within the substance of the cord, from 
extramedullary ones that compress the spinal cord or 
its vascular supply. The differentiating features are only 
relative and serve as clinical guides. With extramedul-
lary lesions, radicular pain is often prominent, and there 
is early sacral sensory loss (lateral spinothalamic tract) 
and spastic weakness in the legs (corticospinal tract) 
due to the superficial location of leg fibers in the corti-
cospinal tract. Intramedullary lesions tend to produce 
poorly localized burning pain rather than radicular pain 
and to spare sensation in the perineal and sacral areas 
(“sacral sparing”), reflecting the laminated configuration 
of the spinothalamic tract with sacral fibers outermost; 
corticospinal tract signs appear later. Regarding extra-
medullary lesions, a further distinction is made between 
extradural and intradural masses, as the former are gen-
erally malignant and the latter benign (neurofibroma 
being a common cause). Consequently, a long duration 
of symptoms favors an intradural origin.
ACUTE AND SUBACUTE SPINAL CORD 
DISEASES
The initial symptoms of disease that evolve over days or 
weeks are focal neck or back pain, followed by various 
combinations of paresthesias, sensory loss, motor weak-
ness, and sphincter disturbance evolving over hours to 
several days. There may be only mild sensory symptoms 
or a devastating functional transection of the cord. Par-
tial lesions selectively involve the posterior columns or 
anterior spinothalamic tracts or are limited to one side of 
the cord. Paresthesias or numbness typically begins in the 
feet and ascends symmetrically or asymmetrically. These 
symptoms initially simulate Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
but involvement of the trunk with a sharply demarcated 
spinal cord level indicates the myelopathic nature of the 
process. In severe and abrupt cases, areﬂexia reﬂecting 
spinal shock may be present, but hyperreﬂexia super-
venes over days or weeks; persistent areﬂexic paralysis 
with a sensory level indicates necrosis over multiple seg-
ments of the spinal cord.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Compressive and Noncompressive 
 
Myelopathy
DISTINGUISHING 
COMPRESSIVE 
FROM 
NONCOMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHY The first 
priority is to exclude a treatable compression of the 
cord by a mass. The common causes are tumor, epidu-
ral abscess or hematoma, herniated disk, or vertebral 
pathology. Epidural compression due to malignancy 
or abscess often causes warning signs of neck or back 
pain, bladder disturbances, and sensory symptoms 
that precede the development of paralysis. Spinal sub-
luxation, hemorrhage, and noncompressive etiologies 
such as infarction are more likely to produce myelopa-
thy without antecedent symptoms. MRI with gadolin-
ium infusion, centered on the clinically suspected level, 
is the initial diagnostic procedure; in some cases it is 
appropriate to image the entire spine (cervical through 
sacral regions) to search for additional clinically silent 
lesions. Once compressive lesions have been excluded, 
noncompressive causes of acute myelopathy that are 
intrinsic to the cord are considered, primarily vascular, 
inflammatory, and infectious etiologies.
COMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHIES
Neoplastic spinal cord compression
In adults, most neoplasms are epidural in origin, result-
ing from metastases to the adjacent spinal bones. The 
propensity of solid tumors to metastasize to the vertebral 
column probably reﬂects the high proportion of bone 
marrow located in the axial skeleton. Almost any malig-
nant tumor can metastasize to the spinal column, with 
breast, lung, prostate, kidney, lymphoma, and plasma 
cell dyscrasia being particularly frequent. The thoracic 
spinal column is most commonly involved; exceptions 
are metastases from prostate and ovarian cancer, which 
occur disproportionately in the sacral and lumbar ver-
tebrae, probably resulting from spread through Batson’s 
plexus, a network of veins along the anterior epidural 
space. Retroperitoneal neoplasms (especially lymphomas 
or sarcomas) enter the spinal canal through the interver-
tebral foramens and produce radicular pain with signs of 
root weakness prior to cord compression.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
404
Pain is usually the initial symptom of spinal metasta-
sis; it may be aching and localized or sharp and radiating 
in quality and typically worsens with movement, cough-
ing, or sneezing and characteristically awakens patients at 
night. A recent onset of persistent back pain, particularly 
if in the thoracic spine (which is uncommonly involved 
by spondylosis), should prompt consideration of ver-
tebral metastasis. Rarely, pain is mild or absent. Plain 
radiographs of the spine and radionuclide bone scans 
have only a limited role in diagnosis because they do not 
identify 15–20% of metastatic vertebral lesions and fail to 
detect paravertebral masses that reach the epidural space 
through the intervertebral foramens. MRI provides 
excellent anatomic resolution of the extent of spinal 
tumors (Fig. 35-2) and is able to distinguish between 
malignant lesions and other masses—epidural abscess, 
tuberculoma, or epidural hemorrhage, among others—
that present in a similar fashion. Vertebral metastases are 
usually hypointense relative to a normal bone marrow 
signal on T1-weighted MRI scans; after the administra-
tion of gadolinium, contrast enhancement may decep-
tively “normalize” the appearance of the tumor by 
increasing its intensity to that of normal bone marrow. 
Infections of the spinal column (osteomyelitis and related 
disorders) are distinctive in that, unlike tumor, they may 
cross the disk space to involve the adjacent vertebral 
body.
If spinal cord compression is suspected, imaging 
should be obtained promptly. If there are radicular 
symptoms but no evidence of myelopathy, it is usu-
ally safe to defer imaging for 24–48 h. Up to 40% of 
FIGURE 35-2 
Epidural spinal cord compression due to breast carci-
noma. Sagittal T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) MRI 
scans through the cervicothoracic junction reveal an inﬁltrated 
and collapsed second thoracic vertebral body with posterior 
displacement and compression of the upper thoracic spi-
nal cord. The low-intensity bone marrow signal in A signiﬁes 
replacement by tumor.
patients who present with cord compression at one 
level are found to have asymptomatic epidural metasta-
ses elsewhere; thus, the length of the spine should be 
imaged when epidural malignancy is in question.
TREATMENT 
Neoplastic Spinal Cord Compression
Management of cord compression includes glucocor-
ticoids to reduce cord edema, local radiotherapy (initi-
ated as early as possible) to the symptomatic lesion, 
and specific therapy for the underlying tumor type. Glu-
cocorticoids (dexamethasone, up to 40 mg daily) can 
be administered before the imaging study if the clini-
cal suspicion is strong and continued at a lower dose 
until radiotherapy (generally 3000 cGy administered in 
15 daily fractions) is completed. Radiotherapy appears 
to be effective even for most classically radioresistant 
metastases. A good response to radiotherapy can be 
expected in individuals who are ambulatory at presen-
tation. Treatment usually prevents new weakness, and 
some recovery of motor function occurs in up to one-
third of treated patients. Motor deficits (paraplegia or 
quadriplegia), once established for >12 h, do not usu-
ally improve, and beyond 48 h the prognosis for sub-
stantial motor recovery is poor. Although most patients 
do not experience recurrences in the months following 
radiotherapy, with survival beyond 2 years, recurrence 
becomes increasingly likely and can be managed with 
additional radiotherapy. New techniques, including 
intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), can deliver 
high doses of focused radiation with extreme precision, 
and preliminary data suggest that these methods pro-
duce similar rates of response compared to traditional 
radiotherapy. Biopsy of the epidural mass is unneces-
sary in patients with known primary cancer, but it is 
indicated if a history of underlying cancer is lacking. 
Surgery, either decompression by laminectomy or ver-
tebral body resection, is usually considered when signs 
of cord compression worsen despite radiotherapy, when 
the maximum tolerated dose of radiotherapy has been 
delivered previously to the site, or when a vertebral 
compression fracture or spinal instability contributes to 
cord compression. The routine use of radiotherapy as 
first-line treatment for most cases of malignant spinal 
cord compression has recently been called into ques-
tion by a randomized clinical trial indicating that sur-
gery followed by radiotherapy is more effective than 
radiotherapy alone for patients with a single area of 
spinal cord compression by extradural tumor; patients 
with recurrent cord compression, brain metastases, 
radiosensitive tumors, or severe motor symptoms of 
>48 h duration were excluded from this study.
In contrast to tumors of the epidural space, most 
intradural mass lesions are slow-growing and benign. 
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
405
Meningiomas and neurofibromas account for most 
of these, with occasional cases caused by chordoma, 
lipoma, dermoid, or sarcoma. Meningiomas (Fig. 35-3) 
are often located posterior to the thoracic cord or near 
the foramen magnum, although they can arise from 
the meninges anywhere along the spinal canal. Neu-
rofibromas are benign tumors of the nerve sheath that 
typically arise near the posterior root; when multiple, 
neurofibromatosis is the likely etiology. Symptoms usu-
ally begin with radicular sensory symptoms followed by 
an asymmetric, progressive spinal cord syndrome. Ther-
apy is by surgical resection.
Primary intramedullary tumors of the spinal cord 
are uncommon. They present as central cord or hemi-
cord syndromes, often in the cervical region; there 
may be poorly localized burning pain in the extremi-
ties and sparing of sacral sensation. In adults, these 
lesions are ependymomas, hemangioblastomas, or low-
grade astrocytomas (Fig. 35-4). Complete resection 
of an intramedullary ependymoma is often possible 
with microsurgical techniques. Debulking of an intra-
medullary astrocytoma can also be helpful, as these 
are often slowly growing lesions; the value of adjunc-
tive radiotherapy and chemotherapy is uncertain. Sec-
ondary (metastatic) intramedullary tumors also occur, 
FIGURE 35-3 
MRI of a thoracic meningioma. Coronal T1-weighted post-
contrast image through the thoracic spinal cord demonstrates 
intense and uniform enhancement of a well-circumscribed 
extramedullary mass (arrows), which displaces the spinal 
cord to the left.
FIGURE 35-4 
MRI of an intramedullary astrocytoma. Sagittal T1-weighted 
postcontrast image through the cervical spine demonstrates 
expansion of the upper cervical spine by a mass lesion ema-
nating from within the spinal cord at the cervicomedullary 
junction. Irregular peripheral enhancement occurs within the 
mass (arrows).
especially in patients with advanced metastatic disease 
(Chap. 37), although these are not nearly as frequent as 
brain metastases.
Spinal epidural abscess
Spinal epidural abscess presents as a clinical triad of 
midline dorsal pain, fever, and progressive limb weak-
ness. Prompt recognition of this distinctive process will 
in most cases prevent permanent sequelae. Aching pain 
is almost always present, either over the spine or in a 
radicular pattern. The duration of pain prior to presen-
tation is generally ≤2 weeks but may on occasion be 
several months or longer. Fever is usual, accompanied 
by elevated white blood cell count, sedimentation rate, 
and C-reactive protein. As the abscess expands, further 
spinal cord damage results from venous congestion and 
thrombosis. Once weakness and other signs of myelopa-
thy appear, progression may be rapid. A more chronic 
sterile granulomatous form of abscess is also known, 
usually after treatment of an acute epidural infection.
Risk factors include an impaired immune status (dia-
betes mellitus, renal failure, alcoholism, malignancy), 
intravenous drug abuse, and infections of the skin or 
other tissues. Two-thirds of epidural infections result 
from hematogenous spread of bacteria from the skin 
(furunculosis), soft tissue (pharyngeal or dental abscesses), 
or deep viscera (bacterial endocarditis). The remainder 
arise from direct extension of a local infection to the 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
406
subdural space; examples of local predisposing condi-
tions are vertebral osteomyelitis, decubitus ulcers, lum-
bar puncture, epidural anesthesia, or spinal surgery. Most 
cases are due to Staphylococcus aureus; gram-negative 
bacilli, Streptococcus, anaerobes, and fungi can also cause 
epidural abscesses. Tuberculosis from an adjacent verte-
bral source (Pott’s disease) remains an important cause in 
the underdeveloped world (Fig. 35-5).
MRI scans localize the abscess and exclude other 
causes of myelopathy. Lumbar puncture is only required 
if encephalopathy or other clinical signs raise the question 
of associated meningitis, a feature that is found in <25% 
of cases. The level of the puncture should be planned 
to minimize the risk of meningitis due to passage of the 
needle through infected tissue. A high cervical tap is 
sometimes the safest approach. CSF abnormalities in sub-
dural abscess consist of pleocytosis with a preponderance 
of polymorphonuclear cells, an elevated protein level, 
and a reduced glucose level, but the responsible organism 
is not cultured unless there is associated meningitis. Blood 
cultures are positive in <25% of cases.
TREATMENT 
Spinal Epidural Abscess
Treatment is by decompressive laminectomy with 
debridement combined with long-term antibiotic treat-
ment. Surgical evacuation prevents development of paral-
ysis and may improve or reverse paralysis in evolution, but 
it is unlikely to improve deficits of more than several days 
duration. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started 
empirically before surgery and then modified on the basis 
of culture results; medication is continued for at least  
4 weeks. If surgery is contraindicated or if there is a fixed 
paraplegia or quadriplegia that is unlikely to improve fol-
lowing surgery, long-term administration of systemic and 
oral antibiotics can be used; in such cases, the choice of 
antibiotics may be guided by results of blood cultures. 
However, paralysis may develop or progress during anti-
biotic therapy; thus, initial surgical management remains 
the treatment of choice unless the abscess is limited in 
size and causes few or no neurologic signs.
With prompt diagnosis and treatment of spinal epi-
dural abscess, up to two-thirds of patients experience 
significant recovery.
Spinal epidural hematoma
Hemorrhage into the epidural (or subdural) space causes 
acute focal or radicular pain followed by variable signs of a 
spinal cord or conus medullaris disorder. Therapeutic anti-
coagulation, trauma, tumor, or blood dyscrasias are predis-
posing conditions. Rare cases complicate lumbar puncture 
or epidural anesthesia. MRI and CT conﬁrm the clinical 
suspicion and can delineate the extent of the bleeding. 
FIGURE 35-5 
MRI of a spinal epidural abscess due to tuberculosis. 
A. Sagittal T2-weighted free spin-echo MR sequence. A 
hypointense mass replaces the posterior elements of C3 
and extends epidurally to compress the spinal cord (arrows). 
B. Sagittal T1-weighted image after contrast administra-
tion reveals a diffuse enhancement of the epidural process 
(arrows) with extension into the epidural space.
Treatment consists of prompt reversal of any underly-
ing clotting disorder and surgical decompression. Surgery 
may be followed by substantial recovery, especially in 
patients with some preservation of motor function preop-
eratively. Because of the risk of hemorrhage, lumbar punc-
ture should be avoided whenever possible in patients with 
severe thrombocytopenia or other coagulopathies.
Hematomyelia
Hemorrhage into the substance of the spinal cord is a rare 
result of trauma, intraparenchymal vascular malforma-
tion (see later in the chapter), vasculitis due to polyarteri-
tis nodosa or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), bleeding 
disorders, or a spinal cord neoplasm. Hematomyelia pres-
ents as an acute painful transverse myelopathy. With large 
lesions, extension into the subarachnoid space results in 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (Chap. 28). Diagnosis is by MRI 
or CT. Therapy is supportive, and surgical intervention is 
generally not useful. An exception is hematomyelia due to 
an underlying vascular malformation, for which selective 
spinal angiography may be indicated, followed by surgery 
to evacuate the clot and remove the underlying vascular 
lesion.
NONCOMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHIES
The most frequent causes of noncompressive acute 
transverse myelopathy (ATM) are spinal cord infarc-
tion; systemic inﬂammatory disorders, including SLE and 
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
407
TABLE 35-3
EVALUATION OF ACUTE TRANSVERSE MYELOPATHY
1.  MRI of spinal cord with and without contrast (exclude 
compressive causes).
2.  CSF studies: Cell count, protein, glucose, IgG index/
synthesis rate, oligoclonal bands, VDRL; Gram’s stain, 
acid-fast bacilli, and India ink stains; PCR for VZV, 
HSV-2, HSV-1, EBV, CMV, HHV-6, enteroviruses, HIV; 
antibody for HTLV-I, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae, and Chlamydia pneumoniae; viral, bacte-
rial, mycobacterial, and fungal cultures.
3.  Blood studies for infection: HIV; RPR; IgG and IgM 
enterovirus antibody; IgM mumps, measles, rubella, 
group B arbovirus, Brucella melitensis, Chlamydia psittaci, 
Bartonella henselae, schistosomal antibody; cultures for 
B. melitensis. Also consider nasal/pharyngeal/anal cul-
tures for enteroviruses; stool O&P for Schistosoma ova.
4.  Immune-mediated disorders: ESR; ANA; ENA; dsDNA; 
rheumatoid factor; anti-SSA; anti-SSB, complement 
levels; antiphospholipid and anticardiolipin antibodies; 
p-ANCA; antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin antibodies; 
if Sjögren syndrome suspected, Schirmer test, salivary 
gland scintography, and salivary/lacrimal gland biopsy.
5.  Sarcoidosis: Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme; 
serum Ca; 24-h urine Ca; chest x-ray; chest CT; total 
body gallium scan; lymph node biopsy.
6.  Demyelinating disease: Brain MRI scan, evoked potentials, 
CSF oligoclonal bands, neuromyelitis optica antibody 
(anti-aquaporin-4 [NMO] antibody).
7. Vascular causes: CT myelogram; spinal angiogram.
Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibodies; CMV, cytomegalovirus; 
EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ENA, epithelial neutrophil-activating pep-
tide; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; HHV, human herpes virus; 
HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV, human T cell leukemia/lymphoma 
virus; O&P, ova and parasites; p-ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophilic 
cytoplasmic antibodies; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid 
plasma reagin (test); VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; 
VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
sarcoidosis; demyelinating diseases, including multiple 
sclerosis (MS); neuromyelitis optica (NMO); postinfec-
tious or idiopathic transverse myelitis, which is presumed 
to be an immune condition related to acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (Chap. 39); and infectious (primarily 
viral) causes. After spinal cord compression is excluded, 
the evaluation generally requires a lumbar puncture and 
a search for underlying systemic disease (Table 35-3).
Spinal cord infarction
The cord is supplied by three arteries that course verti-
cally over its surface: a single anterior spinal artery and 
paired posterior spinal arteries. In addition to the verte-
bral arteries, the anterior spinal artery is fed by radicular 
vessels that arise at C6, at an upper thoracic level, and, 
most consistently, at T11-L2 (artery of Adamkiewicz). 
At each segment, paired penetrating vessels branch 
from the anterior spinal artery to supply the anterior 
two-thirds of the spinal cord; the posterior spinal arter-
ies, which often become less distinct below the midtho-
racic level, supply the posterior columns.
Spinal cord ischemia can occur at any level; however, 
the presence of the artery of Adamkiewicz creates a water-
shed of marginal blood ﬂow in the upper thoracic seg-
ments. With systemic hypotension or cross-clamping of 
the aorta, cord infarction occurs at the level of greatest 
ischemic risk, usually T3-T4, and also at boundary zones 
between the anterior and posterior spinal artery territories 
which may result in a rapidly progressive syndrome (over 
hours) of weakness and spasticity with little sensory change.
Acute infarction in the territory of the anterior spinal 
artery produces paraplegia or quadriplegia, dissociated 
sensory loss affecting pain and temperature sense but 
sparing vibration and position sense, and loss of sphinc-
ter control (“anterior cord syndrome”). Onset may be 
sudden and dramatic but more typically is progressive 
over minutes or a few hours, quite unlike stroke in the 
cerebral hemispheres. Sharp midline or radiating back 
pain localized to the area of ischemia is frequent. Are-
ﬂexia due to spinal shock is often present initially; with 
time, hyperreﬂexia and spasticity appear. Less common 
is infarction in the territory of the posterior spinal arteries, 
resulting in loss of posterior column function.
Spinal cord infarction results from aortic athero-
sclerosis, dissecting aortic aneurysm (manifest as chest 
or back pain with diminished pulses in legs), vertebral 
artery occlusion or dissection in the neck, aortic sur-
gery, or profound hypotension from any cause. Cardio-
genic emboli and vasculitis related to collagen vascular 
disease (particularly SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, and the 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome [see later]) are other 
causative conditions. Occasional cases develop from embo-
lism of nucleus pulposus material into spinal vessels, usually 
from local spine trauma. In a substantial number of cases 
no cause can be found, and thromboembolism in arterial 
feeders is suspected. The MRI may fail to demonstrate 
limited infarctions of the cord, especially in the ﬁrst day, 
but as often it becomes abnormal at the affected level.
In cord infarction due to presumed thromboembo-
lism, acute anticoagulation is probably not indicated, with 
the exception of the unusual transient ischemic attack 
or incomplete infarction with a stuttering or progres-
sive course. The antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is 
treated with anticoagulation. Drainage of spinal ﬂuid has 
reportedly been successful in some cases of cord infarc-
tion but has not been studied systematically.
Inﬂammatory and immune  
myelopathies (myelitis)
This broad category includes the demyelinating con-
ditions MS, NMO, and postinfectious myelitis, as 
well as sarcoidosis and connective tissue disease. 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
408
In approximately one-quarter of cases of myelitis, no 
underlying cause can be identiﬁed. Some will later mani-
fest additional symptoms of an immune-mediated disease. 
Recurrent episodes of myelitis are usually due to one of the 
immune-mediated diseases or to infection with herpes 
simplex virus (HSV) type 2 (see later in the chapter).
Multiple sclerosis
MS (Chap. 39) may present with acute myelitis, par-
ticularly in individuals of Asian or African ancestry. In 
whites, MS rarely causes a complete transverse myelop-
athy (i.e., acute bilateral signs), but it is among the most 
common causes of a partial syndrome. MRI ﬁndings in 
MS-associated myelitis typically consist of mild swelling 
and edema of the cord and diffuse or multifocal areas 
of abnormal signal on T2-weighted sequences. Contrast 
enhancement, indicating disruption in the blood-brain 
barrier associated with inﬂammation, is present in many 
acute cases. A brain MRI is most helpful in gauging the 
likelihood that a case of myelitis represents an initial 
attack of MS. A normal scan indicates that the risk of 
evolution to MS is low, ∼10–15% over 5 years; in con-
trast, the ﬁnding of multiple periventricular T2-bright 
lesions indicates a much higher risk, >50% over 5 years 
and >90% by 14 years. The CSF may be normal, but 
more often there is a mild mononuclear cell pleocytosis, 
with normal or mildly elevated CSF protein levels; oli-
goclonal bands are variable, but when bands are present, 
a diagnosis of MS is more likely.
There are no adequate trials of therapy for MS-
associated transverse myelitis. Intravenous methyl-
prednisolone (500 mg qd for 3 days) followed by oral 
prednisone (1 mg/kg per day for several weeks, then 
gradual taper) has been used as initial treatment. A 
course of plasma exchange is indicated for severe cases 
if glucocorticoids are ineffective.
Neuromyelitis optica
NMO is an immune-mediated demyelinating disor-
der consisting of a severe myelopathy that is typically 
longitudinally extensive, meaning that the lesion spans 
three or more vertebral segments. NMO is associated 
with optic neuritis that is often bilateral and may pre-
cede or follow myelitis by weeks or months, and also by 
brainstem and in some cases hypothalamic involvement. 
However, isolated recurrent myelitis without optic 
nerve involvemement can occur in NMO; affected indi-
viduals are usually female, and often of Asian ancestry. 
CSF studies reveal a variable mononuclear pleocytosis 
of up to several hundred cells per microliter; unlike MS, 
oligoclonal bands are generally absent. Diagnostic serum 
autoantibodies against the water channel protein aqua-
porin-4 are present in 60–70% of patients with NMO. 
NMO has also been associated with SLE and antiphos-
pholipid antibodies (see later) as well as with other con-
nective tissue diseases; rare cases are paraneoplastic in 
origin. Treatment is with glucocorticoids and, for refrac-
tory cases, plasma exchange (as for MS, discussed ear-
lier). Preliminary data suggest that treatment with aza-
thioprine, mycophenolate, or anti-CD20 (anti–B cell) 
monoclonal antibody may protect against subsequent 
relapses; treatment for 5 years or longer is generally rec-
ommended. NMO is discussed in Chap. 39.
Systemic immune-mediated disorders
Myelitis occurs in a small number of patients with SLE, 
many cases of which are associated with antiphospholipid 
antibodies. The CSF is usually normal or shows a mild 
lymphocytic pleocytosis; oligoclonal bands are a variable 
ﬁnding. Responses to glucocorticoids and/or cyclophos-
phamide have been reported, but there is no systematic 
evidence of their beneﬁt. Other immune-mediated myelit-
ides include cases associated with Sjögren’s syndrome, 
mixed connective tissue disease, Behçet’s syndrome, vascu-
litis with perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibod-
ies (p-ANCA), and primary CNS vasculitis.
Another important consideration in this group is sar-
coid mye-lopathy that may present as a slowly progressive 
or relapsing disorder. MRI reveals an edematous swelling 
of the spinal cord that may mimic tumor; there is almost 
always gadolinium enhancement of active lesions and 
in some cases of the adjacent surface of the cord; lesions 
may be single or multiple, and on axial images, enhance-
ment of the central cord is usually present. The typical 
CSF proﬁle consists of a variable lymphocytic pleocytosis 
and mildly elevated protein level; in a minority of cases 
reduced glucose and oligoclonal bands are found. The 
diagnosis is particularly difﬁcult when systemic mani-
festations of sarcoid are minor or absent (nearly 50% of 
cases) or when other typical neurologic manifestations of 
the disease—such as cranial neuropathy, hypothalamic 
involvement, or meningeal enhancement visualized by 
MRI—are lacking. A slit-lamp examination of the eye to 
search for uveitis; chest x-ray and CT to assess pulmonary 
involvement; and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, serum 
or CSF angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE; present in 
only a minority of cases), serum calcium, and a gallium 
scan may assist in the diagnosis. The usefulness of spinal 
ﬂuid ACE is uncertain. Initial treatment is with oral glu-
cocorticoids; immunosuppressant drugs are used for resis-
tant cases. 
Postinfectious myelitis
Many cases of myelitis, termed postinfectious or postvac-
cinal, follow an infection or vaccination. Numerous 
organisms have been implicated, including Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), mycoplasma, 
inﬂuenza, measles, varicella, rubeola, and mumps. As 
in the related disorder acute disseminated encephalo-
myelitis (Chap. 39), postinfectious myelitis often begins 
as the patient appears to be recovering from an acute 
febrile infection, or in the subsequent days or weeks, 
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
409
but an infectious agent cannot be isolated from the ner-
vous system or spinal ﬂuid. The presumption is that the 
myelitis represents an autoimmune disorder triggered by 
infection and is not due to direct infection of the spinal 
cord. No randomized controlled trials of therapy exist; 
treatment is usually with glucocorticoids or, in fulmi-
nant cases, plasma exchange.
Acute infectious myelitis
Many viruses have been associated with an acute myeli-
tis that is infectious in nature rather than postinfectious. 
Nonetheless, the two processes are often difﬁcult to 
distinguish. Herpes zoster is the best characterized viral 
myelitis, but herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2, 
EBV, CMV, and rabies virus are other well-described 
causes. HSV-2 (and less commonly HSV-1) produces a 
distinctive syndrome of recurrent sacral myelitis in asso-
ciation with outbreaks of genital herpes mimicking MS. 
Poliomyelitis is the prototypic viral myelitis, but it is 
more or less restricted to the gray matter of the cord. 
Chronic viral myelitic infections, such as that due to 
HIV, are discussed later.
Bacterial and mycobacterial myelitis (most are essen-
tially abscesses) are far less common than viral causes 
and much less frequent than cerebral bacterial abscess. 
Almost any pathogenic species may be responsible, 
including Listeria monocytogenes, Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme 
disease), and Treponema pallidum (syphilis). Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae may be a cause of myelitis, but its status is 
uncertain since many cases are more properly classiﬁed as 
postinfectious.
Schistosomiasis is an important cause of parasitic myeli-
tis in endemic areas. The process is intensely inﬂammatory 
and granulomatous, caused by a local response to tissue-
digesting enzymes from the ova of the parasite, typically 
S. mansoni. Toxoplasmosis can occasionally cause a focal 
myelopathy, and this diagnosis should be considered in 
patients with AIDS.
In cases of suspected viral myelitis, it may be appro-
priate to begin speciﬁc therapy pending laboratory con-
ﬁrmation. Herpes zoster, HSV, and EBV myelitis are 
treated with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg q8h) or 
oral valacyclovir (2 g tid) for 10–14 days; CMV with 
ganciclovir (5 mg/kg IV bid) plus foscarnet (60 mg/kg 
IV tid), or cidofovir (5 mg/kg per week for 2 weeks).
CHRONIC MYELOPATHIES
SPONDYLITIC MYELOPATHY
Spondylitic myelopathy is one of the most common 
causes of chronic cord compression and of gait difﬁ-
culty in the elderly. Neck and shoulder pain with stiff-
ness are early symptoms; impingement of bone and soft 
tissue overgrowth on nerve roots results in radicular arm 
pain, most often in a C5 or C6 distribution. Compres-
sion of the cervical cord, which occurs in fewer than 
one-third of cases, produces a slowly progressive spastic 
paraparesis, at times asymmetric and often accompanied 
by paresthesias in the feet and hands. Vibratory sense 
is diminished in the legs, there is a Romberg sign, and 
occasionally there is a sensory level for vibration on the 
upper thorax. In some cases, coughing or straining pro-
duces leg weakness or radiating arm or shoulder pain. 
Dermatomal sensory loss in the arms, atrophy of intrin-
sic hand muscles, increased deep-tendon reﬂexes in the 
legs, and extensor plantar responses are common. Uri-
nary urgency or incontinence occurs in advanced cases, 
but there are many alternative causes of these prob-
lems in older individuals. A tendon reﬂex in the arms is 
often diminished at some level, most often at the biceps 
(C5-C6). In individual cases, radicular, myelopathic, or 
combined signs may predominate. The diagnosis should 
be considered in cases of progressive cervical myelopa-
thy, paresthesias of the feet and hands, or wasting of the 
hands.
Diagnosis is usually made by MRI and may be sus-
pected from CT images; plain x-rays are less helpful. 
Extrinsic cord compression and deformation is appreci-
ated on axial MRI views, and T2-weighted sequences 
may reveal areas of high signal intensity within the cord 
adjacent to the site of compression. A cervical collar may 
be helpful in milder cases, but deﬁnitive therapy consists 
of surgical decompression. Posterior laminectomy or an 
anterior approach with resection of the protruded disk 
and bony material may be required. Cervical spondylo-
sis and related degenerative diseases of the spine are dis-
cussed in Chap. 9.
VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS OF THE 
CORD AND DURA
Vascular malformations of the cord and overlying dura 
are treatable causes of progressive myelopathy. Most 
common are ﬁstulas located posteriorly along the surface 
of the cord or within the dura. Most dural arteriovenous 
(AV) ﬁstulas are located at or below the midthoracic 
level, usually consisting of a direct connection between 
a radicular feeding artery in the nerve root sleeve with 
dural veins. The typical presentation is a middle-aged 
man with a progressive myelopathy that worsens slowly 
or intermittently and may have periods of remission 
resembling MS. Acute deterioration due to hemorrhage 
into the spinal cord or subarachnoid space may also 
occur but is rare. A saltatory progression is common and 
is the result of local ischemia and edema from venous 
congestion. Most patients have incomplete sensory, 
motor, and bladder disturbances. The motor disorder 
may predominate and produce a mixture of upper and 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
410
restricted lower motor neuron signs, simulating amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Pain over the dorsal spine, 
dysesthesias, or radicular pain may be present. Other 
symptoms suggestive of arteriovenous malformation 
(AVM) include intermittent claudication, symptoms that 
change with posture, exertion such as singing, menses, 
or fever. Less commonly, AVM disorders are intramed-
ullary rather than dural. One classic syndrome presents 
as a progressive thoracic myelopathy with paraparesis 
developing over weeks or several months, characterized 
pathologically by abnormally thick, hyalinized vessels 
within the cord (Foix-Alajouanine syndrome).
Spinal bruits are infrequent but should be sought at 
rest and after exercise in suspected cases. A vascular nevus 
on the overlying skin may indicate an underlying vascu-
lar malformation (Klippel-Trénaunay-Weber syndrome). 
High-resolution MRI with contrast administration 
detects many but not all AVMs (Fig. 35-6). An uncer-
tain proportion not detected by MRI may be visualized 
by CT myelography as enlarged vessels along the surface 
of the cord. Deﬁnitive diagnosis requires selective spinal 
angiography, which deﬁnes the feeding vessels and the 
extent of the malformation. Endovascular embolization 
FIGURE 35-6 
Arteriovenous malformation. Sagittal MR scans of the 
thoracic spinal cord: T2 fast spin-echo technique (left) and 
T1 postcontrast image (right). On the T2-weighted image 
(left), abnormally high signal intensity is noted in the central 
aspect of the spinal cord (arrowheads). Numerous punctate 
ﬂow voids indent the dorsal and ventral spinal cord (arrow). 
These represent the abnormally dilated venous plexus 
supplied by a dural arteriovenous ﬁstula. After contrast 
administration (right), multiple, serpentine, enhancing veins 
(arrows) on the ventral and dorsal aspect of the thoracic 
spinal cord are visualized, diagnostic of arteriovenous mal-
formation. This patient was a 54-year-old man with a 4-year 
history of progressive paraparesis.
of the major feeding vessels may stabilize a progressive 
neurologic deﬁcit or allow for gradual recovery.
RETROVIRUS-ASSOCIATED MYELOPATHIES
The myelopathy associated with the human T cell lym-
photropic virus type I (HTLV-I), formerly called tropical 
spastic paraparesis, is a slowly progressive spastic syndrome 
with variable sensory and bladder disturbance. Approxi-
mately half of patients have mild back or leg pain. The 
neurologic signs may be asymmetric, often lacking a 
well-deﬁned sensory level; the only sign in the arms 
may be hyperreﬂexia after several years of illness. The 
onset is insidious, and the illness is slowly progressive at 
a variable rate; most patients are unable to walk within 
10 years of onset. This presentation may resemble pri-
mary progressive MS or a thoracic AVM. Diagnosis is 
made by demonstration of HTLV-I–speciﬁc antibody in 
serum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 
conﬁrmed by radioimmunoprecipitation or Western 
blot analysis. There is no effective treatment, but symp-
tomatic therapy for spasticity and bladder symptoms may 
be helpful.
A progressive myelopathy may also result from HIV 
infection (Chap. 42). It is characterized by vacuolar 
degeneration of the posterior and lateral tracts, resem-
bling subacute combined degeneration (see later).
SYRINGOMYELIA
Syringomyelia is a developmental cavity of the cervical 
cord that is prone to enlarge and produce progressive 
myelopathy. Symptoms begin insidiously in adoles-
cence or early adulthood, progress irregularly, and may 
undergo spontaneous arrest for several years. Many 
young patients acquire a cervical-thoracic scoliosis. 
More than half of all cases are associated with Chiari 
type 1 malformations in which the cerebellar tonsils 
protrude through the foramen magnum and into the 
cervical spinal canal. The pathophysiology of syrinx 
expansion is controversial, but some interference with 
the normal ﬂow of CSF seems likely, perhaps by the 
Chiari malformation. Acquired cavitations of the cord 
in areas of necrosis are also termed syrinx cavities; these 
follow trauma, myelitis, necrotic spinal cord tumors, 
and chronic arachnoiditis due to tuberculosis and other 
etiologies.
The presentation is a central cord syndrome consisting 
of dissociated sensory loss (loss of pain and temperature 
sensation with sparing of touch and vibration) and are-
ﬂexic weakness in the upper limbs. The sensory deﬁcit 
has a distribution that is “suspended” over the nape of 
the neck, shoulders, and upper arms (cape distribution) 
or in the hands. Most cases begin asymmetrically with 
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
411
unilateral sensory loss in the hands that leads to injuries 
and burns that are not appreciated by the patient. Muscle 
wasting in the lower neck, shoulders, arms, and hands 
with asymmetric or absent reﬂexes in the arms reﬂects 
expansion of the cavity into the gray matter of the cord. 
As the cavity enlarges and further compresses the long 
tracts, spasticity and weakness of the legs, bladder and 
bowel dysfunction, and a Horner’s syndrome appear. 
Some patients develop facial numbness and sensory loss 
from damage to the descending tract of the trigeminal 
nerve (C2 level or above). In cases with Chiari mal-
formations, cough-induced headache and neck, arm, 
or facial pain are reported. Extension of the syrinx into 
the medulla, syringobulbia, causes palatal or vocal cord 
paralysis, dysarthria, horizontal or vertical nystagmus, 
episodic dizziness or vertigo, and tongue weakness with 
atrophy.
MRI scans accurately identify developmental and 
acquired syrinx cavities and their associated spinal cord 
enlargement (Fig. 35-7). MRI scans of the brain and the 
entire spinal cord should be obtained to delineate the 
full longitudinal extent of the syrinx, assess posterior 
fossa structures for the Chiari malformation, and deter-
mine whether hydrocephalus is present.
FIGURE 35-7 
MRI of syringomyelia associated with a Chiari malforma-
tion. Sagittal T1-weighted image through the cervical and 
upper thoracic spine demonstrates descent of the cerebellar 
tonsils and vermis below the level of the foramen magnum 
(black arrows). Within the substance of the cervical and tho-
racic spinal cord, a CSF collection dilates the central canal 
(white arrows).
TREATMENT 
Syringomyelia
Treatment of syringomyelia is generally unsatisfactory. The 
Chiari tonsillar herniation is usually decompressed, gener-
ally by suboccipital craniectomy, upper cervical laminec-
tomy, and placement of a dural graft. Obstruction of fourth 
ventricular outflow is reestablished by this procedure. If the 
syrinx cavity is large, some surgeons recommend direct 
decompression or drainage by one of a number of meth-
ods, but the added benefit of this procedure is uncertain, 
and morbidity is common. With Chiari malformations, 
shunting of hydrocephalus should generally precede any 
attempt to correct the syrinx. Surgery may stabilize the 
neurologic deficit, and some patients improve.
Syringomyelia secondary to trauma or infection is 
treated with a decompression and drainage procedure in 
which a small shunt is inserted between the syrinx cavity 
and the subarachnoid space; alternatively, the cavity can 
be fenestrated. Cases due to intramedullary spinal cord 
tumor are generally managed by resection of the tumor.
CHRONIC MYELOPATHY OF  
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
A chronic progressive myelopathy is the most frequent 
cause of disability in both primary progressive and sec-
ondary progressive forms of MS. Involvement is typi-
cally bilateral but asymmetric and produces motor, 
sensory, and bladder and bowel disturbances. Fixed 
motor disability appears to result from extensive loss 
of axons in the corticospinal tracts. Diagnosis is facili-
tated by identiﬁcation of earlier attacks such as optic 
neuritis. MRI, CSF, and evoked-response testing are 
conﬁrmatory. Therapy with interferon β, glatiramer 
acetate, or natalizumab is indicated for patients with 
progressive myelopathy, who also have coexisting MS 
relapses. These therapies are sometimes also offered to 
patients without relapses, despite the lack of evidence 
supporting their value in this setting. The value of 
anti-B cell therapy in primary progressive MS is under 
investigation. MS is discussed in Chap. 39.
SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION 
(VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY)
This treatable myelopathy presents with subacute par-
esthesias in the hands and feet, loss of vibration and 
position sensation, and a progressive spastic and ataxic 
weakness. Loss of reﬂexes due to an associated peripheral 
neuropathy in a patient who also has Babinski signs is an 
important diagnostic clue. Optic atrophy and irritability 
or other mental changes may be prominent in advanced 
cases but are rarely the presenting symptoms. The 
myelopathy of subacute combined degeneration tends 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
412
to be diffuse rather than focal; signs are generally sym-
metric and reﬂect predominant involvement of the pos-
terior and lateral tracts, including Romberg’s sign. The 
diagnosis is conﬁrmed by the ﬁnding of macrocytic red 
blood cells, a low serum B12 concentration, and elevated 
serum levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid. 
Treatment is by replacement therapy, beginning with 
1000 μg of intramuscular vitamin B12 repeated at regular 
intervals or by subsequent oral treatment.
HYPOCUPRIC MYELOPATHY
This myelopathy is virtually identical to subacute com-
bined degeneration (discussed earlier) and probably 
explains many cases previously described with normal 
serum levels of B12. Low levels of serum copper are 
found and often there is also a low level of serum ceru-
loplasmin. Some cases follow gastrointestinal procedures 
that result in impaired copper absorption; others have 
been associated with excess zinc from health food supple-
ments or, until recently, use of zinc-containing denture 
creams, which impair copper absorption via induction of 
metallothionein, a copper-binding protein. Many cases 
are idiopathic. Improvement or at least stabilization may 
be expected with reconstitution of copper stores by oral 
supplementation. The pathophysiology and pathology of 
the idiopathic form are not known.
TABES DORSALIS
The classic syndromes of tabes dorsalis and menin-
govascular syphilis of the spinal cord are now less fre-
quent than in the past but must be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of spinal cord disorders. The char-
acteristic symptoms of tabes are ﬂeeting and repetitive 
lancinating pains, primarily in the legs or less often in 
the back, thorax, abdomen, arms, and face. Ataxia of 
the legs and gait due to loss of position sense occurs in 
half of patients. Paresthesias, bladder disturbances, and 
acute abdominal pain with vomiting (visceral crisis) 
occur in 15–30% of patients. The cardinal signs of tabes 
are loss of reﬂexes in the legs; impaired position and 
vibratory sense; Romberg’s sign; and, in almost all cases, 
bilateral Argyll Robertson pupils, which fail to constrict 
to light but accommodate. Diabetic polyradiculopathy 
may simulate tabes.
FAMILIAL SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA
Many cases of slowly progressive myelopathy are 
genetic in origin (Chap. 32). More than 20 different 
causative loci have been identiﬁed, including autoso-
mal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked forms. 
Most patients present with almost imperceptibly pro-
gressive spasticity and weakness in the legs, usually but 
not always symmetric. Sensory symptoms and signs are 
absent or mild, but sphincter disturbances may be pres-
ent. In some families additional neurologic signs are 
prominent, including nystagmus, ataxia, or optic atro-
phy. The onset may be as early as the ﬁrst year of life or 
as late as middle adulthood. Only symptomatic therapies 
for the spasticity are currently available.
ADRENOMYELONEUROPATHY
This X-linked disorder is a variant of adrenoleukodys-
trophy. Affected males usually have a history of adrenal 
insufﬁciency beginning in childhood and then develop 
a progressive spastic (or ataxic) paraparesis beginning in 
early adulthood; some patients also have a mild periph-
eral neuropathy. Female heterozygotes may develop 
a slower, insidiously progressive spastic myelopathy 
beginning later in adulthood and without adrenal insuf-
ﬁciency. Diagnosis is usually made by demonstration of 
elevated levels of very long chain fatty acids in plasma 
and in cultured ﬁbroblasts. The responsible gene 
encodes ADLP, a peroxisomal membrane transporter 
that is a member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) 
family. Steroid replacement is indicated if hypoadrenal-
ism is present, and bone marrow transplantation and 
nutritional supplements have been attempted for this 
condition without clear evidence of efﬁcacy.
OTHER CHRONIC MYELOPATHIES
Primary lateral sclerosis (Chap. 32) is a degenerative dis-
order characterized by progressive spasticity with weak-
ness, eventually accompanied by dysarthria and dys-
phonia; bladder symptoms occur in approximately half 
of patients. Sensory function is spared. The disorder 
resembles ALS and is considered a variant of the motor 
neuron degenerations, but without the characteristic 
lower motor neuron disturbance. Some cases may rep-
resent familial spastic paraplegia, particularly autosomal 
recessive or X-linked varieties in which a family history 
may be absent.
Tethered cord syndrome is a developmental disorder of 
the lower spinal cord and nerve roots that rarely presents 
in adulthood as low back pain accompanied by a pro-
gressive lower spinal cord and/or nerve root syndrome. 
Some patients have a small leg or foot deformity indi-
cating a long-standing process, and in others a dimple, 
patch of hair, or sinus tract on the skin overlying the 
lower back is the clue to a congenital lesion. Diagnosis 
is made by MRI, which demonstrates a low-lying conus 
medullaris and thickened ﬁlum terminale. The MRI may 
also reveal diastematomyelia (division of the lower spinal 
cord into two halves), lipomas, cysts, or other congeni-
tal abnormalities of the lower spine coexisting with the 
tethered cord. Treatment is with surgical release.
 
CHAPTER 35
Diseases of the Spinal Cord
413
There are a number of rare toxic causes of spas-
tic myelopathy, including lathyrism due to ingestion of 
chick peas containing the excitotoxin β-N-oxalylamino-
L-alanine (BOAA), seen primarily in the develop-
ing world, and nitrous oxide inhalation producing a 
myelopathy identical to subacute combined degenera-
tion. SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, and sarcoidosis may each 
cause a myelopathy without overt evidence of systemic 
disease. Cancer-related causes of chronic myelopathy, 
besides the common neoplastic compressive myelopa-
thy discussed earlier, include radiation injury (Chap. 37) 
and rare paraneoplastic myelopathies. The latter are most 
often associated with lung or breast cancer and anti-Hu 
antibodies (Chap. 44); NMO can also be paraneoplastic 
in origin (Chap. 39). Metastases to the cord are probably 
more common than either of these in patients with can-
cer. Often, a cause of intrinsic myelopathy can be identi-
ﬁed only through periodic reassessment.
REHABILITATION OF  
SPINAL CORD DISORDERS
The prospects for recovery from an acute destructive 
spinal cord lesion fade after ∼6 months. There are cur-
rently no effective means to promote repair of injured 
spinal cord tissue; promising experimental approaches 
include the use of factors that inﬂuence reinnervation 
by axons of the corticospinal tract, nerve and neural 
sheath graft bridges, and the local introduction of stem 
cells. The disability associated with irreversible spinal 
cord damage is determined primarily by the level of 
the lesion and by whether the disturbance in function 
is complete or incomplete (Table 35-4). Even a com-
plete high cervical cord lesion may be compatible with 
a productive life. The primary goals are development of 
a rehabilitation plan framed by realistic expectations and 
attention to the neurologic, medical, and psychological 
complications that commonly arise.
Many of the usual symptoms associated with medi-
cal illnesses, especially somatic and visceral pain, may 
be lacking because of the destruction of afferent pain 
pathways. Unexplained fever, worsening of spasticity, 
or deterioration in neurologic function should prompt 
a search for infection, thrombophlebitis, or an intraab-
dominal pathology. The loss of normal thermoregulation 
and inability to maintain normal body temperature can 
produce recurrent fever (quadriplegic fever), although most 
episodes of fever are due to infection of the urinary tract, 
lung, skin, or bone.
Bladder dysfunction generally results from loss of 
supraspinal innervation of the detrusor muscle of the 
bladder wall and the sphincter musculature. Detru-
sor spasticity is treated with anticholinergic drugs 
(oxybutynin, 2.5–5 mg qid) or tricyclic antidepres-
sants that have anticholinergic properties (imipramine, 
25–200 mg/d). Failure of the sphincter muscle to relax 
during bladder emptying (urinary dyssynergia) may be 
managed with the α-adrenergic blocking agent terazo-
sin hydrochloride (1–2 mg tid or qid), with intermit-
tent catheterization, or, if that is not feasible, by use 
of a condom catheter in men or a permanent indwell-
ing catheter. Surgical options include the creation of an 
artiﬁcial bladder by isolating a segment of intestine that 
can be catheterized intermittently (enterocystoplasty) or 
can drain continuously to an external appliance (urinary 
conduit). Bladder areﬂexia due to acute spinal shock or 
conus lesions is best treated by catheterization. Bowel 
regimens and disimpaction are necessary in most patients 
to ensure at least biweekly evacuation and avoid colonic 
distention or obstruction.
Patients with acute cord injury are at risk for venous 
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. During the ﬁrst 
2 weeks, use of calf-compression devices and anticoagu-
lation with heparin (5000 U subcutaneously every 12 h) 
or warfarin (INR, 2–3) are recommended. In cases of 
persistent paralysis, anticoagulation should probably be 
continued for 3 months.
Prophylaxis against decubitus ulcers should involve 
frequent changes in position in a chair or bed, the use of 
special mattresses, and cushioning of areas where pressure 
sores often develop, such as the sacral prominence and 
heels. Early treatment of ulcers with careful cleansing, 
surgical or enzyme debridement of necrotic tissue, and 
appropriate dressing and drainage may prevent infection 
of adjacent soft tissue or bone.
TABLE 35-4
EXPECTED NEUROLOGIC FUNCTION FOLLOWING COMPLETE CORD LESIONS
LEVEL
SELF-CARE
TRANSFERS
MAXIMUM MOBILITY
High quadriplegia (C1-C4)
Dependent on others; 
requires respiratory support
Dependent on others
Motorized wheelchair
Low quadriplegia (C5-C8)
Partially independent with 
adaptive equipment
May be dependent or 
independent
May use manual wheelchair, drive an 
automobile with adaptive equipment
Paraplegia (below T1)
Independent
Independent
Ambulates short distances with aids
Source: Adapted from JF Ditunno, CS Formal: N Engl J Med 330:550, 1994; with permission.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
414
Spasticity is aided by stretching exercises to main-
tain mobility of joints. Drug treatment is effective 
but may result in reduced function, as some patients 
depend upon spasticity as an aid to stand, transfer, 
or walk. Baclofen (15–240 mg/d in divided doses) is 
effective; it acts by facilitating γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)-mediated inhibition of motor reﬂex arcs. 
Diazepam acts by a similar mechanism and is useful for 
leg spasms that interrupt sleep (2–4 mg at bedtime). 
Tizanidine (2–8 mg tid), an α2-adrenergic agonist that 
increases presynaptic inhibition of motor neurons, is 
another option. For nonambulatory patients, the direct 
muscle inhibitor dantrolene (25–100 mg qid) may 
be used, but it is potentially hepatotoxic. In refrac-
tory cases, intrathecal baclofen administered via an 
implanted pump, botulinum toxin injections, or dorsal 
rhizotomy may be required to control spasticity.
Despite the loss of sensory function, many patients 
with spinal cord injury experience chronic pain sufﬁcient 
to diminish their quality of life. Randomized controlled 
studies indicate that gabapentin or pregabalin is useful in 
this setting. Management of chronic pain is discussed in 
Chap. 7.
A paroxysmal autonomic hyperreﬂexia may occur 
following lesions above the major splanchnic sympa-
thetic outﬂow at T6. Headache, ﬂushing, and diapho-
resis above the level of the lesion, as well as transient 
severe hypertension with bradycardia or tachycardia, are 
the major symptoms. The trigger is typically a noxious 
stimulus—for example, bladder or bowel distention, a 
urinary tract infection, or a decubitus ulcer. Treatment 
consists of removal of offending stimuli; ganglionic 
blocking agents (mecamylamine, 2.5–5 mg) or other 
short-acting antihypertensive drugs are useful in some 
patients.
Attention to these details allows longevity and a 
productive life for patients with complete transverse 
myelopathies.
 Allan H. Ropper 
415
 Almost 10 million head injuries occur annually in the 
United States, about 20% of which are serious enough 
to cause brain damage. Among men <35 years, accidents, 
usually motor vehicle collisions, are the chief cause of 
death and >70% of these involve head injury. Further-
more, minor head injuries are so common that almost 
all physicians will be called upon to provide immediate 
care or to see patients who are suffering from various 
sequelae. 
 Medical personnel caring for head injury patients should 
be aware that (1) spinal injury often accompanies head 
injury, and care must be taken in handling the patient to 
prevent compression of the spinal cord due to instability of 
the spinal column; (2) intoxication is a common accom-
paniment of traumatic brain injury and, when appropriate, 
testing should be carried out for drugs and alcohol; and (3) 
additional injuries, including rupture of abdominal organs, 
may produce vascular collapse or respiratory distress that 
requires immediate attention. 
 TYPES OF HEAD INJURIES 
 CONCUSSION 
 This form of minor head injury refers to an immediate 
and transient loss of consciousness that is associated 
with a short period of amnesia. Many patients do not 
lose consciousness after a minor head injury but instead 
are dazed or confused, or feel stunned or “star struck.” 
Severe concussion may precipitate a brief convulsion 
or autonomic signs such as facial pallor, bradycardia, 
faintness with mild hypotension, or sluggish pupillary 
reaction, but most patients are quickly neurologically 
normal. 
 The mechanics of a typical concussion involve sudden 
deceleration of the head when hitting a blunt object. 
This creates an anterior-posterior movement of the 
brain within the skull due to inertia and rotation 
of the cerebral hemispheres on the relatively ﬁ xed 
upper brainstem. Loss of consciousness in concussion 
is believed to result from a transient electrophysi-
ologic dysfunction of the reticular activating system 
in the upper midbrain that is at the site of rotation 
( Chap. 17 ). 
 Gross and light-microscopic changes in the brain 
are usually absent following concussion but biochemical 
and ultrastructural changes, such as mitochondrial ATP 
depletion and local disruption of the blood-brain barrier, 
are transient abnormalities. CT and MRI scans are usually 
normal; however, a small number of patients will be 
found to have a skull fracture, an intracranial hemor-
rhage, or brain contusion. 
 A brief period of both retrograde and anterograde 
amnesia is characteristic of concussion and it recedes 
rapidly in alert patients. Memory loss spans the moments 
before impact but may encompass the previous days or 
weeks (rarely months). With severe injuries, the extent 
of retrograde amnesia roughly correlates with the severity 
of injury. Memory is regained from the most distant to 
more recent memories, with islands of amnesia occa-
sionally remaining. The mechanism of amnesia is not 
known. Hysterical posttraumatic amnesia is not uncommon 
after head injury and should be suspected when inex-
plicable behavioral abnormalities occur, such as recounting 
events that cannot be recalled on later testing, a bizarre 
affect, forgetting one’s own name, or a persistent 
anterograde deﬁ cit that is excessive in comparison with the 
degree of injury.  Amnesia is discussed in  Chap. 18 . 
 A single, uncomplicated concussion only infre-
quently produces permanent neurobehavioral changes 
in patients who are free of preexisting psychiatric and 
neurologic problems. Nonetheless, residual problems 
in memory and concentration may have an anatomic 
correlate in microscopic cerebral lesions (later in the 
chapter). 
 CONCUSSION AND OTHER HEAD INJURIES 
 CHAPTER 36 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
416
CONTUSION, BRAIN HEMORRHAGE, AND 
AXONAL SHEARING LESIONS
A surface bruise of the brain, or contusion, consists of 
varying degrees of petechial hemorrhage, edema, and 
tissue destruction. Contusions and deeper hemorrhages 
result from mechanical forces that displace and compress 
the hemispheres forcefully and by deceleration of the 
brain against the inner skull, either under a point of 
impact (coup lesion) or, as the brain swings back, in the 
antipolar area (contrecoup lesion). Trauma sufﬁcient 
to cause prolonged unconsciousness usually produces 
some degree of contusion. Blunt deceleration impact, as 
occurs against an automobile dashboard or from falling 
forward onto a hard surface, causes contusions on the 
orbital surfaces of the frontal lobes and the anterior and 
basal portions of the temporal lobes. With lateral forces, 
as from impact on an automobile door frame, contusions 
are situated on the lateral convexity of the hemisphere. 
The clinical signs of contusion are determined by the 
location and size of the lesion; often, there are no focal 
neurologic abnormalities, but these injured regions are 
later the sites of gliotic scars that may produce seizures. 
A hemiparesis or gaze preference is fairly typical of 
moderately sized contusions. Large bilateral contusions 
produce stupor with extensor posturing, while those 
limited to the frontal lobes cause a taciturn state. Con-
tusions in the temporal lobe may cause delirium or an 
aggressive, combative syndrome.
Contusions are easily visible on CT and MRI scans, 
appearing as inhomogeneous hyperdensities on CT and 
as hyperintensities on MRI sequences that detect blood; 
there is usually localized brain edema (Fig. 36-1) and 
some subarachnoid bleeding. Blood in the cerebrospinal 
ﬂuid (CSF) due to trauma may provoke a mild inﬂam-
matory reaction. Over a few days, contusions acquire a 
surrounding contrast enhancement and edema that may 
be mistaken for tumor or abscess. Glial and macrophage 
reactions result in chronic, scarred, hemosiderin-stained 
depressions on the cortex (plaques jaunes) that are the 
main source of posttraumatic epilepsy.
Torsional or shearing forces within the brain cause 
hemorrhages of the basal ganglia and other deep regions. 
Large hemorrhages after minor trauma suggest that there 
is a bleeding diathesis or cerebrovascular amyloidosis. For 
unexplained reasons, deep cerebral hemorrhages may not 
develop until several days after injury. Sudden neuro-
logic deterioration in a comatose patient or a sudden rise 
in intracranial pressure (ICP) suggests this complication 
and should therefore prompt investigation with a CT 
scan.
A special type of deep white matter lesion consists 
of widespread mechanical disruption, or shearing, of 
axons at the time of impact. Most characteristic are 
small areas of tissue injury in the corpus callosum and 
dorsolateral pons. The presence of widespread axonal 
damage in both hemispheres, a state called diffuse axonal 
injury (DAI), has been proposed to explain persistent 
coma and the vegetative state after closed head injury 
(Chap. 17), but small ischemic-hemorrhagic lesions in 
the midbrain and thalamus are as often the cause. Only 
severe shearing lesions that contain blood are visualized 
by CT, usually in the corpus callosum and centrum semi-
ovale (Fig. 36-2); however, selective imaging sequences 
of the MRI can demonstrate such lesions throughout 
the white matter.
FIGURE 36-1
Traumatic cerebral contusion. Noncontrast CT scan dem-
onstrating a hyperdense hemorrhagic region in the anterior 
temporal lobe.
FIGURE 36-2
Multiple small areas of hemorrhage and tissue disruption 
in the white matter of the frontal lobes on noncontrast CT 
scan. These appear to reﬂect an extreme type of the diffuse 
axonal shearing lesions that occur with closed head injury.
 
CHAPTER 36
Concussion and Other Head Injuries
417
SKULL FRACTURES
A blow to the skull that exceeds the elastic tolerance of 
the bone causes a fracture. Intracranial lesions accompany 
roughly two-thirds of skull fractures and the presence of 
a fracture increases many-fold the chances of an under-
lying subdural or epidural hematoma. Consequently, 
fractures are primarily markers of the site and severity of 
injury. They also provide potential pathways for entry 
of bacteria to the CSF with a risk of meningitis and 
for leakage of CSF outward through the dura. Severe 
orthostatic headache results from lowered pressure in 
the spinal ﬂuid compartment.
Most fractures are linear and extend from the point 
of impact toward the base of the skull. Basilar skull frac-
tures are often extensions of adjacent linear fractures 
over the convexity of the skull but may occur indepen-
dently owing to stresses on the ﬂoor of the middle cranial 
fossa or occiput. Basilar fractures are usually parallel to 
the petrous bone or along the sphenoid bone and directed 
toward the sella turcica and ethmoidal groove. Although 
most basilar fractures are uncomplicated, they can cause 
CSF leakage, pneumocephalus, and cavernous-carotid 
ﬁstulas. Hemotympanum (blood behind the tympanic 
membrane), delayed ecchymosis over the mastoid process 
(Battle sign), or periorbital ecchymosis (“raccoon sign”) 
are associated with basilar fractures. Because routine x-ray 
examination may fail to disclose basilar fractures, they 
should be suspected if these clinical signs are present.
CSF may leak through the cribriform plate or the 
adjacent sinus and cause CSF rhinorrhea (a watery dis-
charge from the nose). Persistent rhinorrhea and recurrent 
meningitis are indications for surgical repair of torn dura 
underlying the fracture. The site of the leak is often 
difﬁcult to determine, but useful diagnostic tests include 
the instillation of water-soluble contrast into the CSF 
followed by CT with the patient in various positions, or 
injection of radionuclide compounds or ﬂuorescein into 
the CSF and the insertion of absorptive nasal pledgets. 
The location of an intermittent leak is rarely delineated, 
and many resolve spontaneously.
Sellar fractures, even those associated with serious 
neuroendocrine dysfunction, may be radiologically occult 
or evident only by an air-ﬂuid level in the sphenoid sinus. 
Fractures of the dorsum sella cause sixth or seventh 
nerve palsies or optic nerve damage.
Petrous bone fractures, especially those oriented 
along the long axis of the bone, may be associated with 
facial palsy, disruption of ear ossicles, and CSF otorrhea. 
Transverse petrous fractures are less common; they 
almost always damage the cochlea or labyrinths and 
often the facial nerve as well. External bleeding from 
the ear is usually from local abrasion of the external 
canal but can also result from petrous fracture.
Fractures of the frontal bone are usually depressed, 
involving the frontal and paranasal sinuses and the 
orbits. Depressed skull fractures are typically compound, 
but they are often asymptomatic because the impact 
energy is dissipated in breaking the bone; some have 
underlying brain contusions. Debridement and explo-
ration of compound fractures are required in order to 
avoid infection; simple fractures do not require surgery.
CRANIAL NERVE INJURIES
The cranial nerves most often injured with head trauma 
are the olfactory, optic, oculomotor, and trochlear; the 
ﬁrst and second branches of the trigeminal nerve; and 
the facial and auditory nerves. Anosmia and an apparent 
loss of taste (actually a loss of perception of aromatic 
ﬂavors, with retained elementary taste perception) occur 
in ∼10% of persons with serious head injuries, particularly 
from falls on the back of the head. This is the result of 
displacement of the brain and shearing of the ﬁne olfac-
tory nerve ﬁlaments that course through the cribriform 
bone. At least partial recovery of olfactory and gustatory 
function is expected, but if bilateral anosmia persists for 
several months, the prognosis is poor. Partial optic 
nerve injuries from closed trauma result in blurring of 
vision, central or paracentral scotomas, or sector defects. 
Direct orbital injury may cause short-lived blurred 
vision for close objects due to reversible iridoplegia. 
Diplopia limited to downward gaze and corrected when 
the head is tilted away from the side of the affected 
eye indicates trochlear (fourth nerve) nerve damage. It 
occurs frequently as an isolated problem after minor 
head injury or may develop for unknown reasons 
after a delay of several days. Facial nerve injury caused 
by a basilar fracture is present immediately in up to 
3% of severe injuries; it may also be delayed 5-7 days. 
Fractures through the petrous bone, particularly the 
less common transverse type, are liable to produce 
facial palsy. Delayed palsy, the mechanism of which is 
unknown, has a good prognosis. Injury to the eighth 
cranial nerve from a fracture of the petrous bone causes 
loss of hearing, vertigo, and nystagmus immediately 
after injury. Deafness from eighth nerve injury is rare 
and must be distinguished from blood in the middle 
ear or disruption of the middle ear ossicles. Dizziness, 
tinnitus, and high-tone hearing loss occur from cochlear 
concussion.
SEIZURES
Convulsions are surprisingly uncommon immediately 
after a head injury, but a brief period of tonic extensor 
posturing or a few clonic movements of the limbs just 
after the moment of impact can occur. However, the 
cortical scars that evolve from contusions are highly epi-
leptogenic and may later manifest as seizures, even after 
many months or years (Chap. 26). The severity of injury 
roughly determines the risk of future seizures. It has 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
418
been estimated that 17% of individuals with brain con-
tusion, subdural hematoma, or prolonged loss of con-
sciousness will develop a seizure disorder and that this 
risk extends for an indeﬁnite period of time, whereas 
the risk is ≤2% after mild injury. The majority of con-
vulsions in the latter group occur within 5 years of 
injury but may be delayed for decades. Penetrating inju-
ries have a much higher rate of subsequent epilepsy.
SUBDURAL AND EPIDURAL HEMATOMAS
Hemorrhages beneath the dura (subdural) or between 
the dura and skull (epidural) have characteristic clinical and 
radiologic features. They are associated with underlying 
contusions and other injuries, often making it difﬁcult 
to determine the relative contribution of each component 
to the clinical state. The mass effect and raised ICP caused 
by these hematomas can be life threatening, making it 
imperative to identify them rapidly by CT or MRI scan 
and to remove them when appropriate.
Acute subdural hematoma (Fig. 36-3)
Direct cranial trauma may be minor and is not required 
for acute subdural hemorrhage to occur, especially in the 
elderly and those taking anticoagulant medications. 
Acceleration forces alone, as from whiplash, are some-
times sufﬁcient to produce subdural hemorrhage. Up to 
one-third of patients have a lucid interval lasting minutes 
to hours before coma supervenes, but most are drowsy 
or comatose from the moment of injury. A unilateral 
headache and slightly enlarged pupil on the side of 
the hematoma are frequently, but not invariably, present. 
Stupor or coma, hemiparesis, and unilateral pupillary 
enlargement are signs of larger hematomas. In an 
acutely deteriorating patient, burr (drainage) holes or 
an emergency craniotomy are required. Small subdural 
hematomas may be asymptomatic and usually do not 
require evacuation if they do not expand. 
A subacutely evolving syndrome due to subdural hema-
toma occurs days or weeks after injury with drowsiness, 
headache, confusion, or mild hemiparesis, usually in 
alcoholics and in the elderly and often after only minor 
trauma. On imaging studies subdural hematomas appear 
as crescentic collections over the convexity of one or 
both hemispheres, most commonly in the frontotemporal 
region, and less often in the inferior middle fossa or 
over the occipital poles (Fig. 36-3). Interhemispheric, 
posterior fossa, or bilateral convexity hematomas are 
less frequent and are difﬁcult to diagnose clinically, 
although drowsiness and the neurologic signs expected 
from damage in each region can usually be detected. 
The bleeding that causes larger hematomas is primarily 
venous in origin, although additional arterial bleeding 
sites are sometimes found at operation, and a few large 
hematomas have a purely arterial origin.
Epidural hematoma (Fig. 36-4)
These evolve more rapidly than subdural hematomas 
and are correspondingly more treacherous. They occur 
in up to 10% of cases of severe head injury but are asso-
ciated with underlying cortical damage less often than 
are subdural hematomas. Most patients are unconscious 
when ﬁrst seen. A “lucid interval” of several minutes 
to hours before coma supervenes is most characteristic 
of epidural hemorrhage, but it is still uncommon, and 
epidural hemorrhage is not the only cause of this temporal 
FIGURE 36-3
Acute subdural hematoma. Noncontrast CT scan reveals a 
hyperdense clot which has an irregular border with the brain 
and causes more horizontal displacement (mass effect) than 
might be expected from its thickness. The disproportionate 
mass effect is the result of the large rostral-caudal extent of 
these hematomas. Compare to Fig. 36-4.
FIGURE 36-4
Acute epidural hematoma. The tightly attached dura is 
stripped from the inner table of the skull, producing a charac-
teristic lenticular-shaped hemorrhage on noncontrast CT scan. 
Epidural hematomas are usually caused by tearing of the middle 
meningeal artery following fracture of the temporal bone.
 
CHAPTER 36
Concussion and Other Head Injuries
419
sequence. Rapid surgical evacuation and ligation or 
cautery of the damaged vessel is indicated, usually the 
middle meningeal artery that has been lacerated by an 
overlying skull fracture.
Chronic subdural hematoma (Fig. 36-5)
A history of trauma may or may not be elicited in relation 
to chronic subdural hematoma; the injury may have 
been trivial and forgotten, particularly in the elderly and 
those with clotting disorders. Headache is common but 
not invariable. Additional features may include slowed 
thinking, vague change in personality, seizure, or a mild 
hemiparesis. The headache ﬂuctuates in severity, some-
times with changes in head position. Bilateral chronic 
subdural hematomas produce perplexing clinical syndromes 
and the initial clinical impression may be of a stroke, brain 
tumor, drug intoxication, depression, or a dementing 
illness. Drowsiness, inattentiveness, and incoherence of 
thought are more generally prominent than focal signs 
such as hemiparesis. Rarely, chronic hematomas cause 
brief episodes of hemiparesis or aphasia that are indistin-
guishable from transient ischemic attacks. Patients with 
undetected bilateral subdural hematomas have a low tol-
erance for surgery, anesthesia, and drugs that depress the 
nervous system; drowsiness or confusion persist for long 
periods postoperatively.
CT without contrast initially shows a low-density 
mass over the convexity of the hemisphere (Fig. 36-5). 
Between 2 and 6 weeks after the initial bleeding the 
hemorrhage becomes isodense compared to adjacent 
brain and may be inapparent. Many subdural hemato-
mas that are several weeks in age contain areas of blood 
and intermixed serous ﬂuid. Bilateral chronic hemato-
mas may fail to be detected because of the absence of 
lateral tissue shifts; this circumstance in an older patient 
is suggested by a “hypernormal” CT scan with fullness 
of the cortical sulci and small ventricles. Infusion of 
contrast material demonstrates enhancement of the vas-
cular ﬁbrous capsule surrounding the collection. MRI 
reliably identiﬁes subacute and chronic hematomas.
Clinical observation coupled with serial imaging is a 
reasonable approach to patients with few symptoms, such 
as headache alone, and small chronic subdural collections. 
Treatment of minimally symptomatic chronic subdural 
hematoma with glucocorticoids is favored by some clini-
cians, but surgical evacuation is more often successful. The 
ﬁbrous membranes that grow from the dura and encapsu-
late the collection require removal to prevent recurrent ﬂuid 
accumulation. Small hematomas are resorbed, leaving only 
the organizing membranes. On imaging studies very 
chronic subdural hematomas are difﬁcult to distinguish 
from hygromas, which are collections of CSF from a 
rent in the arachnoid membrane.
CLINICAL SYNDROMES AND 
TREATMENT OF HEAD INJURY
MINOR INJURY
The patient who has brieﬂy lost consciousness or been 
stunned after a minor head injury usually becomes fully 
alert and attentive within minutes but may complain of 
headache, dizziness, faintness, nausea, a single episode 
of emesis, difﬁculty with concentration, a brief amnestic 
period, or slight blurring of vision. This typical concus-
sion syndrome has a good prognosis with little risk of sub-
sequent deterioration. Children are particularly prone 
to drowsiness, vomiting, and irritability, symptoms that 
are sometimes delayed for several hours after appar-
ently minor injuries. Vasovagal syncope that follows 
injury may cause undue concern. Generalized or frontal 
headache is common in the following days. It may be 
migrainous (throbbing and hemicranial) in nature or 
aching and bilateral. After several hours of observation, 
patients with minor injury may be accompanied home 
and observed for a day by a family member or friend; 
written instructions to return if symptoms worsen 
should be provided.
Persistent severe headache and repeated vomiting in 
the context of normal alertness and no focal neurologic 
signs is usually benign, but CT should be obtained and 
a longer period of observation is appropriate. The deci-
sion to perform imaging tests also depends on clinical 
signs that indicate the impact was severe (e.g., prolonged 
concussion, periorbital or mastoid hematoma, repeated 
vomiting, palpable skull fracture), on the seriousness of 
other bodily injuries, and on the degree of surveillance 
FIGURE 36-5
CT scan of chronic bilateral subdural hematomas of differ-
ent ages. The collections began as acute hematomas and 
have become hypodense in comparison to the adjacent brain 
after a period during which they were isodense and difﬁcult to 
appreciate. Some areas of resolving blood are contained on 
the more recently formed collection on the left (arrows).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
420
that can be anticipated after discharge. Two studies 
have indicated that older age, two or more episodes of 
vomiting, >30 min of retrograde or persistent antero-
grade amnesia, seizure, and concurrent drug or alcohol 
intoxication are sensitive (but not speciﬁc) indicators 
of intracranial hemorrhage that justify CT scanning. It 
is appropriate to be more liberal in obtaining CT scans 
in children since a small number, even without loss of 
consciousness, will have intracranial lesions.
Concussion in sports
In the current absence of adequate data, a common 
sense approach to athletic concussion has been to avoid 
contact sports for at least several days after a mild injury, 
and for a longer period if there are more severe injuries 
or if there are protracted neurologic symptoms. The 
individual then undertakes a graduated program of 
activity until there are no further symptoms with exercise 
(Table 36-1). These guidelines are designed in part 
to avoid the extremely rare second impact syndrome, in 
which cerebral swelling follows a second minor head 
injury. There is some evidence that repeated concussions 
are associated with cumulative cognitive deﬁcits, but 
this and the subsequent risk for dementia and Parkinson’s 
disease are controversial.
INJURY OF INTERMEDIATE SEVERITY
Patients who are not fully alert or have persistent confu-
sion, behavioral changes, extreme dizziness, or focal 
neurologic signs such as hemiparesis should be admitted 
to the hospital and have a CT scan. A cerebral contu-
sion or hematoma is usually found. Common syndromes 
include: (1) delirium with a disinclination to be examined 
or moved, expletive speech, and resistance if disturbed 
(anterior temporal lobe contusions); (2) a quiet, disin-
terested, slowed mental state (abulia) alternating with 
irascibility (inferior frontal and frontopolar contusions); 
(3) a focal deﬁcit such as aphasia or mild hemiparesis 
TABLE 36-1 
GUIDELINES FOR MANAGEMENT OF CONCUSSION IN SPORTS
Severity of Concussion
Grade 1: Transient confusion, no loss of consciousness (LOC), all symptoms resolve within 15 min.
Grade 2: Transient confusion, no LOC, but concussive symptoms or mental status abnormalities persist longer than 15 min.
Grade 3: Any LOC, either brief (seconds) or prolonged (minutes).
On-Site Evaluation
1. Mental status testing
    a. Orientation—time, place, person, circumstances of injury
    b. Concentration—digits backward, months of year in reverse order
    c. Memory—names of teams, details of contest, recent events, recall of three words and objects at 0 and 5 min
2. Finger-to-nose with eyes open and closed
3. Pupillary symmetry and reaction
4. Romberg and tandem gait
5.  Provocative testing—40-yard sprint, 5 push ups, 5 sit ups, 5 knee bends (development of dizziness, headaches, or other  
symptoms is abnormal)
Management Guidelines
Grade 1: Remove from contest. Examine immediately and at 5-min intervals. May return to contest if exam clears within 15 min. 
A second grade 1 concussion eliminates player for 1 week, with return contingent upon normal neurologic assessment at rest 
and with exertion.
Grade 2: Remove from contest, cannot return for at least 1 week. Examine at frequent intervals on sideline. Formal neurologic 
exam the next day. If headache or other symptoms persist for 1 week or longer, CT or MRI scan is indicated. After 1 full 
asymptomatic week, repeat neurologic assessment at rest and with exercise before cleared to resume play. A second grade 2 
concussion eliminates player for at least 2 weeks following complete resolution of symptoms at rest or with exertion. If imaging 
shows abnormality, player is removed from play for the season.
Grade 3: Transport by ambulance to emergency department if still unconscious or worrisome signs are present; cervical spine 
stabilization may be indicated. Neurologic exam and, when indicated, CT or MRI scan will guide subsequent management. 
Hospital admission indicated when signs of pathology are present or if mental status remains abnormal. If ﬁndings are normal 
at the time of the initial medical evaluation, the athlete may be sent home, but daily exams as an outpatient are indicated. A 
brief (LOC for seconds) grade 3 concussion eliminates player for 1 week, and a prolonged (LOC for minutes) grade 3 concussion 
for 2 weeks, following complete resolution of symptoms. A second grade 3 concussion should eliminate player from sports 
for at least 1 month following resolution of symptoms. Any abnormality on CT or MRI scans should result in termination of the 
season for the athlete, and return to play at any future time should be discouraged.
Source: Modiﬁed from Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology: The American Academy of Neurology Practice 
Handbook. The American Academy of Neurology, St. Paul, MN, 1997.
 
CHAPTER 36
Concussion and Other Head Injuries
421
(due to subdural hematoma or convexity contusion, or, 
less often, carotid artery dissection); (4) confusion and 
inattention, poor performance on simple mental tasks, 
and ﬂuctuating orientation (associated with several types 
of injuries, including those described earlier and with 
medial frontal contusions and interhemispheric subdural 
hematoma); (5) repetitive vomiting, nystagmus, drowsi-
ness, and unsteadiness (labyrinthine concussion, but 
occasionally due to a posterior fossa subdural hematoma 
or vertebral artery dissection); and (6) diabetes insipidus 
(damage to the median eminence or pituitary stalk). 
Injuries of this degree are often complicated by drug or alcohol 
intoxication, and clinically inapparent cervical spine injury may 
be present.
After surgical removal of hematomas, most patients 
in this category improve over weeks. During the ﬁrst 
week, the state of alertness, memory, and other cogni-
tive functions often ﬂuctuate, and agitation is common. 
Behavioral changes tend to be worse at night, as with 
many other encephalopathies, and may be treated with 
small doses of antipsychotic medications. Subtle abnor-
malities of attention, intellect, spontaneity, and memory 
return toward normal weeks or months after the injury, 
sometimes abruptly. Persistent cognitive problems are 
discussed later.
SEVERE INJURY
Patients who are comatose from the moment of injury 
require immediate neurologic attention and resuscitation. 
After intubation, with care taken to immobilize the 
cervical spine, the depth of coma, pupillary size and 
reactivity, limb movements, and Babinski responses are 
assessed. As soon as vital functions permit and cervical 
spine x-rays and a CT scan have been obtained, the 
patient should be transported to a critical care unit. 
Hypoxia should be reversed, and normal saline used as 
the resuscitation ﬂuid in preference to albumin. The 
ﬁnding of an epidural or subdural hematoma or large 
intracerebral hemorrhage is an indication for prompt 
surgery and intracranial decompression in an otherwise 
salvageable patient. The use of prophylactic antiepileptic 
medications has been recommended but there is little 
supportive data. Management of raised ICP, a frequent 
feature of severe head injury, is discussed in Chap. 28.
GRADING AND PROGNOSIS
In severe head injury, the clinical features of eye opening, 
motor responses of the limbs, and verbal output have 
been found to be generally predictive of outcome. 
These three responses are assessed by the Glasgow 
Coma Scale; a score between 3 and 15 is assigned 
(Table 36-2). Over 85% of patients with aggregate 
scores of <5 die within 24 h. However, a number of 
patients with slightly higher scores, including a few 
without pupillary light responses, survive, suggesting 
that an initially aggressive approach is justiﬁed in most 
patients. Patients <20 years, particularly children, may 
make remarkable recoveries after having grave early 
neurologic signs. In one large study of severe head 
injury, 55% of children had a good outcome at 1 year, 
compared with 21% of adults. Older age, increased ICP, 
early hypoxia or hypotension, compression of the brain-
stem on CT or MRI, and a delay in the evacuation of 
large intracranial hemorrhages are indicators of a poor 
prognosis.
POSTCONCUSSION SYNDROME
The postconcussion syndrome refers to a state following 
minor head injury consisting of fatigue, dizziness, head-
ache, and difﬁculty in concentration. The syndrome 
simulates asthenia and anxious depression. Based on 
experimental models, it has been proposed that subtle 
axonal shearing lesions or as yet undeﬁned biochemical 
alterations account for the cognitive symptoms. In mod-
erate and severe trauma, neuropsychological changes such 
as difﬁculty with attention, memory and other cognitive 
deﬁcits are undoubtedly present, sometimes severe, but 
many problems identiﬁed by formal testing do not affect 
daily functioning. Test scores tend to improve rapidly 
during the ﬁrst 6 months after injury, then more slowly 
for years.
TABLE 36-2
GLASGOW COMA SCALE FOR HEAD INJURY
EYE OPENING (E)
VERBAL RESPONSE (V)
Spontaneous
4
Oriented
5
To loud voice
3
Confused,  
disoriented
4
To pain
2
Inappropriate 
words
3
Nil
1
Incomprehensible 
sounds
2
Nil
1
BEST MOTOR RESPONSE (M)
Obeys
6
Localizes
5
Withdraws (ﬂexion)
4
Abnormal ﬂexion 
posturing
3
Extension posturing
2
Nil
1
Note: Coma score = E + M + V. Patients scoring 3 or 4 have an 
85% chance of dying or remaining vegetative, while scores >11 
indicate only a 5–10% likelihood of death or vegetative state and 
85% chance of moderate disability or good recovery. Intermediate 
scores correlate with proportional chances of recovery.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
422
Management 
of 
the 
postconcussive 
syndrome 
requires the identiﬁcation and treatment of depression, 
sleeplessness, anxiety, persistent headache, and dizzi-
ness. A clear explanation of the problems that may follow 
concussion has been shown to reduce subsequent com-
plaints. Care is taken to avoid prolonged use of drugs that 
produce dependence. Headache may initially be treated 
with acetaminophen and small doses of amitryptiline. 
Vestibular exercises (Chap. 11) and small doses of ves-
tibular suppressants such as promethazine (Phenergan) 
may be helpful when dizziness is the main problem. 
Patients who after minor or moderate injury have 
difﬁculty with memory or with complex cognitive tasks 
at work may be reassured that these problems usually 
improve over 6–12 months. It is sometimes helpful to 
obtain serial and quantiﬁed neuropsychological testing 
in order to adjust the work environment to the patient’s 
abilities and to document improvement over time. 
Whether cognitive exercises are useful in contrast to rest 
and a reduction in mental challenges is uncertain. Previ-
ously energetic and resilient individuals usually have the 
best recoveries. In patients with persistent symptoms, 
the possibility exists of malingering or prolongation as a 
result of litigation.
 Lisa M. DeAngelis 
■  Patrick Y. Wen 
423
 INTRODUCTION 
 Primary brain tumors are diagnosed in approximately 
52,000 people each year in the United States. At least 
one-half of these tumors are malignant and associated 
with a high mortality rate. Glial tumors account for about 
60% of all primary brain tumors, and 80% of those are 
malignant neoplasms. Meningiomas account for 25%, 
vestibular schwannomas 10%, and central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) lymphomas about 2%. Brain metastases are 
three times more common than all primary brain tumors 
combined and are diagnosed in approximately 150,000 
people each year. Metastases to the leptomeninges and 
epidural space of the spinal cord each occur in approxi-
mately 3–5% of patients with systemic cancer and are also 
a major cause of neurologic disability in this population. 
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
  Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the 
Nervous System 
 CLINICAL FEATURES  Brain tumors of any type 
can present with a variety of symptoms and signs that 
fall into two categories: general and focal; patients often 
have a combination of the two  ( Table 37-1 ) . General 
or nonspecifi c symptoms include headache, cogni-
tive diffi  culties, personality change, and gait disorder. 
Generalized symptoms arise when the enlarging tumor 
and its surrounding edema cause an increase in intra-
cranial pressure or direct compression of cerebrospinal 
fl uid (CSF) circulation leading to hydrocephalus. The 
classic headache associated with a brain tumor is most 
evident in the morning and improves during the day, 
but this particular pattern is actually seen in a minor-
ity of patients. Headache may be accompanied by nau-
sea or vomiting when intracranial pressure is elevated. 
Headaches are often holocephalic but can be ipsilateral 
 PRIMARY AND METASTATIC TUMORS 
OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 CHAPTER 37 
to the side of a tumor. Occasionally, headaches have 
features of a typical migraine with unilateral throb-
bing pain associated with visual scotoma. Personality 
changes may include apathy and withdrawal from social 
circumstances, mimicking depression. Focal or lateral-
izing fi ndings include hemiparesis, aphasia, or visual 
fi eld defect. Lateralizing symptoms such as hemipare-
sis are typically subacute and progressive. A visual fi eld 
defect is often not noticed by the patient; its presence 
may only be revealed after it leads to an injury such as 
an automobile accident occurring in the blind visual 
fi eld. Language diffi  culties may be mistaken for con-
fusion. Seizures are a common presentation of brain 
tumors, occurring in about 25% of patients with brain 
metastases or malignant gliomas but can be the pre-
senting symptom in up to 90% of patients with low-
TABLE 37-1
 SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS AT PRESENTATION OF 
BRAIN TUMORS 
HIGH-
GRADE 
GLIOMA 
(%)
LOW-
GRADE 
GLIOMA 
(%)
MENINGIOMA 
(%)
METASTASES 
(%)
Generalized
Impaired 
cognitive 
function
50
10
30
60
Hemiparesis
40
10
36
60
Headache
50
40
37
50
Lateralizing
Seizures
20
70+
17
18
Aphasia
20
<5
18
Visual ﬁ eld 
deﬁ cit
—
—
—
 7
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
424
grade gliomas. Most seizures have a focal signature that 
reflects their location in the brain and many proceed to 
secondary generalization. All generalized seizures that 
arise from a brain tumor will have a focal onset whether 
or not it is apparent clinically.
NEUROIMAGING Cranial MRI is the preferred diag-
nostic test for any patient suspected of having a brain 
tumor, and should be performed with gadolinium con-
trast administration. CT scan should be reserved for 
those patients unable to undergo MRI (e.g., pacemaker). 
Malignant brain tumors—whether primary or meta-
static—typically enhance with gadolinium and may 
have central areas of necrosis; they are characteristically 
surrounded by edema of the neighboring white matter. 
Low-grade gliomas typically do not enhance with gad-
olinium and are best appreciated on fluid-attenuated 
inversion recovery (FLAIR) MR images. Meningiomas 
have a characteristic appearance on MRI as they are 
dural-based with a dural tail and compress but do not 
invade the brain. Dural metastases or a dural lymphoma 
can have a similar appearance. Imaging is characteristic 
for many primary and metastatic tumors, but occasion-
ally there is diagnostic uncertainty based on imaging 
alone. In such patients a brain biopsy may be helpful 
in determining a definitive diagnosis. However, when a 
tumor is strongly suspected, the biopsy can be obtained 
as an intraoperative frozen section before a definitive 
resection is performed.
Functional MRI is useful in presurgical planning and 
defining eloquent sensory, motor, and language cortex. 
Positron emission tomography (PET) is useful in deter-
mining the metabolic activity of the lesions seen on 
MRI; MR perfusion and spectroscopy can provide infor-
mation on blood flow or tissue composition. These tech-
niques may help distinguish tumor progression from 
necrotic tissue as a consequence of treatment with radi-
ation and chemotherapy or identify foci of high-grade 
tumor in an otherwise low-grade-appearing glioma.
Neuroimaging is the only test necessary to diagnose a 
brain tumor. Laboratory tests are rarely useful, although 
patients with metastatic disease may have elevation of 
a tumor marker in their serum that reflects the presence 
of brain metastases (e.g., human chorionic gonadotropin 
[βhCG] from testicular cancer). Additional testing such 
as cerebral angiogram, electroencephalogram (EEG), or 
lumbar puncture is rarely indicated or helpful.
TREATMENT 
Brain Tumors
Therapy of any intracranial malignancy requires both 
symptomatic and definitive treatments. Definitive treat-
ment is based upon the specific tumor type and includes 
surgery, radiotherapy (RT), and chemotherapy. However, 
symptomatic treatments apply to brain tumors of any 
type. Most high-grade malignancies are accompanied 
by substantial surrounding edema, which contributes 
to neurologic disability and raised intracranial pres-
sure. Glucocorticoids are highly effective at reducing 
perilesional edema and improving neurologic function, 
often within hours of administration. Dexamethasone 
has been the glucocorticoid of choice because of its 
relatively low mineralocorticoid activity. Initial doses are 
typically 12 mg to 16 mg a day in divided doses given 
orally or IV (both are equivalent). While glucocorticoids 
rapidly ameliorate symptoms and signs, their long-
term use causes substantial toxicity including insomnia, 
weight gain, diabetes mellitus, steroid myopathy, and 
personality changes. Consequently, a taper is indicated 
as definitive treatment is administered and the patient 
improves.
Patients with brain tumors who present with seizures, 
require anticonvulsant drug therapy. There is no role for 
prophylactic anticonvulsant drugs in patients who have 
not had a seizure, thus their use should be restricted to 
those who have had a convincing ictal event. The agents 
of choice are those drugs that do not induce the hepatic 
microsomal enzyme system. These include levetirace-
tam, topiramate, lamotrigine, valproic acid, or lacos-
amide (Chap. 26). Other drugs such as phenytoin and 
carbamazepine are used less frequently because they 
are potent enzyme inducers that can interfere with both 
glucocorticoid metabolism and the metabolism of che-
motherapeutic agents needed to treat the underlying 
systemic malignancy or the primary brain tumor.
Venous thromboembolic disease occurs in 20–30% 
of patients with high-grade gliomas and brain metas-
tases. Therefore, anticoagulants should be used pro-
phylactically during hospitalization and in patients who 
are nonambulatory. Those who have had either a deep 
vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolus can receive 
therapeutic doses of anticoagulation safely and without 
increasing the risk for hemorrhage into the tumor. Infe-
rior vena cava filters are reserved for patients with abso-
lute contraindications to anticoagulation such as recent 
craniotomy.
PRIMARY BRAIN TUMORS
PATHOGENESIS
No underlying cause has been identiﬁed for the majority 
of primary brain tumors. The only established risk factors 
are exposure to ionizing radiation (meningiomas, glio-
mas, and schwannomas) and immunosuppression (pri-
mary CNS lymphoma). Evidence for an association with 
exposure to electromagnetic ﬁelds including cellular 
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
425
TABLE 37-2
GENETIC SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH PRIMARY BRAIN TUMORS
SYNDROME
INHERITANCE
GENE/PROTEIN
ASSOCIATED TUMORS
Cowden’s syndrome
AD
Mutations of PTEN (ch10p23)
Dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma  
(Lhermitte-Duclos disease), meningioma, 
astrocytoma
Breast, endometrial, thyroid cancer,  
trichilemmomas
Familial schwannomatosis
Sporadic
Hereditary
Mutations in INI1/SNF5
(ch22q11)
Schwannomas, gliomas
Gardner’s syndrome
AD
Mutations in APC(ch5q21)
Medulloblastoma, glioblastoma,  
craniopharyngioma
Familial polyposis, multiple osteomas, skin 
and soft tissue tumors
Gorlin syndrome (basal cell 
nevus syndrome)
AD
Mutations in Patched 1 gene
(ch9q22.3)
Medulloblastomas
Basal cell carcinoma
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
AD
Mutations in p53
(ch17p13.1)
Gliomas, medulloblastomas
Sarcomas, breast cancer, leukemias, others
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
1 (Werner’s syndrome)
AD
Mutations in Menin
(ch11q13)
Pituitary adenoma, malignant schwannomas
Parathyroid and pancreatic islet cell tumors
Neuroﬁbromatosis type  
1 (NF1)
AD
Mutations in NF1/ 
Neuroﬁbromin
(ch17q12-22)
Schwannomas, astrocytomas, optic nerve 
gliomas, meningiomas
Neuroﬁbromas, neuroﬁbrosarcomas, others
Neuroﬁbromatosis type  
2 (NF2)
AD
Mutations in NF2/Merlin
(ch22q12)
Bilateral vestibular schwannomas, astrocyto-
mas, multiple meningiomas, ependymomas
Tuberous sclerosis (TSC) 
(Bourneville’s disease)
AD
Mutations in TSC1/TSC2
(ch9q34/16)
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma,  
ependymomas, glioma, ganglioneuroma, 
hamartoma
Turcot’s syndrome
AD
AR
Mutations in APCa
(ch5)
hMLH1
(ch3p21)
Gliomas, medulloblastomas
Adenomatous colon polyps, adenocarcinoma
Von Hippel–Lindau (VHL)
AD
Mutations in VHL gene
(ch3p25)
Hemangioblastomas
Retinal angiomas, renal cell carcinoma, 
pheochromocytoma, pancreatic tumors 
and cysts, endolymphatic sac tumors of the 
middle ear
a Various DNA mismatch repair gene mutations may cause a similar clinical phenotype, also referred to as Turcot’s syndrome, in which there is a 
predisposition to nonpolyposis colon cancer and brain tumors.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; APC, adenomatous polyposis coli; AR, autosomal recessive; ch, chromosome; PTEN, phosphatase 
and tensin homologue; TSC, tuberous sclerosis complex.
telephones, head injury, foods containing N-nitroso 
compounds, or occupational risk factors, are unproven. 
A small minority of patients have a family history of 
brain tumors. Some of these familial cases are associated 
with genetic syndromes (Table 37-2).
As with other neoplasms, brain tumors arise as a 
result of a multistep process driven by the sequen-
tial acquisition of genetic alterations. These include 
loss of tumor suppressor genes (e.g., p53 and phospha-
tase and tensin homolog on chromosome 10 [PTEN]) 
and ampliﬁcation and overexpression of protooncogenes 
such as the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
and the platelet-derived growth factor receptors 
(PDGFR). The accumulation of these genetic abnor-
malities results in uncontrolled cell growth and tumor 
formation.
Important progress has been made in understand-
ing the molecular pathogenesis of several types of brain 
tumors, including glioblastomas and medulloblastomas. 
Glioblastomas can be separated into two main subtypes 
based on genetic and biologic differences (Fig. 37-1). 
The majority are primary glioblastomas. These arise de 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
426
novo and are characterized by EGFR ampliﬁcation and 
mutations, and deletion or mutation of PTEN. Second-
ary glioblastomas arise in younger patients as lower-
grade tumors and transform over a period of several 
years into glioblastomas. These tumors have inactivation 
of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, overexpression of 
PDGFR, and mutations of the isocitrate dehydrogenase 
1 and 2 genes. Despite their genetic differences, primary 
and secondary glioblastomas are morphologically indis-
tinguishable, although they are likely to respond differ-
ently to molecular therapies. The molecular subtypes of 
medulloblastomas are also being elucidated. Approxi-
mately 25% of medulloblastomas have activating muta-
tions of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, raising 
the possibility that inhibitors of this pathway may have 
therapeutic potential.
The adult nervous system contains neural stem cells 
that are capable of self-renewal, proliferation, and dif-
ferentiation into distinctive mature cell types. There 
is increasing evidence that neural stem cells, or related 
progenitor cells, can be transformed into tumor stem 
cells and give rise to primary brain tumors, including 
gliomas and medulloblastomas. These stem cells appear 
to be more resistant to standard therapies than the 
tumor cells themselves and contribute to the difﬁculty 
in eradicating these tumors. There is intense interest in 
developing therapeutic strategies that effectively target 
tumor stem cells.
INTRINSIC “MALIGNANT” TUMORS
ASTROCYTOMAS
These are inﬁltrative tumors with a presumptive glial 
cell of origin. The World Health Organization (WHO) 
classiﬁes astrocytomas into four prognostic grades based 
on histologic features: grade I (pilocytic astrocytoma, 
subependymal giant cell astrocytoma); grade II (dif-
fuse astrocytoma); grade III (anaplastic astrocytoma); 
and grade IV (glioblastoma). Grades I and II are con-
sidered low-grade, and grades III and IV high-grade, 
astrocytomas.
Low-grade astrocytoma
These tumors occur predominantly in children and 
young adults.
Grade I astrocytomas
Pilocytic astrocytomas (WHO grade I) are the most 
common tumor of childhood. They occur typically in 
P53 mutations (>65%)
PDGFA/PDGFR-a overexpression (~60%)
IDH1 and 2 mutations
EGFR amplifications (~40%)
EGFR mutations (~20-30%)
MDM2 amplifications (~10%)
MDM2 overexpression (>50%)
LOH 10q (~70%)
P16Ink4a/P14ARF loss (~30%)
PTEN mutations (~40%) 
PIK3CA mutations/amplifications (~20%)
RB mutations
Low Grade Astrocytoma (5–10 yrs)* (WHO Grade II)
LOH 19q (~50%)
RB mutations (~25%)
CDK4 amplifications (15%)
MDM2 overexpression (10%)
(IDH1 and 2 mutations ?)
LOH 11p (~30%)
Anaplastic Astrocytoma (2–3 yrs)* (WHO Grade III)
LOH 10q (~70%)
DCC loss (~50%)
PDGFR-α amplifications (~10%)
PTEN mutations (~10%)
PIK3CA mutations/amplifications (~10%)
Secondary Glioblastoma (WHO Grade IV)*
Primary Glioblastoma (WHO Grade IV)*
Cell-of-Origin: Stem/Progenitor Cells
FIGURE 37-1 
Genetic and chromosomal alterations involved in the 
development of primary and secondary glioblastomas. 
A slash indicates one or the other or both. DCC, deleted 
in colorectal carcinoma; EGFR, epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor; IDH, isocitrate dehydrogenase; LOH, loss of 
heterozygosity; MDM2, murine double minute 2; PDGF, 
platelet-derived growth factor; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth 
factor receptor; PIK3CA, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, cata-
lytic; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homologue; RB, retino-
blastoma; WHO, World Health Organization.
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
427
the cerebellum but may also be found elsewhere in the 
neuraxis, including the optic nerves and brainstem. Fre-
quently they appear as cystic lesions with an enhanc-
ing mural nodule. They are potentially curable if they 
can be completely resected. Giant cell subependymal 
astrocytomas are usually found in the ventricular wall 
of patients with tuberous sclerosis. They often do not 
require intervention but can be treated surgically or 
with inhibitors of the mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR).
Grade II astrocytomas
These are inﬁltrative tumors that usually present with 
seizures in young adults. They appear as nonenhancing 
tumors with increased T2/FLAIR signal (Fig. 37-2). 
If feasible, patients should undergo maximal surgical 
resection, although complete resection is rarely possible 
because of the invasive nature of the tumor. Radiother-
apy is helpful, but there is no difference in overall sur-
vival between radiotherapy administered postoperatively 
or delayed until the time of tumor progression. There is 
increasing evidence that chemotherapeutic agents such 
as temozolomide, an oral alkylating agent, can be help-
ful in some patients.
High-grade astrocytoma
Grade III (anaplastic) astrocytoma
These account for approximately 15–20% of high-
grade astrocytomas. They generally present in the fourth 
and ﬁfth decades of life as variably enhancing tumors. 
Treatment is the same as for glioblastoma, consisting of 
FIGURE 37-2 
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI of a left 
frontal low-grade astrocytoma. This lesion did not enhance.
maximal safe surgical resection followed by radiotherapy 
with concurrent and adjuvant temozolomide, or with 
radiotherapy and adjuvant temozolomide alone.
Grade IV astrocytoma (glioblastoma)
Glioblastoma accounts for the majority of high-grade 
astrocytomas. They are the most common cause of 
malignant primary brain tumors, with over 10,000 cases 
diagnosed each year in the United States. Patients usu-
ally present in the sixth and seventh decades of life with 
headache, seizures, or focal neurologic deﬁcits. The 
tumors appear as ring-enhancing masses with central 
necrosis and surrounding edema (Fig. 37-3). These are 
highly inﬁltrative tumors, and the areas of increased T2/
FLAIR signal surrounding the main tumor mass con-
tain invading tumor cells. Treatment involves maxi-
mal surgical resection followed by partial-ﬁeld external 
beam radiotherapy (6000 cGy in thirty 200-cGy frac-
tions) with concomitant temozolomide, followed by 
6–12 months of adjuvant temozolomide. With this regi-
men, median survival is increased to 14.6 months com-
pared to only 12 months with radiotherapy alone, and 
2-year survival is increased to 27%, compared to 10% 
with radiotherapy alone. Patients whose tumor con-
tains the DNA repair enzyme O6-methylguanine-DNA 
methyltransferase (MGMT) are relatively resistant to 
temozolomide and have a worse prognosis compared 
to those whose tumors contain low levels of MGMT 
as a result of silencing of the MGMT gene by pro-
moter hypermethylation. Implantation of biodegradable 
FIGURE 37-3 
Postgadolinium T1 MRI of a large cystic left frontal 
glioblastoma.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
428
A
B
FIGURE 37-4 
Postgadolinium T1 MRI of a recurrent glioblastoma 
before (A) and after (B) administration of bevacizumab. Note 
the decreased enhancement and mass effect.
polymers containing the chemotherapeutic agent car-
mustine into the tumor bed after resection of the tumor 
also produces a modest improvement in survival.
Despite optimal therapy, glioblastomas invariably 
recur. Treatment options for recurrent disease may 
include reoperation, carmustine wafers, and alternate 
chemotherapeutic regimens. Reirradiation is rarely 
helpful. Bevacizumab, a humanized vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) monoclonal antibody, has activity 
in recurrent glioblastoma, increasing progression-free 
survival and reducing peritumoral edema and glucocor-
ticoid use (Fig. 37-4). Treatment decisions for patients 
with recurrent glioblastoma must be made on an indi-
vidual basis, taking into consideration such factors as pre-
vious therapy, time to relapse, performance status, and 
quality of life. Whenever feasible, patients with recur-
rent disease should be enrolled in clinical trials. Novel 
therapies undergoing evaluation in patients with glio-
blastoma include targeted molecular agents directed at 
receptor tyrosine kinases and signal transduction path-
ways; antiangiogenic agents, especially those directed at 
the VEGF receptors; chemotherapeutic agents that cross 
the blood-brain barrier more effectively than currently 
available drugs; gene therapy; immunotherapy; and infu-
sion of radiolabeled drugs and targeted toxins into the 
tumor and surrounding brain by means of convection-
enhanced delivery.
The most important adverse prognostic factors in 
patients with high-grade astrocytomas are older age, 
histologic features of glioblastoma, poor Karnofsky per-
formance status, and unresectable tumor. Patients with 
unmethylated MGMT promoter resulting in the pres-
ence of the repair enzyme in tumor cells and resistance 
to temozolomide also have a worse prognosis.
Gliomatosis cerebri
Rarely, patients may present with a highly inﬁltrating, 
nonenhancing tumor involving more than two lobes. 
These tumors do not qualify for the histologic diagnosis 
of glioblastoma but behave aggressively and have a simi-
larly poor outcome. Treatment involves radiotherapy 
and temozolomide chemotherapy.
Oligodendroglioma
Oligodendrogliomas account for approximately 15–20% 
of gliomas. They are classiﬁed by the WHO into well-
differentiated oligodendrogliomas (grade II) or anaplas-
tic oligodendrogliomas (AOs) (grade III). Tumors with 
oligodendroglial components have distinctive features 
such as perinuclear clearing—giving rise to a “fried-
egg” appearance—and a reticular pattern of blood vessel 
growth. Some tumors have both an oligodendroglial as 
well as an astrocytic component. These mixed tumors, 
or oligoastrocytomas (OAs), are also classiﬁed into well-
differentiated OA (grade II) or anaplastic oligoastrocyto-
mas (AOAs) (grade III).
Grade II oligodendrogliomas and OAs are generally 
more responsive to therapy and have a better progno-
sis than pure astrocytic tumors. These tumors present 
similarly to grade II astrocytomas in young adults. The 
tumors are nonenhancing and often partially calciﬁed. 
They should be treated with surgery and, if necessary, 
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Patients with oligoden-
drogliomas have a median survival in excess of 10 years.
Anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and AOAs present in the 
fourth and ﬁfth decades as variably enhancing tumors. They 
are more responsive to therapy than grade III astrocytomas. 
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
429
Co-deletion of chromosomes 1p and 19q, mediated by an 
unbalanced translocation of 19p to 1q, occurs in 61 to 89% 
of patients with AO and 14 to 20% of patients with AOA. 
Tumors with the 1p and 19q co-deletion are particularly 
sensitive to chemotherapy with procarbazine, lomustine 
(cyclohexylchloroethylnitrosourea [CCNU]), and vincris-
tine (PCV) or temozolomide, as well as to radiotherapy. 
Median survival of patients with AO or AOA is approxi-
mately 3–6 years.
Ependymomas
Ependymomas are tumors derived from ependymal 
cells that line the ventricular surface. They account for 
approximately 5% of childhood tumors and frequently 
arise from the wall of the fourth ventricle in the poste-
rior fossa. Although adults can have intracranial epen-
dymomas, they occur more commonly in the spine, 
especially in the ﬁlum terminale of the spinal cord 
where they have a myxopapillary histology. Ependy-
momas that can be completely resected are potentially 
curable. Partially resected ependymomas will recur and 
require irradiation. The less common anaplastic epen-
dymomas are more aggressive but can be treated in 
the same way as ependymomas. Subependymomas are 
slow-growing benign lesions arising in the wall of ven-
tricles that often do not require treatment.
Other less common gliomas
Gangliogliomas and pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas occur 
in young adults. They behave as more indolent forms of 
grade II gliomas and are treated in the same way. Brainstem 
gliomas usually occur in children or young adults. Despite 
treatment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the prog-
nosis is poor with median survival of only 1 year. Gliosarco-
mas contain both an astrocytic as well as a sarcomatous com-
ponent and are treated in the same way as glioblastomas.
PRIMARY CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
LYMPHOMA
Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) 
is a rare non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma accounting for less 
than 3% of primary brain tumors. For unclear reasons, 
its incidence is increasing, particularly in immunocom-
petent individuals.
PCNSL in immunocompetent patients usually con-
sists of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. PCNSL may also 
occur in immunocompromised patients, usually those 
infected with the human immunodeﬁciency virus 
(HIV) or organ transplant recipients on immunosuppres-
sive therapy. PCNSL in immunocompromised patients 
is typically large cell with immunoblastic and more 
aggressive features. These patients are usually severely 
FIGURE 37-5 
Postgadolinium T1 MRI demonstrating a large bifrontal 
primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL). The 
periventricular location and diffuse enhancement pattern are 
characteristic of lymphoma.
immunocompromised with CD4 counts of less than 
50/mL. The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) frequently plays 
an important role in the pathogenesis of HIV-related 
PCNSL.
Immunocompetent patients are older (median 60 years) 
compared to HIV-related PCNSL (median 31 years). 
PCNSL usually presents as a mass lesion, with neuropsy-
chiatric symptoms, symptoms of increased intracranial 
pressure, lateralizing signs, or seizures.
On contrast-enhanced MRI, PCNSL usually appears 
as a densely enhancing tumor (Fig. 37-5). Immuno-
competent patients have solitary lesions more often 
than immunosuppressed patients. Frequently there is 
involvement of the basal ganglia, corpus callosum, or 
periventricular region. Although the imaging features 
are often characteristic, PCNSL can sometimes be dif-
ﬁcult to differentiate from high-grade gliomas, infec-
tions, or demyelination. Stereotactic biopsy is necessary 
to obtain a histologic diagnosis. Whenever possible, 
glucocorticoids should be withheld until after the 
biopsy has been obtained, since they have a cytolytic 
effect on lymphoma cells and may lead to nondiag-
nostic tissue. In addition, patients should be tested for 
HIV and the extent of disease assessed by performing 
positron emission tomography (PET) or computerized 
tomography (CT) of the body, MRI of the spine, CSF 
analysis, and slit-lamp examination of the eye. Bone 
marrow biopsy and testicular ultrasound are occasion-
ally performed.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
430
TREATMENT 
Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma
Unlike other primary brain tumors, PCNSL is relatively 
sensitive to glucocorticoids, chemotherapy, and radio-
therapy. Durable complete responses and long-term 
survival are possible with these treatments. High-dose 
methotrexate, a folate antagonist that interrupts DNA 
synthesis, produces response rates ranging from 35 to 
80% and median survival up to 50 months. Combination 
of methotrexate with other chemotherapeutic agents 
such as cytarabine, as well as whole-brain radiotherapy, 
increases the response rate to 70–100%. However, radio-
therapy is associated with delayed neurotoxicity, espe-
cially in patients over the age of 60 years. As a result 
radiotherapy is frequently omitted in older patients with 
PCNSL. There is emerging evidence that the anti-CD20 
monoclonal antibody rituximab may have activity in 
PCNSL, although there remain concerns about its ability 
to pass through the blood-brain barrier as it becomes 
reconstituted with therapy. For some patients, high-
dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue 
may offer the best chance of preventing relapse.
At least 50% of patients will eventually develop 
recurrent disease. Treatment options include radio-
therapy for patients who have not had prior irradiation, 
re-treatment with methotrexate, as well as other agents 
such as temozolomide, rituximab, procarbazine, topo-
tecan, and pemetrexed. High-dose chemotherapy with 
autologous stem cell rescue may have a role in selected 
patients with relapsed disease.
PCNSL 
IN 
IMMUNOCOMPROMISED 
PA- 
TIENTS PCNSL in immunocompromised patients 
often produces multiple-ring enhancing lesions that 
can be difficult to differentiate from metastases and 
infections such as toxoplasmosis. The diagnosis is usu-
ally established by examination of the cerebrospinal 
fluid for cytology and EBV DNA, toxoplasmosis serologic 
testing, brain PET imaging for hypermetabolism of the 
lesions consistent with tumor instead of infection, and, 
if necessary, brain biopsy. Since the advent of highly 
active antiretroviral drugs, the incidence of HIV-related 
PCNSL has declined. These patients may be treated with 
whole-brain radiotherapy, high-dose methotrexate, and 
initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy. In organ 
transplant recipients, reduction of immunosuppression 
may improve outcome.
MEDULLOBLASTOMAS
Medulloblastomas are the most common malignant 
brain tumor of childhood, accounting for approximately 
20% of all primary CNS tumors among children. They 
arise from granule cell progenitors or from multipotent 
progenitors from the ventricular zone. Approximately 
5% of children have inherited disorders with germ-
line mutations of genes that predispose to the devel-
opment of medulloblastoma. The Gorlin syndrome, 
the most common of these inherited disorders, is due 
to mutations in the patched-1 (PTCH-1) gene, a key 
component in the sonic hedgehog pathway. Turcot’s 
syndrome, caused by mutations in the adenomatous 
polyposis coli (APC) gene and familial adenomatous 
polyposis, has also been associated with an increased 
incidence of medulloblastoma. Histologically, medul-
loblastomas appear as highly cellular tumors with abun-
dant dark staining, round nuclei, and rosette formation 
(Homer-Wright rosettes). They present with headache, 
ataxia, and signs of brainstem involvement. On MRI 
they appear as densely enhancing tumors in the poste-
rior fossa, sometimes associated with hydrocephalus. 
Seeding of the CSF is common. Treatment involves 
maximal surgical resection, craniospinal irradiation, and 
chemotherapy with agents such as cisplatin, lomustine, 
cyclophosphamide, and vincristine. Approximately 70% 
of patients have long-term survival but usually at the 
cost of signiﬁcant neurocognitive impairment. A major 
goal of current research is to improve survival while 
minimizing long-term complications.
PINEAL REGION TUMORS
A large number of tumors can arise in the region of the 
pineal gland. These typically present with headache, 
visual symptoms, and hydrocephalus. Patients may 
have Parinaud’s syndrome characterized by impaired 
upgaze and accommodation. Some pineal tumors such 
as pineocytomas and benign teratomas can be treated 
simply by surgical resection. Germinomas respond 
to irradiation, while pineoblastomas and malignant 
germ cell tumors require craniospinal radiation and 
chemotherapy.
EXTRINSIC “BENIGN” TUMORS
MENINGIOMAS
Meningiomas are diagnosed with increasing frequency 
as more people undergo neuroimaging studies for vari-
ous indications. They are now the most common pri-
mary brain tumor, accounting for approximately 32% 
of the total. Their incidence increases with age. They 
tend to be more common in women and in patients 
with neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. They also occur more 
commonly in patients with a past history of cranial 
irradiation.
Meningiomas arise from the dura mater and are 
composed of neoplastic meningothelial (arachnoidal 
cap) cells. They are most commonly located over the 
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
431
cerebral convexities, especially adjacent to the sagit-
tal sinus, but can also occur in the skull base and along 
the dorsum of the spinal cord. Meningiomas are clas-
siﬁed by the WHO into three histologic grades of 
increasing aggressiveness: grade I (benign meningiomas), 
grade II (atypical meningiomas), and grade III (malig-
nant meningiomas).
Many meningiomas are found incidentally follow-
ing neuroimaging for unrelated reasons. They can also 
present with headaches, seizures, or focal neurologic 
deﬁcits. On imaging studies they have a characteris-
tic appearance usually consisting of a partially calciﬁed, 
densely enhancing extraaxial tumor arising from the 
dura (Fig. 37-6). Occasionally they may have a dural 
tail, consisting of thickened, enhanced dura extending 
like a tail from the mass. The main differential diagnosis 
of meningioma is a dural metastasis.
If the meningioma is small and asymptomatic, no 
intervention is necessary and the lesion can be observed 
with serial MRI studies. Larger, symptomatic lesions 
should be resected surgically. If complete resection is 
achieved, the patient is cured. Incompletely resected 
tumors tend to recur, although the rate of recurrence 
can be very slow with grade I tumors. Tumors that 
cannot be resected, or can only be partially removed, 
may beneﬁt from treatment with external beam radio-
therapy or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS). These treat-
ments may also be helpful in patients whose tumor has 
recurred after surgery. Hormonal therapy and chemo-
therapy are currently unproven.
Rarer tumors that resemble meningiomas include 
hemangiopericytomas and solitary ﬁbrous tumors. These 
FIGURE 37-6 
Postgadolinium T1 MRI demonstrating multiple menin-
giomas along the falx and left parietal cortex.
are treated with surgery and radiotherapy but have a 
higher propensity to recur.
SCHWANNOMAS
These are generally benign tumors arising from the 
Schwann cells of cranial and spinal nerve roots. The most 
common schwannomas, termed vestibular schwannomas 
or acoustic neuromas, arise from the vestibular portion of 
the eighth cranial nerve and account for approximately 
9% of primary brain tumors. Patients with neuroﬁ-
bromatosis type 2 have a high incidence of vestibular 
schwannomas that are frequently bilateral. Schwanno-
mas arising from other cranial nerves, such as the 
trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V), occur with much 
lower frequency. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 is associated 
with an increased incidence of schwannomas of the spi-
nal nerve roots.
Vestibular schwannomas may be found incidentally 
on neuroimaging or present with progressive unilat-
eral hearing loss, dizziness, tinnitus, or less commonly, 
symptoms resulting from compression of the brain-
stem and cerebellum. On MRI they appear as densely 
enhancing lesions, enlarging the internal auditory canal 
and often extending into the cerebellopontine angle 
(Fig. 37-7). The differential diagnosis includes menin-
gioma. Very small, asymptomatic lesions can be 
observed with serial MRIs. Larger lesions should be 
treated with surgery or stereotactic radiosurgery. The 
optimal treatment will depend on the size of the tumor, 
FIGURE 37-7 
Postgadolinium MRI of a right vestibular schwannoma. 
The tumor can be seen to involve the internal auditory canal.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
432
symptoms, and the patient’s preference. In patients with 
small vestibular schwannomas and relatively intact hear-
ing, early surgical intervention increases the chance of 
preserving hearing.
PITUITARY TUMORS (CHAP. 38)
These account for approximately 9% of primary brain 
tumors. They can be divided into functioning and 
nonfunctioning tumors. Functioning tumors are usu-
ally microadenomas (<1 cm in diameter) that secrete 
hormones and produce speciﬁc endocrine syndromes 
(e.g., acromegaly for growth hormone–secreting tumors, 
Cushing’s syndrome for adrenocorticotropic hormone 
[ACTH]-secreting tumors, and galactorrhea, amenor-
rhea, and infertility for prolactin-secreting tumors]). Non-
functioning pituitary tumors tend to be macroadenomas 
(>1 cm) that produce symptoms by mass effect, giving rise 
to headaches, visual impairment (such as bitemporal hemi-
anopia), and hypopituitarism. Prolactin-secreting tumors 
respond well to dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine 
and cabergoline. Other pituitary tumors usually require 
treatment with surgery and sometimes radiotherapy or 
radiosurgery and hormonal therapy.
CRANIOPHARYNGIOMAS
Craniopharyngiomas are rare, usually suprasellar, par-
tially calciﬁed, solid, or mixed solid-cystic benign 
tumors that arise from remnants of Rathke’s pouch. 
They have a bimodal distribution, occurring predomi-
nantly in children but also between the ages of 55 and 
65 years. They present with headaches, visual impair-
ment, and impaired growth in children and hypopitu-
itarism in adults. Treatment involves surgery, radiother-
apy, or the combination of the two.
OTHER BENIGN TUMORS
Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial  
tumors (DNTs)
These are benign, supratentorial tumors, usually in the 
temporal lobes. They typically occur in children and 
young adults with a long-standing history of seizures. If 
the seizures are refractory, surgical resection is curative.
Epidermoid cysts
These consist of squamous epithelium surrounding a 
keratin-ﬁlled cyst. They are usually found in the cer-
ebellopontine angle and the intrasellar and suprasel-
lar regions. They may present with headaches, cra-
nial nerve abnormalities, seizures, or hydrocephalus. 
Imaging studies demonstrate extraaxial lesions with 
characteristics that are similar to CSF but have restricted 
diffusion. Treatment involves surgical resection.
Dermoid cysts
Like epidermoid cysts, dermoid cysts arise from epithe-
lial cells that are retained during closure of the neural 
tube. They contain both epidermal and dermal struc-
tures such as hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous 
glands. Unlike epidermoid cysts, these tumors usually 
have a midline location. They occur most frequently 
in the posterior fossa, especially the vermis, fourth ven-
tricle, and suprasellar cistern. Radiographically, dermoid 
cysts resemble lipomas, demonstrating T1 hyperintensity 
and variable signal on T2. Symptomatic dermoid cysts 
can be treated with surgery.
Colloid cysts
These usually arise in the anterior third ventricle and 
may present with headaches, hydrocephalus, and very 
rarely sudden death. Surgical resection is curative or 
a third ventriculostomy may relieve the obstructive 
hydrocephalus and be sufﬁcient therapy.
NEUROCUTANEOUS SYNDROMES 
(PHAKOMATOSES)
A number of genetic disorders are characterized by 
cutaneous lesions and an increased risk of brain tumors. 
Most of these disorders have an autosomal dominance 
inheritance with variable penetrance.
NEUROFIBROMATOSIS TYPE 1 (NF1)  
(VON RECKLINGHAUSEN’S DISEASE)
NF1 is an autosomal dominant disorder with an inci-
dence of approximately 1 in 2600–3000. Approximately 
half the cases are familial; the remainder are new muta-
tions arising in patients with unaffected parents. The 
NF1 gene on chromosome 17q11.2 encodes a protein, 
neuroﬁbromin, a guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-acti-
vating protein (GAP) that modulates signaling through 
the ras pathway. Mutations of the NF1 gene result in 
a large number of nervous system tumors including 
neuroﬁbromas, plexiform neuroﬁbromas, optic nerve 
gliomas, astrocytomas, and meningiomas. In addition 
to neuroﬁbromas, which appear as multiple, soft, rub-
bery cutaneous tumors, other cutaneous manifestations 
of NF1 include café au lait spots and axillary freck-
ling. NF1 is also associated with hamartomas of the 
iris termed Lisch nodules, pheochromocytomas, pseu-
doarthrosis of the tibia, scoliosis, epilepsy, and mental 
retardation.
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
433
NEUROFIBROMATOSIS TYPE 2 (NF2)
NF2 is less common than NF1, with an incidence of 
1 in 25,000–40,000. It is an autosomal dominant dis-
order with full penetrance. As with NF1, approxi-
mately half the cases arise from new mutations. The 
NF2 gene on 22q encodes a cytoskeletal protein 
“merlin” (moesin, ezrin, radixin-like protein) that 
functions as a tumor suppressor. NF2 is characterized 
by bilateral vestibular schwannomas in over 90% of 
patients, multiple meningiomas, and spinal ependymo-
mas and astrocytomas. Treatment of bilateral vestibular 
schwannomas can be challenging because the goal is to 
preserve hearing for as long as possible. These patients 
may also have posterior subcapsular lens opacities and 
retinal hamartomas.
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS (BOURNEVILLE’S 
DISEASE)
This is an autosomal dominant disorder with an inci-
dence of approximately 1 in 5000 to 10,000 live births. 
It is caused by mutations in either the TSC1 gene, 
which maps to chromosome 9q34, and encodes a pro-
tein termed hamartin, or mutations in the TSC2 gene, 
which maps to chromosome 16p13.3 and encodes the 
tuberin protein. Hamartin forms a complex with tuberin, 
which inhibits cellular signaling through the mamma-
lian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and acts as a negative 
regulator of the cell cycle. Patients with tuberous sclero-
sis have seizures, mental retardation, adenoma sebaceum 
(facial angioﬁbromas), shagreen patch, hypomelanotic 
macules, periungual ﬁbromas, renal angiomyolipomas, 
and cardiac rhabdomyomas. These patients have an 
increased incidence of subependymal nodules, corti-
cal tubers, and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas 
(SEGA). Patients frequently require anticonvulsants 
for seizures. SEGAs often do not need treatment but 
occasionally require surgical resection. There is emerg-
ing evidence that mTOR inhibitors may have activity 
in SEGAs.
TUMORS METASTATIC TO THE BRAIN
Brain metastases arise from hematogenous spread and 
frequently arise from either a lung primary or are asso-
ciated with pulmonary metastases. Most metastases 
develop at the gray matter–white matter junction in 
the watershed distribution of the brain where intravas-
cular tumor cells lodge in terminal arterioles. The dis-
tribution of metastases in the brain approximates the 
proportion of blood ﬂow such that about 85% of all 
metastases are supratentorial and 15% occur in the pos-
terior fossa. The most common sources of brain metas-
tases are lung and breast carcinomas; melanoma has the 
TABLE 37-3
FREQUENCY OF NERVOUS SYSTEM METASTASES 
BY COMMON PRIMARY TUMORS
BRAIN %
LM %
ESCC %
Lung
41
17
15
Breast
19
57
22
Melanoma
10
12
 4
Prostate
 1
 1
10
GIT
 7
—
 5
Renal
 3
 2
 7
Lymphoma
<1
10
10
Sarcoma
 7
 1
 9
Other
11
—
18
Abbreviations: ESCC, epidural spinal cord compression; GIT, gas-
trointestinal tract; LM, leptomeningeal metastases.
greatest propensity to metastasize to the brain, being 
found in 80% of patients at autopsy (Table 37-3). 
Other tumor types such as ovarian and esophageal car-
cinoma rarely metastasize to the brain. Prostate and 
breast cancer also have a propensity to metastasize to 
the dura and can mimic meningioma. Leptomeningeal 
metastases are common from hematologic malignancies 
and also breast and lung cancers. Spinal cord compres-
sion primarily arises in patients with prostate and breast 
cancer, tumors with a strong propensity to metastasize 
to the axial skeleton.
DIAGNOSIS OF METASTASES
Brain metastases are best visualized on MRI, 
where they usually appear as well-circumscribed 
lesions (Fig. 37-8). The amount of perilesional edema 
can be highly variable with large lesions causing mini-
mal edema and sometimes very small lesions causing 
extensive edema. Enhancement may be in a ring pat-
tern or diffuse. Occasionally, intracranial metastases will 
hemorrhage; although melanoma, thyroid, and kidney 
cancer have the greatest propensity to hemorrhage, 
the most common cause of a hemorrhagic metastasis 
is lung cancer because it accounts for the majority of 
brain metastases. The radiographic appearance of brain 
metastasis is nonspeciﬁc, and similar appearing lesions 
can occur with infection including brain abscesses and 
also with demyelinating lesions, sarcoidosis, radia-
tion necrosis in a previously treated patient, or a pri-
mary brain tumor that may be a second malignancy 
in a patient with systemic cancer. However, biopsy is 
rarely necessary for diagnosis in most patients because 
imaging alone in the appropriate clinical situation usu-
ally sufﬁces. This is straightforward for the majority 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
434
A
B
FIGURE 37-8 
Postgadolinium T1 MRI of multiple brain metastases 
from non-small cell lung cancer involving the right fron-
tal (A) and right cerebellar (B) hemispheres. Note the diffuse 
enhancement pattern and absence of central necrosis.
TREATMENT 
Tumors Metastatic to the Brain
DEFINITIVE TREATMENT The number and loca-
tion of brain metastases often determine the thera-
peutic options. The patient’s overall condition and the 
current or potential control of the systemic disease are 
also major determinants. Brain metastases are single in 
approximately one-half of patients and multiple in the 
other half.
RADIATION THERAPY The standard treatment 
for brain metastases has been whole-brain radiotherapy 
(WBRT) usually administered to a total dose of 3000 cGy  
in 10 fractions. This affords rapid palliation, and approxi-
mately 80% of patients improve with glucocorticoids 
and radiation therapy. However, it is not curative. 
Median survival is only 4–6 months. More recently, ste-
reotactic radiosurgery (SRS) delivered through a variety 
of techniques including the gamma knife, linear accel-
erator, proton beam, and CyberKnife all can deliver 
highly focused doses of RT, usually in a single fraction. 
SRS can effectively sterilize the visible lesions and afford 
local disease control in 80–90% of patients. In addition, 
there are some patients who have clearly been cured 
of their brain metastases using SRS, whereas this is dis-
tinctly rare with WBRT. However, SRS can be used only 
for lesions 3 cm or less in diameter and should be con-
fined to patients with only 1–3 metastases. The addition 
of WBRT to SRS improves disease control in the nervous 
system but does not prolong survival.
SURGERY Randomized controlled trials have dem-
onstrated that surgical extirpation of a single brain 
metastasis followed by WBRT is superior to WBRT alone. 
Removal of two lesions or a single symptomatic mass, 
particularly if compressing the ventricular system, can 
also be useful. This is particularly useful in patients who 
have highly radioresistant lesions such as renal carci-
noma. Surgical resection can afford rapid symptomatic 
improvement and prolonged survival. RT administered 
after complete resection of a brain metastasis improves 
disease control but does not prolong survival.
CHEMOTHERAPY Chemotherapy is rarely use-
ful for brain metastases. Metastases from certain tumor 
types that are highly chemosensitive, such as germ 
cell tumors or small cell lung cancer, may respond to 
chemotherapeutic regimens chosen according to the 
underlying malignancy. Increasingly, there are data 
demonstrating responsiveness of brain metastases to 
chemotherapy including small molecule–targeted ther-
apy when the lesion possesses the target. This has been 
best illustrated in patients with lung cancer harboring 
EGFR mutations that sensitize them to EGFR inhibitors. 
Antiangiogenic agents such as bevacizumab may also 
prove efficacious in the treatment of CNS metastases.
of patients with brain metastases because they have a 
known systemic cancer. However, in approximately 
10% of patients a systemic cancer may present with 
a brain metastasis, and if there is not an easily acces-
sible systemic site to biopsy, then a brain lesion must be 
removed for diagnostic purposes.
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
435
LEPTOMENINGEAL METASTASES
Leptomeningeal metastases are also identiﬁed as carci-
nomatous meningitis, meningeal carcinomatosis, or in 
the case of speciﬁc tumors, leukemic or lymphomatous 
meningitis. Among the hematologic malignancies, acute 
leukemia is the most common to metastasize to the sub-
arachnoid space, and in lymphomas the aggressive dif-
fuse lymphomas can metastasize to the subarachnoid 
space frequently as well. Among solid tumors, breast 
and lung carcinomas and melanoma most frequently 
spread in this fashion. Tumor cells reach the subarach-
noid space via the arterial circulation or occasionally 
through retrograde ﬂow in venous systems that drain 
metastases along the bony spine or cranium. In addition, 
leptomeningeal metastases may develop as a direct con-
sequence of prior brain metastases and can develop in 
almost 40% of patients who have a metastasis resected 
from the cerebellum.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Leptomeningeal metastases are characterized clinically 
by multilevel symptoms and signs along the neuraxis. 
Combinations of lumbar and cervical radiculopathies, 
cranial neuropathies, seizures, confusion, and encepha-
lopathy from hydrocephalus or raised intracranial pres-
sure can be present. Focal deﬁcits such as hemiparesis 
or aphasia are rarely due to leptomeningeal metastases 
unless there is direct brain inﬁltration and are more 
often associated with coexisting brain lesions. New 
onset limb pain in patients with breast, lung cancer, or 
melanoma should prompt consideration of leptomenin-
geal spread.
LABORATORY AND IMAGING DIAGNOSIS
Leptomeningeal metastases are particularly challeng-
ing to diagnose as identiﬁcation of tumor cells in the 
subarachnoid compartment may be elusive. MR imag-
ing can be deﬁnitive in patients when there are clear 
tumor nodules adherent to the cauda equina or spi-
nal cord, enhancing cranial nerves, or subarachnoid 
enhancement on brain imaging (Fig. 37-9). Imag-
ing is diagnostic in approximately 75% of patients and 
is more often positive in patients with solid tumors. 
Demonstration of tumor cells in the CSF is deﬁni-
tive and often considered the gold standard. However, 
CSF cytologic examination is positive in only 50% of 
patients on the ﬁrst lumbar puncture and still misses 
10% after three CSF samples. CSF cytologic exami-
nation is most useful in hematologic malignancies. 
Accompanying CSF abnormalities include an elevated 
protein concentration and an elevated white count. 
Hypoglycorrhachia is noted in less than 25% of patients 
A
B
FIGURE 37-9 
Postgadolinium MRI images of extensive leptomeningeal 
metastases from breast cancer. Nodules along the dorsal 
surface of the spinal cord (A) and cauda equina (B) are seen.
but is useful when present. Identiﬁcation of tumor 
markers or molecular conﬁrmation of clonal prolifera-
tion with techniques such as ﬂow cytometry within the 
CSF can also be deﬁnitive when present. Tumor mark-
ers are usually speciﬁc to solid tumors, and chromo-
somal or molecular markers are most useful in patients 
with hematologic malignancies.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
436
TREATMENT 
Leptomeningeal Metastases
The treatment of leptomeningeal metastasis is palliative 
as there is no curative therapy. RT to the symptomatically 
involved areas, such as skull base for cranial neuropa-
thy, can relieve pain and sometimes improve function. 
Whole neuraxis RT has extensive toxicity with myelosup-
pression and gastrointestinal irritation as well as limited 
effectiveness. Systemic chemotherapy with agents that 
can penetrate the blood-CSF barrier may be helpful. 
Alternatively, intrathecal chemotherapy can be effec-
tive, particularly in hematologic malignancies. This is 
optimally delivered through an intraventricular cannula 
(Ommaya reservoir) rather than by lumbar puncture. 
Few drugs can be delivered safely into the subarach-
noid space and they have a limited spectrum of antitu-
mor activity, perhaps accounting for the relatively poor 
response to this approach. In addition, impaired CSF flow 
dynamics can compromise intrathecal drug delivery. Sur-
gery has a limited role in the treatment of leptomenin-
geal metastasis, but placement of a ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt can relieve raised intracranial pressure. However, it 
compromises delivery of chemotherapy into the CSF.
EPIDURAL METASTASIS
Epidural metastasis occurs in 3–5% of patients with a 
systemic malignancy and causes neurologic compromise 
by compressing the spinal cord or cauda equina. The 
most common cancers that metastasize to the epidural 
space are those malignancies that spread to bone, such as 
breast and prostate. Lymphoma can cause bone involve-
ment and compression but it can also invade the inter-
vertebral foramens and cause spinal cord compression 
without bone destruction. The thoracic spine is affected 
most commonly, followed by the lumbar and then cer-
vical spine.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Back pain is the presenting symptom of epidural metas-
tasis in virtually all patients; the pain may precede neu-
rologic ﬁndings by weeks or months. The pain is usu-
ally exacerbated by lying down; by contrast, arthritic 
pain is often relieved by recumbency. Leg weakness is 
seen in about 50% of patients as is sensory dysfunction. 
Sphincter problems are present in about 25% of patients 
at diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is established by imaging, with MRI of the 
complete spine being the best test (Fig. 37-10). Con-
trast is not needed to identify spinal or epidural lesions. 
FIGURE 37-10 
Postgadolinium T1 MRI showing circumferential epidural 
tumor around the thoracic spinal cord from esophageal cancer.
Any patient with cancer who has severe back pain 
should undergo an MRI. Plain ﬁlms, bone scans, or 
even CT scans may show bone metastases, but only 
MRI can reliably delineate epidural tumor. For patients 
unable to have an MRI, CT myelography should be 
performed to outline the epidural space. The differential 
diagnosis of epidural tumor includes epidural abscess, 
acute or chronic hematomas, and rarely, extramedullary 
hematopoiesis.
TREATMENT 
Epidural Metastasis
Epidural metastasis requires immediate treatment. A 
randomized controlled trial demonstrated the superior-
ity of surgical resection followed by RT compared to RT 
alone. However, patients must be able to tolerate sur-
gery, and the surgical procedure of choice is a complete 
removal of the mass, which is typically anterior to the 
spinal canal, necessitating an extensive approach and 
resection. Otherwise, RT is the mainstay of treatment 
and can be used for patients with radiosensitive tumors, 
such as lymphoma, or for those unable to undergo sur-
gery. Chemotherapy is rarely used for epidural metas-
tasis unless the patient has minimal to no neurologic 
deficit and a highly chemosensitive tumor such as lym-
phoma or germinoma. Patients generally fare well if 
treated before there is severe neurologic deficit. Recov-
ery after paraparesis is better after surgery than with 
RT alone, but survival is often short due to widespread 
metastatic tumor.
 
CHAPTER 37
Primary and Metastatic Tumors of the Nervous System 
437
NEUROLOGIC TOXICITY OF THERAPY
TOXICITY FROM RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy can cause a variety of toxicities in the 
CNS. These are usually described based on their rela-
tionship in time to the administration of RT, e.g., 
they can be acute (occurring within days of RT), early 
delayed (months), or late delayed (years). In general, the 
acute and early delayed syndromes resolve and do not 
result in persistent deﬁcits, whereas the late delayed tox-
icities are usually permanent and sometimes progressive.
Acute toxicity
Acute cerebral toxicity usually occurs during RT to the 
brain. RT can cause a transient disruption of the blood-
brain barrier, resulting in increased edema and elevated 
intracranial pressure. This is usually manifest as head-
ache, lethargy, nausea and vomiting, and can be both 
prevented and treated with the administration of gluco-
corticoids. There is no acute RT toxicity that affects the 
spinal cord.
Early delayed toxicity
Early delayed toxicity is usually apparent weeks to 
months after completion of cranial irradiation and is 
likely due to focal demyelination. Clinically it may be 
asymptomatic or take the form of worsening or reap-
pearance of a preexisting neurologic deﬁcit. At times a 
contrast-enhancing lesion can be seen on MRI/CT that 
can mimic the tumor for which the patient received 
the RT. For patients with a malignant glioma, this has 
been described as “pseudoprogression” because it mim-
ics tumor recurrence on MRI but actually represents 
inﬂammation and necrotic debris engendered by effec-
tive therapy. This is seen with increased frequency when 
chemotherapy, particularly temozolomide, is given con-
currently with RT. Pseudoprogression can resolve on 
its own or, if very symptomatic, may require resection. 
A rare form of early delayed toxicity is the somnolence 
syndrome that occurs primarily in children and is charac-
terized by marked sleepiness.
In the spinal cord, early delayed RT toxicity is mani-
fest as a Lhermitte symptom with paresthesias of the 
limbs or along the spine when the patient ﬂexes the 
neck. Although frightening, it is benign, resolves on its 
own, and does not portend more serious problems.
Late delayed toxicity
Late delayed toxicities are the most serious as they are 
often irreversible and cause severe neurologic deﬁcits. 
In the brain, late toxicities can take several forms, the 
most common of which include radiation necrosis and 
leukoencephalopathy. Radiation necrosis is a focal mass 
of necrotic tissue that is contrast enhancing on CT/
MRI and may be associated with signiﬁcant edema. 
This may appear identical to pseudoprogression but 
is seen months to years after RT and is always symp-
tomatic. Clinical symptoms and signs include seizure 
and lateralizing ﬁndings referable to the location of 
the necrotic mass. The necrosis is caused by the effect 
of RT on cerebral vasculature with resultant ﬁbrinoid 
necrosis and occlusion of the blood vessels. It can mimic 
tumor radiographically, but unlike tumor it is typically 
hypometabolic on a PET scan and has reduced perfu-
sion on perfusion MR sequences. It may require resec-
tion for diagnosis and treatment unless it can be man-
aged with glucocorticoids. There are rare reports 
of improvement with hyperbaric oxygen or antico-
agulation but the usefulness of these approaches is 
questionable.
Leukoencephalopathy is seen most commonly after 
WBRT as opposed to focal RT. On T2 or FLAIR 
MR sequences there is diffuse increased signal seen 
throughout the hemispheric white matter, often bilat-
erally and symmetrically. There tends to be a periven-
tricular predominance that may be associated with 
atrophy and ventricular enlargement. Clinically, patients 
develop cognitive impairment, gait disorder, and later 
urinary incontinence, all of which can progress over 
time. These symptoms mimic those of normal pressure 
hydrocephalus, and placement of a ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt can improve function in some patients but does 
not reverse the deﬁcits completely. Increased age is a 
risk factor for leukoencephalopathy but not for radia-
tion necrosis. Necrosis appears to depend on an as yet 
unidentiﬁed predisposition.
Other late neurologic toxicities include endocrine 
dysfunction if the pituitary or hypothalamus was 
included in the RT port. A radiation-induced neoplasm 
can occur many years after therapeutic RT for either a 
prior CNS tumor or a head and neck cancer; accurate 
diagnosis requires surgical resection or biopsy. In addi-
tion, RT causes accelerated atherosclerosis, which can 
cause stroke either from intracranial vascular disease or 
carotid plaque from neck irradiation.
The peripheral nervous system is relatively resistant 
to RT toxicities. Peripheral nerves are rarely affected 
by RT, but the plexus is more vulnerable. Plexopathy 
develops more commonly in the brachial distribution 
than in the lumbosacral distribution. It must be differ-
entiated from tumor progression in the plexus, which 
is usually accomplished with CT/MR imaging of the 
area or PET scan demonstrating tumor inﬁltrating the 
region. Clinically, tumor progression is usually pain-
ful whereas radiation-induced plexopathy is painless. 
Radiation plexopathy is also more commonly associated 
with lymphedema of the affected limb. Sensory loss and 
weakness are seen in both.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
438
TABLE 37-4
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS CAUSED BY AGENTS 
COMMONLY USED IN PATIENTS WITH CANCER
Acute encephalopathy  
(delirium)
 Methotrexate  
(high-dose IV, IT)
 Cisplatin
 Vincristine
 Asparaginase
 Procarbazine
 5-Flourouracil  
(± levamisole)
 Cytarabine (high-dose)
 Nitrosoureas (high-dose  
or arterial)
 Ifosfamide
 Etoposide (high-dose)
 Bevacizumab (PRES)
Chronic encephalopathy 
(dementia)
 Methotrexate
 Carmustine
 Cytarabine
 Fludarabine
Visual loss
 Tamoxifen
 Gallium nitrate
 Cisplatin
 Fludarabine
Cerebellar dysfunction/ataxia
 5-Fluorouracil  
(± levamisole)
 Cytarabine
 Procarbazine
Seizures
 Methotrexate
 Etoposide (high-dose)
 Cisplatin
 Vincristine
 Asparaginase
 Nitrogen mustard
 Carmustine
 Dacarbazine (intraarterial 
or high-dose)
 Busulfan (high-dose)
Myelopathy (intrathecal 
drugs)
 Methotrexate
 Cytarabine
 Thiotepa
Peripheral neuropathy
 Vinca alkaloids
 Cisplatin
 Procarbazine
 Etoposide
 Teniposide
 Cytarabine
 Taxanes
 Suramin
 Bortezomib
Abbreviations: IT, intrathecal; IV, intravenous; PRES, posterior 
reversible encephalopathy syndrome.
TOXICITY FROM CHEMOTHERAPY
Neurotoxicity is second to myelosuppression as the 
dose-limiting toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents 
(Table 37-4). Chemotherapy causes peripheral neu-
ropathy from a number of commonly used agents, and 
the type of neuropathy can differ, depending upon the 
drug. Vincristine causes paresthesias but little sensory loss 
and is associated with motor dysfunction, autonomic 
impairment (frequently ileus), and rarely cranial nerve 
compromise. Cisplatin causes large ﬁber sensory loss 
resulting in sensory ataxia but little cutaneous sensory 
loss and no weakness. The taxanes also cause a predom-
inately sensory neuropathy. Agents such as bortezomib 
and thalidomide also cause neuropathy.
Encephalopathy and seizures are common toxici-
ties from chemotherapeutic drugs. Ifosfamide can cause 
a severe encephalopathy, which is reversible with dis-
continuation of the drug and the use of methylene blue 
for severely affected patients. Fludarabine also causes a 
severe global encephalopathy that may be permanent. 
Bevacizumab and other anti-VEGF agents can cause 
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome. Cispla-
tin can cause hearing loss and less frequently vestibular 
dysfunction.
 Shlomo Melmed 
■  J. Larry Jameson 
439
 The anterior pituitary often is referred to as the “mas-
ter gland” because, together with the hypothalamus, it 
orchestrates the complex regulatory functions of many 
other endocrine glands. The anterior pituitary gland 
produces six major hormones: (1) prolactin (PRL), (2) 
growth hormone (GH), (3) adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH), (4) luteinizing hormone (LH), (5) follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH), and (6) thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) ( Table 38-1 ). Pituitary hormones are 
secreted in a pulsatile manner, reﬂ ecting stimulation by 
 NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS OF THE PITUITARY 
AND HYPOTHALAMUS 
 CHAPTER 38 
TABLE 38-1
 ANTERIOR PITUITARY HORMONE EXPRESSION AND REGULATION 
CELL
CORTICOTROPE
SOMATOTROPE
LACTOTROPE
THYROTROPE
GONADOTROPE
Tissue-speciﬁ c 
transcription 
factor
T-Pit
Prop-1, Pit-1
Prop-1, Pit-1
Prop-1, Pit-1, TEF
SF-1, DAX-1
Fetal 
appearance
6 weeks
8 weeks
12 weeks
12 weeks
12 weeks
Hormone
POMC
GH
PRL
TSH
FSH LH
Protein
Polypeptide
Polypeptide
Polypeptide
Glycoprotein 
α, β subunits
Glycoprotein 
α, β subunits
Amino acids
266 (ACTH 1–39)
191
199
211
210 204
Stimulators
CRH, AVP, gp-130 
cytokines
GHRH, ghrelin
Estrogen, TRH, 
VIP
TRH
GnRH, activins, 
estrogen
Inhibitors
Glucocorticoids
Somatostatin, IGF-I
Dopamine
T 3 , T 4 , dopamine, 
somatostatin, 
glucocorticoids
Sex steroids, inhibin
Target gland
Adrenal
Liver, other tissues
Breast, other 
tissues
Thyroid
Ovary, testis
Trophic effect
Steroid production
IGF-I production, 
growth induction, 
insulin antago-
nism
Milk production
T 4 synthesis and 
secretion
Sex steroid produc-
tion, follicle growth, 
germ cell maturation
Normal range
ACTH, 4–22 pg/L
<0.5 μg/La
M <15; F <20 μg/L
0.1–5 mU/L
M, 5–20 IU/L, F 
(basal), 5–20 IU/L
aHormone secretion integrated over 24 h.
 Abbreviations: M, male; F, female. For other abbreviations, see text.
 Source: Adapted from I Shimon, S Melmed, in S Melmed, P Conn (eds):  Endocrinology: Basic and Clinical Principles . Totowa, NJ, Humana, 
2005. 
440
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
an array of speciﬁc hypothalamic releasing factors. Each 
of these pituitary hormones elicits speciﬁc responses in 
peripheral target tissues. The hormonal products of those 
peripheral glands, in turn, exert feedback control at the 
level of the hypothalamus and pituitary to modulate 
pituitary function (Fig. 38-1). Pituitary tumors cause 
characteristic hormone-excess syndromes. Hormone 
deﬁciency may be inherited or acquired. Fortunately, 
there are efﬁcacious treatments for the various pituitary 
hormone-excess and -deﬁciency syndromes. Nonethe-
less, these diagnoses are often elusive; this emphasizes the 
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Cortisol
ACTH
PRL
IGF-1
Target
organs
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
– – +
–
Adrenal
glands
Lactation
Liver
Chondrocytes
Linear and
organ growth
Thyroid
glands
Testes
Ovaries
Cell homeostasis
and function
T4/T3
Thermogenesis
metabolism
Testosterone
Inhibin
Spermatogenesis
Secondary sex
characteristics
Estradiol
Progesterone
Inhibin
Ovulation
Secondary sex
characteristics
GnRH
TRH
CRH
SRIF
+
TSH
LH
FSH
Dopamine
GHRH
GH
FIGURE 38-1 
Diagram of pituitary axes. Hypothalamic hormones regulate 
anterior pituitary trophic hormones that in turn determine tar-
get gland secretion. Peripheral hormones feed back to regu-
late hypothalamic and pituitary hormones. For abbreviations, 
see text.
importance of recognizing subtle clinical manifestations 
and performing the correct laboratory diagnostic tests. 
ANATOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
ANATOMY
The pituitary gland weighs ∼600 mg and is located 
within the sella turcica ventral to the diaphragma sella; 
it consists of anatomically and functionally distinct ante-
rior and posterior lobes. The bony sella is contiguous to 
vascular and neurologic structures, including the cav-
ernous sinuses, cranial nerves, and optic chiasm. Thus, 
expanding intrasellar pathologic processes may have sig-
niﬁcant central mass effects in addition to their endocri-
nologic impact.
Hypothalamic neural cells synthesize speciﬁc releasing 
and inhibiting hormones that are secreted directly into 
the portal vessels of the pituitary stalk. Blood supply of 
the pituitary gland comes from the superior and inferior 
hypophyseal arteries (Fig. 38-2). The hypothalamic-
pituitary portal plexus provides the major blood source 
for the anterior pituitary, allowing reliable transmis-
sion of hypothalamic peptide pulses without signiﬁcant 
Neuroendocrine
cell nuclei
Third ventricle
Hypothalamus
Stalk
Superior
hypophyseal
artery
Long portal
vessels
Trophic
hormone
secreting
cells
Short portal
vessel
Inferior
hypophyseal
artery
Anterior
pituitary
Hormone
secretion
Posterior
pituitary
FIGURE 38-2 
Diagram of hypothalamic-pituitary vasculature. The hypo-
thalamic nuclei produce hormones that traverse the portal 
system and impinge on anterior pituitary cells to regulate 
pituitary hormone secretion. Posterior pituitary hormones are 
derived from direct neural extensions.
441
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
systemic dilution; consequently, pituitary cells are 
exposed to releasing or inhibiting factors and in turn 
release their hormones as discrete pulses (Fig. 38-3).
The posterior pituitary is supplied by the inferior 
hypophyseal arteries. In contrast to the anterior pituitary, 
the posterior lobe is directly innervated by hypothalamic 
neurons (supraopticohypophyseal and tuberohypophyseal 
nerve tracts) via the pituitary stalk. Thus, posterior pitu-
itary production of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone 
[ADH]) and oxytocin is particularly sensitive to neuro-
nal damage by lesions that affect the pituitary stalk or 
hypothalamus.
PITUITARY DEVELOPMENT
The embryonic differentiation and maturation of anterior 
pituitary cells have been elucidated in considerable detail. 
Pituitary development from Rathke’s pouch involves a 
complex interplay of lineage-speciﬁc transcription factors 
expressed in pluripotent precursor cells and gradients of 
locally produced growth factors (Table 38-1). The tran-
scription factor Prop-1 induces pituitary development 
of Pit-1-speciﬁc lineages as well as gonadotropes. The 
transcription factor Pit-1 determines cell-speciﬁc expres-
sion of GH, PRL, and TSH in somatotropes, lactotropes, 
and thyrotropes. Expression of high levels of estrogen 
receptors in cells that contain Pit-1 favors PRL expres-
sion, whereas thyrotrope embryonic factor (TEF) induces 
TSH expression. Pit-1 binds to GH, PRL, and TSH 
gene regulatory elements as well as to recognition sites on 
its own promoter, providing a mechanism for maintain-
ing speciﬁc pituitary phenotypic stability. Gonadotrope 
cell development is further deﬁned by the cell-speciﬁc 
expression of the nuclear receptors steroidogenic factor 
(SF-1) and dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypo-
plasia critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1 (DAX-1). 
Development of corticotrope cells, which express the 
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, requires the T-Pit 
transcription factor. Abnormalities of pituitary develop-
ment caused by mutations of Pit-1, Prop-1, SF-1, DAX-1, 
and T-Pit result in a series of rare, selective or combined 
pituitary hormone deﬁcits.
LH mlU/mL GnRH pg/mL
GnRH pulses
LH pulses
FIGURE 38-3 
Hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
pulses induce secretory pulses of luteinizing hormone (LH).
HYPOTHALAMIC AND ANTERIOR 
PITUITARY INSUFFICIENCY
Hypopituitarism results from impaired production of 
one or more of the anterior pituitary trophic hormones. 
Reduced pituitary function can result from inherited 
disorders; more commonly, hypopituitarism is acquired 
and reﬂects the compressive mass effects of tumors or 
the consequences of inﬂammation or vascular damage. 
These processes also may impair synthesis or secretion 
of hypothalamic hormones, with resultant pituitary fail-
ure (Table 38-2).
TABLE 38-2 
ETIOLOGY OF HYPOPITUITARISMa
Development/structural
 Transcription factor defect
 Pituitary dysplasia/aplasia
 Congenital CNS mass, encephalocele
 Primary empty sella
  Congenital hypothalamic disorders (septo-optic  
 dysplasia, Prader-Willi syndrome, Laurence- 
 Moon-Biedl syndrome, Kallmann syndrome)
Traumatic
 Surgical resection
 Radiation damage
 Head injuries
Neoplastic
 Pituitary adenoma
 Parasellar mass (germinoma, ependymoma, glioma)
 Rathke’s cyst
 Craniopharyngioma
 Hypothalamic hamartoma, gangliocytoma
 Pituitary metastases (breast, lung, colon carcinoma)
 Lymphoma and leukemia
 Meningioma
Inﬁltrative/inﬂammatory
 Lymphocytic hypophysitis
 Hemochromatosis
 Sarcoidosis
 Histiocytosis X
 Granulomatous hypophysitis
Vascular
 Pituitary apoplexy
  Pregnancy-related (infarction with diabetes; postpartum  
 necrosis)
 Sickle cell disease
 Arteritis
Infections
 Fungal (histoplasmosis)
 Parasitic (toxoplasmosis)
 Tuberculosis
 Pneumocystis carinii
aTrophic hormone failure associated with pituitary compression or 
destruction usually occurs sequentially: GH > FSH > LH > TSH > 
ACTH. During childhood, growth retardation is often the presenting 
feature, and in adults, hypogonadism is the earliest symptom.
442
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
DEVELOPMENTAL AND GENETIC CAUSES 
OF HYPOPITUITARISM
Pituitary dysplasia
Pituitary dysplasia may result in aplastic, hypoplastic, 
or ectopic pituitary gland development. Because pitu-
itary development follows midline cell migration from 
the nasopharyngeal Rathke’s pouch, midline craniofa-
cial disorders may be associated with pituitary dysplasia. 
Acquired pituitary failure in the newborn also can be 
caused by birth trauma, including cranial hemorrhage, 
asphyxia, and breech delivery.
Septo-optic dysplasia
Hypothalamic dysfunction and hypopituitarism may 
result from dysgenesis of the septum pellucidum or cor-
pus callosum. Affected children have mutations in the 
HESX1 gene, which is involved in early development 
of the ventral prosencephalon. These children exhibit 
variable combinations of cleft palate, syndactyly, ear 
deformities, hypertelorism, optic atrophy, micropenis, 
and anosmia. Pituitary dysfunction leads to diabetes 
insipidus, GH deﬁciency and short stature, and, occa-
sionally, TSH deﬁciency.
Tissue-speciﬁc factor mutations
Several pituitary cell–speciﬁc transcription factors, such 
as Pit-1 and Prop-1, are critical for determining the 
development and committed function of differentiated 
anterior pituitary cell lineages. Autosomal dominant or 
recessive Pit-1 mutations cause combined GH, PRL, 
and TSH deﬁciencies. These patients usually present 
with growth failure and varying degrees of hypothy-
roidism. The pituitary may appear hypoplastic on MRI.
Prop-1 is expressed early in pituitary development 
and appears to be required for Pit-1 function. Familial 
and sporadic PROP1 mutations result in combined GH, 
PRL, TSH, and gonadotropin deﬁciency. Over 80% of 
these patients have growth retardation; by adulthood, 
all are deﬁcient in TSH and gonadotropins, and a small 
minority later develop ACTH deﬁciency. Because of 
gonadotropin deﬁciency, these individuals do not enter 
puberty spontaneously. In some cases, the pituitary 
gland is enlarged. TPIT mutations result in ACTH deﬁ-
ciency associated with hypocortisolism.
Developmental hypothalamic dysfunction
Kallmann syndrome
Kallmann syndrome results from defective hypothalamic 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) synthesis and 
is associated with anosmia or hyposmia due to olfac-
tory bulb agenesis or hypoplasia. The syndrome also 
may be associated with color blindness, optic atrophy, 
nerve deafness, cleft palate, renal abnormalities, crypt-
orchidism, and neurologic abnormalities such as mirror 
movements. Defects in the X-linked KAL gene impair 
embryonic migration of GnRH neurons from the hypo-
thalamic olfactory placode to the hypothalamus. Genetic 
abnormalities, in addition to KAL mutations, also can 
cause isolated GnRH deﬁciency. Autosomal reces-
sive (i.e., GPR54, KISS1) and dominant (i.e., FGFR1) 
modes of transmission have been described, and there 
is a growing list of genes associated with GnRH deﬁ-
ciency (GNRH1, PROK2, PROKR2, CH7, PCSK1, 
FGF8, TAC3, TACR3). GnRH deﬁciency prevents 
progression through puberty. Males present with delayed 
puberty and pronounced hypogonadal features, including 
micropenis, probably the result of low testosterone levels 
during infancy. Females present with primary amenor-
rhea and failure of secondary sexual development.
Kallmann syndrome and other causes of congeni-
tal GnRH deﬁciency are characterized by low LH 
and FSH levels and low concentrations of sex steroids 
(testosterone or estradiol). In sporadic cases of isolated 
gonadotropin deﬁciency, the diagnosis is often one of 
exclusion after other causes of hypothalamic-pituitary 
dysfunction have been eliminated. Repetitive GnRH 
administration restores normal pituitary gonadotropin 
responses, pointing to a hypothalamic defect.
Long-term treatment of men with human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) or testosterone restores pubertal 
development and secondary sex characteristics; women 
can be treated with cyclic estrogen and progestin. Fer-
tility also may be restored by the administration of 
gonadotropins or by using a portable infusion pump to 
deliver subcutaneous, pulsatile GnRH.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
This is a rare genetically heterogeneous disorder char-
acterized by mental retardation, renal abnormalities, 
obesity, and hexadactyly, brachydactyly, or syndactyly. 
Central diabetes insipidus may or may not be associ-
ated. GnRH deﬁciency occurs in 75% of males and 
half of affected females. Retinal degeneration begins in 
early childhood, and most patients are blind by age 30. 
Numerous subtypes of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) 
have been identiﬁed, with genetic linkage to at least 
nine different loci. Several of the loci encode genes 
involved in basal body cilia function, and this may 
account for the diverse clinical manifestations.
Leptin and leptin receptor mutations
Deﬁciencies of leptin or its receptor cause a broad spec-
trum of hypothalamic abnormalities, including hyper-
phagia, obesity, and central hypogonadism. Decreased 
GnRH production in these patients results in attenuated 
pituitary FSH and LH synthesis and release.
443
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
Prader-Willi syndrome
This is a contiguous gene syndrome that results from 
deletion of the paternal copies of the imprinted SNRPN 
gene, the NECDIN gene, and possibly other genes on 
chromosome 15q. Prader-Willi syndrome is associ-
ated with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hyperpha-
gia-obesity, chronic muscle hypotonia, mental retarda-
tion, and adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Multiple somatic 
defects also involve the skull, eyes, ears, hands, and feet. 
Diminished hypothalamic oxytocin- and vasopressin- 
producing nuclei have been reported. Deﬁcient GnRH 
synthesis is suggested by the observation that chronic 
GnRH treatment restores pituitary LH and FSH release.
ACQUIRED HYPOPITUITARISM
Hypopituitarism may be caused by accidental or neuro-
surgical trauma; vascular events such as apoplexy; pitu-
itary or hypothalamic neoplasms, craniopharyngioma, 
lymphoma, or metastatic tumors; inﬂammatory disease 
such as lymphocytic hypophysitis; inﬁltrative disorders 
such as sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, and tuberculosis; 
or irradiation.
Increasing evidence suggests that patients with brain 
injury, including sports trauma, subarachnoid hemor-
rhage, and irradiation, have transient hypopituitarism 
and require intermittent long-term endocrine follow-
up, as permanent hypothalamic or pituitary dysfunction 
will develop in 25–40% of these patients.
Hypothalamic inﬁltration disorders
These disorders—including sarcoidosis, histiocytosis X, 
amyloidosis, and hemochromatosis—frequently involve 
both hypothalamic and pituitary neuronal and neuro-
chemical tracts. Consequently, diabetes insipidus occurs 
in half of patients with these disorders. Growth retar-
dation is seen if attenuated GH secretion occurs before 
pubertal epiphyseal closure. Hypogonadotropic hypo-
gonadism and hyperprolactinemia are also common.
Inﬂammatory lesions
Pituitary damage and subsequent dysfunction can be 
seen with chronic infections such as tuberculosis, with 
opportunistic fungal infections associated with AIDS, 
and in tertiary syphilis. Other inﬂammatory processes, 
such as granulomas and sarcoidosis, may mimic the fea-
tures of a pituitary adenoma. These lesions may cause 
extensive hypothalamic and pituitary damage, leading to 
trophic hormone deﬁciencies.
Cranial irradiation
Cranial irradiation may result in long-term hypotha-
lamic and pituitary dysfunction, especially in children and 
adolescents, as they are more susceptible to damage after 
whole-brain or head and neck therapeutic irradiation. 
The development of hormonal abnormalities correlates 
strongly with irradiation dosage and the time interval after 
completion of radiotherapy. Up to two-thirds of patients 
ultimately develop hormone insufﬁciency after a median 
dose of 50 Gy (5000 rad) directed at the skull base. The 
development of hypopituitarism occurs over 5–15 years 
and usually reﬂects hypothalamic damage rather than pri-
mary destruction of pituitary cells. Although the pattern of 
hormone loss is variable, GH deﬁciency is most common, 
followed by gonadotropin and ACTH deﬁciency. When 
deﬁciency of one or more hormones is documented, the 
possibility of diminished reserve of other hormones is 
likely. Accordingly, anterior pituitary function should be 
continually evaluated over the long term in previously 
irradiated patients, and replacement therapy instituted 
when appropriate (discussed later).
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
This occurs most often in postpartum women; it usu-
ally presents with hyperprolactinemia and MRI evi-
dence of a prominent pituitary mass that often resembles 
an adenoma, with mildly elevated PRL levels. Pituitary 
failure caused by diffuse lymphocytic inﬁltration may be 
transient or permanent but requires immediate evalua-
tion and treatment. Rarely, isolated pituitary hormone 
deﬁciencies have been described, suggesting a selective 
autoimmune process targeted to speciﬁc cell types. Most 
patients manifest symptoms of progressive mass effects 
with headache and visual disturbance. The erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate often is elevated. As the MRI 
image may be indistinguishable from that of a pituitary 
adenoma, hypophysitis should be considered in a post-
partum woman with a newly diagnosed pituitary mass 
before an unnecessary surgical intervention is under-
taken. The inﬂammatory process often resolves after 
several months of glucocorticoid treatment, and pitu-
itary function may be restored, depending on the extent 
of damage.
Pituitary apoplexy
Acute intrapituitary hemorrhagic vascular events can 
cause substantial damage to the pituitary and surround-
ing sellar structures. Pituitary apoplexy may occur 
spontaneously in a preexisting adenoma; postpartum 
(Sheehan’s syndrome); or in association with diabe-
tes, hypertension, sickle cell anemia, or acute shock. 
The hyperplastic enlargement of the pituitary, which 
occurs normally during pregnancy, increases the risk for 
hemorrhage and infarction. Apoplexy is an endocrine 
emergency that may result in severe hypoglycemia, 
hypotension and shock, central nervous system (CNS) 
hemorrhage, and death. Acute symptoms may include 
444
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
severe headache with signs of meningeal irritation, bilat-
eral visual changes, ophthalmoplegia, and, in severe 
cases, cardiovascular collapse and loss of consciousness. 
Pituitary CT or MRI may reveal signs of intratumoral 
or sellar hemorrhage, with deviation of the pituitary 
stalk and compression of pituitary tissue.
Patients with no evident visual loss or impaired con-
sciousness can be observed and managed conservatively 
with high-dose glucocorticoids. Those with signiﬁ-
cant or progressive visual loss or loss of consciousness 
require urgent surgical decompression. Visual recov-
ery after sellar surgery is inversely correlated with the 
length of time after the acute event. Therefore, severe 
ophthalmoplegia or visual deﬁcits are indications for 
early surgery. Hypopituitarism is very common after 
apoplexy.
Empty sella
A partial or apparently totally empty sella is often an 
incidental MRI ﬁnding. These patients usually have 
normal pituitary function, implying that the surround-
ing rim of pituitary tissue is fully functional. Hypopi-
tuitarism, however, may develop insidiously. Pituitary 
masses also may undergo clinically silent infarction and 
involution with development of a partial or totally 
empty sella by cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) ﬁlling the dural 
herniation. Rarely, small but functional pituitary ade-
nomas may arise within the rim of pituitary tissue, and 
they are not always visible on MRI.
PRESENTATION AND DIAGNOSIS
The clinical manifestations of hypopituitarism depend 
on which hormones are lost and the extent of the 
hormone deﬁciency. GH deﬁciency causes growth 
disorders in children and leads to abnormal body 
composition in adults (discussed later). Gonadotro-
pin deﬁciency causes menstrual disorders and infertil-
ity in women and decreased sexual function, infertil-
ity, and loss of secondary sexual characteristics in men. 
TSH and ACTH deﬁciency usually develop later in 
the course of pituitary failure. TSH deﬁciency causes 
growth retardation in children and features of hypothy-
roidism in children and adults. The secondary form of 
adrenal insufﬁciency caused by ACTH deﬁciency leads 
to hypocortisolism with relative preservation of miner-
alocorticoid production. PRL deﬁciency causes failure 
of lactation. When lesions involve the posterior pitu-
itary, polyuria and polydipsia reﬂect loss of vasopressin 
secretion. Epidemiologic studies have documented an 
increased mortality rate in patients with long-standing 
pituitary damage, primarily from increased cardiovascu-
lar and cerebrovascular disease. Previous head or neck 
irradiation is also a determinant of increased mortality 
rates in patients with hypopituitarism.
LABORATORY INVESTIGATION
Biochemical diagnosis of pituitary insufﬁciency is made 
by demonstrating low levels of trophic hormones in the 
setting of low levels of target hormones. For example, 
low free thyroxine in the setting of a low or inappropri-
ately normal TSH level suggests secondary hypothyroid-
ism. Similarly, a low testosterone level without elevation 
of gonadotropins suggests hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism. Provocative tests may be required to assess pituitary 
reserve (Table 38-3). GH responses to insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia, arginine, L-dopa, growth hormone–releas-
ing hormone (GHRH), or growth hormone–releasing 
peptides (GHRPs) can be used to assess GH reserve. 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) administra-
tion induces ACTH release, and administration of syn-
thetic ACTH (cosyntropin) evokes adrenal cortisol 
release as an indirect indicator of pituitary ACTH reserve. 
ACTH reserve is most reliably assessed by measur-
ing ACTH and cortisol levels during insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia. However, this test should be performed 
cautiously in patients with suspected adrenal insufﬁciency 
because of enhanced susceptibility to hypoglycemia and 
hypotension. Administering insulin to induce hypogly-
cemia is contraindicated in patients with active coronary 
artery disease or seizure disorders.
TREATMENT 
Hypopituitarism
Hormone replacement therapy, including glucocorti-
coids, thyroid hormone, sex steroids, growth hormone, 
and vasopressin, is usually safe and free of complica-
tions. Treatment regimens that mimic physiologic hor-
mone production allow for maintenance of satisfactory 
clinical homeostasis. Effective dosage schedules are out-
lined in Table 38-4. Patients in need of glucocorticoid 
replacement require careful dose adjustments during 
stressful events such as acute illness, dental procedures, 
trauma, and acute hospitalization.
HYPOTHALAMIC, PITUITARY, AND 
OTHER SELLAR MASSES
PITUITARY TUMORS
Pituitary adenomas are the most common cause of pitu-
itary hormone hypersecretion and hyposecretion syn-
dromes in adults. They account for ∼15% of all intra-
cranial neoplasms and have been identiﬁed with a 
population prevalence of ∼80/100,000. At autopsy, up 
to one-quarter of all pituitary glands harbor an unsus-
pected microadenoma (<10 mm diameter). Similarly, 
pituitary imaging detects small clinically inapparent 
pituitary lesions in at least 10% of individuals.
445
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
TABLE 38-3
TESTS OF PITUITARY SUFFICIENCY
HORMONE
TEST
BLOOD SAMPLES
INTERPRETATION
Growth  
hormone
Insulin tolerance test: regular insulin 
(0.05–0.15 U/kg IV)
−30, 0, 30, 60, 120 min for 
glucose and GH
Glucose <40 mg/dL; GH should be >3 
μg/L
GHRH test: 1 μg/kg IV
0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120 min  
for GH
Normal response is GH >3 μg/L
L-Arginine test: 30 g IV over 30 min
0, 30, 60, 120 min for GH
Normal response is GH >3 μg/L
L-Dopa test: 500 mg PO
0, 30, 60, 120 min for GH
Normal response is GH >3 μg/L
Prolactin
TRH test: 200–500 μg IV
0, 20, and 60 min for TSH  
and PRL
Normal prolactin is >2 μg/L and 
increase >200% of baseline
ACTH
Insulin tolerance test: regular insulin 
(0.05–0.15 U/kg IV)
−30, 0, 30, 60, 90 min for 
glucose and cortisol
Glucose <40 mg/dL
Cortisol should increase by >7 μg/dL 
or to >20 μg/dL
CRH test: 1 μg/kg ovine CRH IV at 
8 A.M.
0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 min for 
ACTH and cortisol
Basal ACTH increases 2- to 4-fold and 
peaks at 20–100 pg/mL
Cortisol levels >20–25 μg/dL
Metyrapone test: metyrapone  
(30 mg/kg) at midnight
Plasma 11-deoxycortisol and 
cortisol at 8 A.M.; ACTH can 
also be measured
Plasma cortisol should be <4 μg/dL to 
assure an adequate response
Normal response is 11-deoxycortisol 
>7.5 μg/dL or ACTH >75 pg/mL
Standard ACTH stimulation test: ACTH 
1-24 (cosyntropin), 0.25 mg IM or IV
0, 30, 60 min for cortisol and 
aldosterone
Normal response is cortisol >21 μg/dL 
and aldosterone response of  
>4 ng/dL above baseline
Low-dose ACTH test: ACTH 1-24 
(cosyntropin), 1 μg IV
0, 30, 60 min for cortisol
Cortisol should be >21 μg/dL
3-day ACTH stimulation test consists 
of 0.25 mg ACTH 1-24 given IV over  
8 h each day
Cortisol >21 μg/dL
TSH
Basal thyroid function tests: T4, T3, TSH
Basal measurements
Low free thyroid hormone levels in 
the setting of TSH levels that are not 
appropriately increased indicate pitu-
itary insufﬁciency
TRH test: 200–500 μg IV
0, 20, 60 min for TSH and 
PRLa
TSH should increase by >5 mU/L 
unless thyroid hormone levels are 
increased
LH, FSH
LH, FSH, testosterone, estrogen
Basal measurements
Basal LH and FSH should be 
increased in postmenopausal women
Low testosterone levels in the setting 
of low LH and FSH indicate pituitary 
insufﬁciency
GnRH test: GnRH (100 μg) IV
0, 30, 60 min for LH and FSH
In most adults, LH should increase by 
10 IU/L and FSH by 2 IU/L
Normal responses are variable
Multiple 
hormones
Combined anterior pituitary test:  
GHRH (1 μg/kg), CRH (1 μg/kg), 
GnRH (100 μg), TRH (200 μg) are 
given IV
−30, 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 
120 min for GH, ACTH,  
cortisol, LH, FSH, and TSH
Combined or individual releasing  
hormone responses must be  
elevated in the context of basal  
target gland hormone values and 
may not be uniformly diagnostic  
(see text)
aEvoked PRL response indicates lactotrope integrity.
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
446
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
Pathogenesis
Pituitary adenomas are benign neoplasms that arise from 
one of the ﬁve anterior pituitary cell types. The clini-
cal and biochemical phenotypes of pituitary adenomas 
depend on the cell type from which they are derived. 
Thus, tumors arising from lactotrope (PRL), somato-
trope (GH), corticotrope (ACTH), thyrotrope (TSH), or 
gonadotrope (LH, FSH) cells hypersecrete their respec-
tive hormones (Table 38-5). Plurihormonal tumors that 
express combinations of GH, PRL, TSH, ACTH, and 
the glycoprotein hormone α or β subunit may be diag-
nosed by careful immunocytochemistry or may manifest 
as clinical syndromes that combine features of these hor-
monal hypersecretory syndromes. Morphologically, these 
tumors may arise from a single polysecreting cell type or 
include cells with mixed function within the same tumor.
Hormonally active tumors are characterized by auton-
omous hormone secretion with diminished feedback 
TABLE 38-4
 HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY FOR ADULT 
HYPOPITUITARISMa
TROPHIC HORMONE  
DEFICIT
HORMONE REPLACEMENT
ACTH
Hydrocortisone  
(10–20 mg A.M.; 5–10 mg P.M.)
Cortisone acetate (25 mg A.M.; 
12.5 mg P.M.)
Prednisone (5 mg A.M.)
TSH
L-Thyroxine (0.075–0.15 mg daily)
FSH/LH
Males
  Testosterone enanthate  
(200 mg IM every 2 weeks)
 Testosterone skin patch (5 mg/d)
Females
  Conjugated estrogen  
(0.65–1.25 mg qd for 25 days)
  Progesterone (5–10 mg qd) on 
days 16–25
  Estradiol skin patch (0.5 mg, 
every other day)
For fertility: Menopausal gonado-
tropins, human chorionic gonad-
otropins
GH
Adults: Somatotropin  
(0.1–1.25 mg SC qd)
Children: Somatotropin  
(0.02–0.05 [mg/kg per day])
Vasopressin
Intranasal desmopressin  
(5–20 μg twice daily)
Oral 300–600 μg qd
aAll doses shown should be individualized for speciﬁc patients and 
should be reassessed during stress, surgery, or pregnancy. 
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
TABLE 38-5 
CLASSIFICATION OF PITUITARY ADENOMASa
ADENOMA CELL 
ORIGIN
HORMONE 
PRODUCT
CLINICAL 
SYNDROME
Lactotrope
PRL
Hypogonadism, 
galactorrhea
Gonadotrope
FSH, LH,  
subunits
Silent or  
hypogonadism
Somatotrope
GH
Acromegaly/ 
gigantism
Corticotrope
ACTH
Cushing’s  
disease
Mixed growth  
hormone and  
prolactin cell
GH, PRL
Acromegaly,  
hypogonadism, 
galactorrhea
Other plurihormonal  
cell
Any
Mixed
Acidophil stem cell
PRL, GH
Hypogonadism, 
galactorrhea,  
acromegaly
Mammosomatotrope
PRL, GH
Hypogonadism, 
galactorrhea,  
acromegaly
Thyrotrope
TSH
Thyrotoxicosis
Null cell
None
Pituitary failure
Oncocytoma
None
Pituitary failure
aHormone-secreting tumors are listed in decreasing order of fre-
quency. All tumors may cause local pressure effects, including 
visual disturbances, cranial nerve palsy, and headache.
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
Source: Adapted from S Melmed, in JL Jameson (ed): Principles of 
Molecular Medicine, Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, 1998.
responsiveness to physiologic inhibitory pathways. Hor-
mone production does not always correlate with tumor 
size. Small hormone-secreting adenomas may cause signif-
icant clinical perturbations, whereas larger adenomas that 
produce less hormone may be clinically silent and remain 
undiagnosed (if no central compressive effects occur). 
About one-third of all adenomas are clinically nonfunc-
tioning and produce no distinct clinical hypersecretory 
syndrome. Most of them arise from gonadotrope cells and 
may secrete small amounts of α- and β-glycoprotein hor-
mone subunits or, very rarely, intact circulating gonado-
tropins. True pituitary carcinomas with documented 
extracranial metastases are exceedingly rare.
Almost all pituitary adenomas are monoclonal in ori-
gin, implying the acquisition of one or more somatic 
mutations that confer a selective growth advantage. Con-
sistent with their clonal origin, complete surgical resection 
of small pituitary adenomas usually cures hormone hyper-
secretion. Nevertheless, hypothalamic hormones such as 
GHRH and CRH also enhance mitotic activity of their 
respective pituitary target cells in addition to their role in 
447
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
pituitary hormone regulation. Thus, patients who har-
bor rare abdominal or chest tumors that elaborate ectopic 
GHRH or CRH may present with somatotrope or corti-
cotrope hyperplasia with GH or ACTH hypersecretion.
Several etiologic genetic events have been implicated 
in the development of pituitary tumors. The pathogen-
esis of sporadic forms of acromegaly has been particu-
larly informative as a model of tumorigenesis. GHRH, 
after binding to its G protein–coupled somatotrope 
receptor, utilizes cyclic AMP (adenosine monophos-
phate) as a second messenger to stimulate GH secretion 
and somatotrope proliferation. A subset (∼35%) of GH-
secreting pituitary tumors contain sporadic mutations in 
Gsα (Arg 201 → Cys or His; Gln 227 → Arg). These 
mutations attenuate intrinsic GTPase activity, resulting 
in constitutive elevation of cyclic AMP, Pit-1 induc-
tion, and activation of cyclic AMP response element 
binding protein (CREB), thereby promoting somato-
trope cell proliferation and GH secretion.
Characteristic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in various 
chromosomes has been documented in large or inva-
sive macroadenomas, suggesting the presence of putative 
tumor suppressor genes at these loci. LOH of chromo-
some regions on 11q13, 13, and 9 is present in up to 
20% of sporadic pituitary tumors, including GH-, PRL-, 
and ACTH-producing adenomas and some nonfunc-
tioning tumors.
Compelling evidence also favors growth factor pro-
motion of pituitary tumor proliferation. Basic ﬁbroblast 
growth factor (bFGF) is abundant in the pituitary and has 
been shown to stimulate pituitary cell mitogenesis. Other 
factors involved in initiation and promotion of pituitary 
tumors include loss of negative-feedback inhibition (as 
seen with primary hypothyroidism or hypogonadism) 
and estrogen-mediated or paracrine angiogenesis. Growth 
characteristics and neoplastic behavior also may be inﬂu-
enced by several activated oncogenes, including RAS and 
pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG), or inactiva-
tion of growth suppressor genes, including MEG3.
Genetic syndromes associated with  
pituitary tumors
Several familial syndromes are associated with pituitary 
tumors, and the genetic mechanisms for some of them 
have been unraveled (Table 38-6).
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 1 is an autosomal 
dominant syndrome characterized primarily by a genetic 
predisposition to parathyroid, pancreatic islet, and pitu-
itary adenomas. MEN1 is caused by inactivating germ-
line mutations in MENIN, a constitutively expressed 
tumor-suppressor gene located on chromosome 11q13. 
Loss of heterozygosity, or a somatic mutation of the 
remaining normal MENIN allele, leads to tumorigenesis. 
About half of affected patients develop prolactinomas; 
TABLE 38-6 
FAMILIAL PITUITARY TUMOR SYNDROMES
GENE 
MUTATED
CLINICAL FEATURES
Multiple endocrine  
neoplasia 1
 (MEN1)
MEN1
(11q13)
Hyperparathyroid-
ism
Pancreatic neuroen-
docrine tumors
Foregut carcinoids
Adrenal adenomas
Skin lesions
Pituitary adenomas 
(40%)
Multiple endocrine  
neoplasia 4
 (MEN4)
CDKNIB
(12p13)
Hyperparathyroidsm
Pituitary adenomas
Other tumors
Carney complex
PRKAR1A 
17q23-24
Pituitary  
hyperplasia and 
adenomas (10%)
Atrial myxomas
Schwannomas
Adrenal hyperplasia
Lentigines
Familial pituitary  
adenomas
AIP (11q13.3)
Acromegaly/ 
gigantism (15%)
acromegaly and Cushing’s syndrome are less commonly 
encountered.
Carney syndrome is characterized by spotty skin pig-
mentation, myxomas, and endocrine tumors, including 
testicular, adrenal, and pituitary adenomas. Acromeg-
aly occurs in about 20% of these patients. A subset of 
patients have mutations in the R1α regulatory subunit 
of protein kinase A (PRKAR1A).
McCune-Albright syndrome consists of polyostotic 
ﬁbrous dysplasia, pigmented skin patches, and a variety 
of endocrine disorders, including acromegaly, adrenal 
adenomas, and autonomous ovarian function. Hormonal 
hypersecretion results from constitutive cyclic AMP pro-
duction caused by inactivation of the GTPase activity of 
Gsα. The Gsα mutations occur postzygotically, leading 
to a mosaic pattern of mutant expression.
Familial acromegaly is a rare disorder in which family 
members may manifest either acromegaly or gigantism. 
The disorder is associated with LOH at a chromosome 
11q13 locus distinct from that of MENIN. A subset of 
families with a predisposition for familial pituitary tumors, 
especially acromegaly, have been found to harbor inacti-
vating mutations in the AIP gene, which encodes the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein.
OTHER SELLAR MASSES
Craniopharyngiomas are benign, suprasellar cystic masses 
that present with headaches, visual ﬁeld deﬁcits, and 
448
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
variable degrees of hypopituitarism. They are derived 
from Rathke’s pouch and arise near the pituitary 
stalk, commonly extending into the suprasellar cis-
tern. Craniopharyngiomas are often large, cystic, and 
locally invasive. Many are partially calciﬁed, exhibit-
ing a characteristic appearance on skull x-ray and CT 
images. More than half of all patients present before 
age 20, usually with signs of increased intracranial pres-
sure, including headache, vomiting, papilledema, and 
hydrocephalus. Associated symptoms include visual ﬁeld 
abnormalities, personality changes and cognitive dete-
rioration, cranial nerve damage, sleep difﬁculties, and 
weight gain. Hypopituitarism can be documented in 
about 90%, and diabetes insipidus occurs in about 10% 
of patients. About half of affected children present with 
growth retardation. MRI is generally superior to CT for 
evaluating cystic structure and tissue components of cra-
niopharyngiomas. CT is useful to deﬁne calciﬁcations 
and evaluate invasion into surrounding bony structures 
and sinuses.
Treatment usually involves transcranial or trans-
sphenoidal surgical resection followed by postop-
erative radiation of residual tumor. Surgery alone is 
curative in less than half of patients because of recur-
rences due to adherence to vital structures or because 
of small tumor deposits in the hypothalamus or brain 
parenchyma. The goal of surgery is to remove as much 
tumor as possible without risking complications associ-
ated with efforts to remove ﬁrmly adherent or inacces-
sible tissue. In the absence of radiotherapy, about 75% 
of craniopharyngiomas recur, and 10-year survival is 
less than 50%. In patients with incomplete resection, 
radiotherapy improves 10-year survival to 70–90% but 
is associated with increased risk of secondary malignan-
cies. Most patients require lifelong pituitary hormone 
replacement.
Developmental failure of Rathke’s pouch oblit-
eration may lead to Rathke’s cysts, which are small (<5 
mm) cysts entrapped by squamous epithelium and are 
found in about 20% of individuals at autopsy. Although 
Rathke’s cleft cysts do not usually grow and are often 
diagnosed incidentally, about a third present in adult-
hood with compressive symptoms, diabetes insipi-
dus, and hyperprolactinemia due to stalk compression. 
Rarely, hydrocephalus develops. The diagnosis is sug-
gested preoperatively by visualizing the cyst wall on 
MRI, which distinguishes these lesions from craniopha-
ryngiomas. Cyst contents range from CSF-like ﬂuid to 
mucoid material. Arachnoid cysts are rare and generate an 
MRI image that is isointense with cerebrospinal ﬂuid.
Sella chordomas usually present with bony clival ero-
sion, local invasiveness, and, on occasion, calciﬁcation. 
Normal pituitary tissue may be visible on MRI, distin-
guishing chordomas from aggressive pituitary adeno-
mas. Mucinous material may be obtained by ﬁne-needle 
aspiration.
Meningiomas arising in the sellar region may be difﬁ-
cult to distinguish from nonfunctioning pituitary adeno-
mas. Meningiomas typically enhance on MRI and may 
show evidence of calciﬁcation or bony erosion. Menin-
giomas may cause compressive symptoms.
Histiocytosis X includes a variety of syndromes asso-
ciated with foci of eosinophilic granulomas. Diabetes 
insipidus, exophthalmos, and punched-out lytic bone 
lesions (Hand-Schüller-Christian disease) are associated 
with granulomatous lesions visible on MRI, as well as 
a characteristic axillary skin rash. Rarely, the pituitary 
stalk may be involved.
Pituitary metastases occur in ∼3% of cancer patients. 
Bloodborne metastatic deposits are found almost exclu-
sively in the posterior pituitary. Accordingly, diabetes 
insipidus can be a presenting feature of lung, gastroin-
testinal, breast, and other pituitary metastases. About 
half of pituitary metastases originate from breast cancer; 
about 25% of patients with metastatic breast cancer have 
such deposits. Rarely, pituitary stalk involvement results 
in anterior pituitary insufﬁciency. The MRI diagno-
sis of a metastatic lesion may be difﬁcult to distinguish 
from an aggressive pituitary adenoma; the diagnosis may 
require histologic examination of excised tumor tissue. 
Primary or metastatic lymphoma, leukemias, and plas-
macytomas also occur within the sella.
Hypothalamic hamartomas and gangliocytomas may arise
 from astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons with 
varying degrees of differentiation. These tumors may 
overexpress hypothalamic neuropeptides, including 
GnRH, GHRH, and CRH. With GnRH-producing 
tumors, children present with precocious puberty, 
psychomotor delay, and laughing-associated seizures. 
Medical treatment of GnRH-producing hamartomas 
with long-acting GnRH analogues effectively sup-
presses gonadotropin secretion and controls premature 
pubertal development. Rarely, hamartomas also are 
associated with craniofacial abnormalities; imperfo-
rate anus; cardiac, renal, and lung disorders; and pitu-
itary failure as features of Pallister-Hall syndrome, which 
is caused by mutations in the carboxy terminus of the 
GLI3 gene. Hypothalamic hamartomas are often con-
tiguous with the pituitary, and preoperative MRI 
diagnosis may not be possible. Histologic evidence of 
hypothalamic neurons in tissue resected at transsphe-
noidal surgery may be the ﬁrst indication of a primary 
hypothalamic lesion.
Hypothalamic gliomas and optic gliomas occur mainly in 
childhood and usually present with visual loss. Adults 
have more aggressive tumors; about a third are associ-
ated with neuroﬁbromatosis.
Brain germ cell tumors may arise within the sellar 
region. They include dysgerminomas, which frequently 
are associated with diabetes insipidus and visual loss. 
They rarely metastasize. Germinomas, embryonal carci-
nomas, teratomas, and choriocarcinomas may arise in the 
449
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
parasellar region and produce hCG. These germ cell 
tumors present with precocious puberty, diabetes insipi-
dus, visual ﬁeld defects, and thirst disorders. Many 
patients are GH-deﬁcient with short stature.
METABOLIC EFFECTS OF HYPOTHALAMIC 
LESIONS
Lesions involving the anterior and preoptic hypotha-
lamic regions cause paradoxical vasoconstriction, tachy-
cardia, and hyperthermia. Acute hyperthermia usually 
is due to a hemorrhagic insult, but poikilothermia may 
also occur. Central disorders of thermoregulation result 
from posterior hypothalamic damage. The periodic hypo-
thermia syndrome is characterized by episodic attacks of 
rectal temperatures <30°C (86°F), sweating, vasodila-
tion, vomiting, and bradycardia. Damage to the ven-
tromedial hypothalamic nuclei by craniopharyngiomas, 
hypothalamic trauma, or inﬂammatory disorders may 
be associated with hyperphagia and obesity. This region 
appears to contain an energy-satiety center where mel-
anocortin receptors are inﬂuenced by leptin, insulin, 
POMC products, and gastrointestinal peptides. Polydip-
sia and hypodipsia are associated with damage to central 
osmoreceptors located in preoptic nuclei. Slow-growing 
hypothalamic lesions can cause increased somnolence 
and disturbed sleep cycles as well as obesity, hypother-
mia, and emotional outbursts. Lesions of the central 
hypothalamus may stimulate sympathetic neurons, lead-
ing to elevated serum catecholamine and cortisol levels. 
These patients are predisposed to cardiac arrhythmias, 
hypertension, and gastric erosions.
EVALUATION
Local mass effects
Clinical manifestations of sellar lesions vary, depending 
on the anatomic location of the mass and the direction 
of its extension (Table 38-7). The dorsal sellar dia-
phragm presents the least resistance to soft tissue expan-
sion from the sella; consequently, pituitary adenomas 
frequently extend in a suprasellar direction. Bony inva-
sion may occur as well.
Headaches are common features of small intrasellar 
tumors, even with no demonstrable suprasellar exten-
sion. Because of the conﬁned nature of the pituitary, 
small changes in intrasellar pressure stretch the dural 
plate; however, headache severity correlates poorly with 
adenoma size or extension.
Suprasellar extension can lead to visual loss by sev-
eral mechanisms, the most common being compres-
sion of the optic chiasm, but rarely, direct invasion of 
the optic nerves or obstruction of CSF ﬂow leading to 
secondary visual disturbances also occurs. Pituitary stalk 
TABLE 38-7 
FEATURES OF SELLAR MASS LESIONSa
IMPACTED STRUCTURE
CLINICAL IMPACT
Pituitary
Hypogonadism
Hypothyroidism
Growth failure and adult 
hyposomatotropism
Hypoadrenalism
Optic chiasm
Loss of red perception
Bitemporal hemianopia
Superior or bitemporal ﬁeld 
defect
Scotoma
Blindness
Hypothalamus
Temperature dysregulation
Appetite and thirst disor-
ders
Obesity
Diabetes insipidus
Sleep disorders
Behavioral dysfunction
Autonomic dysfunction
Cavernous sinus
Opthalmoplegia with or 
without ptosis or diplopia
Facial numbness
Frontal lobe
Personality disorder
Anosmia
Brain
Headache
Hydrocephalus
Psychosis
Dementia
Laughing seizures
aAs the intrasellar mass expands, it ﬁrst compresses intrasellar pitu-
itary tissue, then usually invades dorsally through the dura to lift the 
optic chiasm or laterally to the cavernous sinuses. Bony erosion is 
rare, as is direct brain compression. Microadenomas may present 
with headache.
compression by a hormonally active or inactive intra-
sellar mass may compress the portal vessels, disrupting 
pituitary access to hypothalamic hormones and dopa-
mine; this results in early hyperprolactinemia and later 
concurrent loss of other pituitary hormones. This “stalk 
section” phenomenon may also be caused by trauma, 
whiplash injury with posterior clinoid stalk compres-
sion, or skull base fractures. Lateral mass invasion may 
impinge on the cavernous sinus and compress its neural 
contents, leading to cranial nerve III, IV, and VI pal-
sies as well as effects on the ophthalmic and maxillary 
branches of the ﬁfth cranial nerve (Chap. 34). Patients 
may present with diplopia, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, and 
decreased facial sensation, depending on the extent of 
neural damage. Extension into the sphenoid sinus indi-
cates that the pituitary mass has eroded through the sel-
lar ﬂoor. Aggressive tumors rarely invade the palate roof 
and cause nasopharyngeal obstruction, infection, and 
450
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
CSF leakage. Temporal and frontal lobe involvement 
may rarely lead to uncinate seizures, personality disor-
ders, and anosmia. Direct hypothalamic encroachment 
by an invasive pituitary mass may cause important meta-
bolic sequelae, including precocious puberty or hypo-
gonadism, diabetes insipidus, sleep disturbances, dys-
thermia, and appetite disorders.
MRI
Sagittal and coronal T1-weighted MRI imaging before 
and after administration of gadolinium allows precise 
visualization of the pituitary gland with clear delinea-
tion of the hypothalamus, pituitary stalk, pituitary tissue 
and surrounding suprasellar cisterns, cavernous sinuses, 
sphenoid sinus, and optic chiasm. Pituitary gland height 
ranges from 6 mm in children to 8 mm in adults; during 
pregnancy and puberty, the height may reach 10–12 mm. 
The upper aspect of the adult pituitary is ﬂat or slightly 
concave, but in adolescent and pregnant individuals, this 
surface may be convex, reﬂecting physiologic pituitary 
enlargement. The stalk should be midline and vertical. 
CT scan is reserved to deﬁne the extent of bony erosion 
or the presence of calciﬁcation.
Anterior pituitary gland soft tissue consistency is 
slightly heterogeneous on MRI, and signal intensity 
resembles that of brain matter on T1-weighted imaging 
(Fig. 38-4). Adenoma density is usually lower than that 
of surrounding normal tissue on T1-weighted imag-
ing, and the signal intensity increases with T2-weighted 
FIGURE 38-4 
Pituitary adenoma. Coronal T1-weighted postcontrast MR 
image shows a homogeneously enhancing mass (arrow-
heads) in the sella turcica and suprasellar region compatible 
with a pituitary adenoma; the small arrows outline the carotid 
arteries.
images. The high phospholipid content of the posterior 
pituitary results in a “pituitary bright spot.”
Sellar masses are encountered commonly as inciden-
tal ﬁndings on MRI, and most of them are pituitary 
adenomas (incidentalomas). In the absence of hormone 
hypersecretion, these small intrasellar lesions can be 
monitored safely with MRI, which is performed annu-
ally and then less often if there is no evidence of further 
growth. Resection should be considered for incidentally 
discovered macroadenomas, as about one-third become 
invasive or cause local pressure effects. If hormone 
hypersecretion is evident, speciﬁc therapies are indi-
cated. When larger masses (>1 cm) are encountered, 
they should also be distinguished from nonadenomatous 
lesions. Meningiomas often are associated with bony 
hyperostosis; craniopharyngiomas may be calciﬁed and 
are usually hypodense, whereas gliomas are hyperdense 
on T2-weighted images.
Ophthalmologic evaluation
Because optic tracts may be contiguous to an expand-
ing pituitary mass, reproducible visual ﬁeld assessment 
using perimetry techniques should be performed on 
all patients with sellar mass lesions that abut the optic 
chiasm (Chap. 21). Bitemporal hemianopia or superior 
bitemporal defects are classically observed, reﬂecting the 
location of these tracts within the inferior and poste-
rior part of the chiasm. Homonymous cuts reﬂect post-
chiasmal lesions, and monocular ﬁeld cuts prechiasmal 
lesions. Loss of red perception is an early sign of optic 
tract pressure. Early diagnosis reduces the risk of blind-
ness, scotomas, or other visual disturbances.
Laboratory investigation
The presenting clinical features of functional pituitary 
adenomas (e.g., acromegaly, prolactinomas, or Cush-
ing’s syndrome) should guide the laboratory stud-
ies (Table 38-8). However, for a sellar mass with no 
obvious clinical features of hormone excess, laboratory 
studies are geared toward determining the nature of the 
tumor and assessing the possible presence of hypopitu-
itarism. When a pituitary adenoma is suspected based 
on MRI, initial hormonal evaluation usually includes 
(1) basal PRL; (2) insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I; (3) 
24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC) and/or overnight oral 
dexamethasone (1 mg) suppression test; (4) α subunit, 
FSH, and LH; and (5) thyroid function tests. Additional 
hormonal evaluation may be indicated based on the 
results of these tests. Pending more detailed assessment 
of hypopituitarism, a menstrual history, measurement of 
testosterone and 8 A.M. cortisol levels, and thyroid func-
tion tests usually identify patients with pituitary hor-
mone deﬁciencies that require hormone replacement 
before further testing or surgery.
451
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
Histologic evaluation
Immunohistochemical staining of pituitary tumor speci-
mens obtained at transsphenoidal surgery conﬁrms clinical 
and laboratory studies and provides a histologic diagnosis 
when hormone studies are equivocal and in cases of clini-
cally nonfunctioning tumors. Occasionally, ultrastructural 
assessment by electron microscopy is required for diagnosis.
TREATMENT 
 Hypothalamic, Pituitary, and Other Sellar 
Masses
OVERVIEW Successful 
management 
of 
sellar 
masses requires accurate diagnosis as well as selection 
of optimal therapeutic modalities. Most pituitary tumors 
are benign and slow-growing. Clinical features result 
from local mass effects and hormonal hypo- or hyper-
secretion syndromes caused directly by the adenoma or 
occurring as a consequence of treatment. Thus, lifelong 
management and follow-up are necessary for these 
patients.
MRI with gadolinium enhancement for pituitary 
visualization, new advances in transsphenoidal surgery 
and in stereotactic radiotherapy (including gamma-
knife radiotherapy), and novel therapeutic agents have 
improved pituitary tumor management. The goals of 
pituitary tumor treatment include normalization of 
excess pituitary secretion, amelioration of symptoms 
and signs of hormonal hypersecretion syndromes, and 
shrinkage or ablation of large tumor masses with relief 
of adjacent structure compression. Residual anterior 
pituitary function should be preserved during treat-
ment and sometimes can be restored by removing the 
tumor mass. Ideally, adenoma recurrence should be pre-
vented.
TRANSSPHENOIDAL SURGERY Transsphenoidal 
rather than transfrontal resection is the desired surgical 
approach for pituitary tumors, except for the rare inva-
sive suprasellar mass surrounding the frontal or middle 
fossa or the optic nerves or invading posteriorly behind 
the clivus. Intraoperative microscopy facilitates visual 
distinction between adenomatous and normal pituitary 
tissue as well as microdissection of small tumors that 
may not be visible by MRI (Fig. 38-5). Transsphenoidal 
surgery also avoids the cranial invasion and manipu-
lation of brain tissue required by subfrontal surgical 
approaches. Endoscopic techniques with three-dimen-
sional intraoperative localization have also improved 
visualization and access to tumor tissue.
In addition to correction of hormonal hypersecre-
tion, pituitary surgery is indicated for mass lesions that 
impinge on surrounding structures. Surgical decom-
pression and resection are required for an expanding 
pituitary mass accompanied by persistent headache, 
progressive visual field defects, cranial nerve palsies, 
hydrocephalus, and, occasionally, intrapituitary hemor-
rhage and apoplexy. Transsphenoidal surgery some-
times is used for pituitary tissue biopsy to establish a 
histologic diagnosis.
Whenever possible, the pituitary mass lesion should 
be selectively excised; normal pituitary tissue should be 
manipulated or resected only when critical for effective 
mass dissection. Nonselective hemihypophysectomy 
or total hypophysectomy may be indicated if no hyper-
secreting mass lesion is clearly discernible, multifocal 
lesions are present, or the remaining nontumorous pitu-
itary tissue is obviously necrotic. This strategy, however, 
increases the likelihood of hypopituitarism and the 
need for lifelong hormone replacement.
Preoperative mass effects, including visual field 
defects and compromised pituitary function, may be 
reversed by surgery, particularly when the deficits are 
not long-standing. For large and invasive tumors, it is 
TABLE 38-8 
SCREENING TESTS FOR FUNCTIONAL PITUITARY 
ADENOMAS
TEST
COMMENTS
Acromegaly
Serum IGF-I
Interpret IGF-I relative 
to age- and sex-
matched controls
Oral glucose tol-
erance test with 
GH obtained at 
0, 30, and 60 
min
Normal subjects 
should suppress 
growth hormone to 
<1 μg/L
Prolacti-
noma
Serum PRL
Exclude medications
MRI of the sella 
should be ordered if 
prolactin is elevated
Cushing’s  
disease
24-h urinary free 
cortisol
Ensure urine collection 
is total and accurate
Dexamethasone 
(1 mg) at  
11 P.M. and 
fasting plasma 
cortisol mea-
sured at 8 A.M.
Normal subjects  
suppress to  
<5 μg/dL
ACTH assay
Distinguishes adrenal 
adenoma (ACTH  
suppressed) from 
ectopic ACTH or 
Cushing’s disease 
(ACTH normal or 
elevated)
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
452
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
necessary to determine the optimal balance between 
maximal tumor resection and preservation of anterior 
pituitary function, especially for preserving growth and 
reproductive function in younger patients. Similarly, 
tumor invasion outside the sella is rarely amenable to 
surgical cure; the surgeon must judge the risk-versus-
benefit ratio of extensive tumor resection.
Side Effects Tumor size, the degree of invasive-
ness, and experience of the surgeon largely determine 
the incidence of surgical complications. Operative mor-
tality rate is about 1%. Transient diabetes insipidus and 
hypopituitarism occur in up to 20% of patients. Perma-
nent diabetes insipidus, cranial nerve damage, nasal sep-
tal perforation, or visual disturbances may be encoun-
tered in up to 10% of patients. CSF leaks occur in 4% of 
patients. Less common complications include carotid 
artery injury, loss of vision, hypothalamic damage, and 
meningitis. Permanent side effects are rare after surgery 
for microadenomas.
RADIATION Radiation is used either as a primary 
therapy for pituitary or parasellar masses or, more com-
monly, as an adjunct to surgery or medical therapy. 
Focused megavoltage irradiation is achieved by precise 
MRI localization, using a high-voltage linear accelerator 
and accurate isocentric rotational arcing. A major deter-
minant of accurate irradiation is reproduction of the 
patient’s head position during multiple visits and main-
tenance of absolute head immobility. A total of <50 Gy 
(5000 rad) is given as 180-cGy (180-rad) fractions divided 
over about 6 weeks. Stereotactic radiosurgery delivers 
a large single high-energy dose from a cobalt 60 source 
(gamma knife), linear accelerator, or cyclotron. Long-
term effects of gamma-knife surgery are unclear but 
appear to be similar to those encountered with conven-
tional radiation.
The role of radiation therapy in pituitary tumor man-
agement depends on multiple factors, including the 
nature of the tumor, the age of the patient, and the 
availability of surgical and radiation expertise. Because 
of its relatively slow onset of action, radiation therapy 
is usually reserved for postsurgical management. As an 
adjuvant to surgery, radiation is used to treat residual 
tumor and in an attempt to prevent regrowth. Irradia-
tion offers the only means for potentially ablating sig-
nificant postoperative residual nonfunctioning tumor 
tissue. In contrast, PRL- and GH-secreting tumor tissues 
are amenable to medical therapy.
Side Effects In the short term, radiation may cause 
transient nausea and weakness. Alopecia and loss of 
taste and smell may be more long-lasting. Failure of 
pituitary hormone synthesis is common in patients who 
have undergone head and neck or pituitary-directed 
irradiation. More than 50% of patients develop loss of 
GH, ACTH, TSH, and/or gonadotropin secretion within 
10 years, usually due to hypothalamic damage. Life-
long follow-up with testing of anterior pituitary hor-
mone reserve is therefore required after radiation treat-
ment. Optic nerve damage with impaired vision due to 
optic neuritis is reported in about 2% of patients who 
undergo pituitary irradiation. Cranial nerve damage is 
uncommon now that radiation doses are ≤2 Gy (200 rad) 
at any one treatment session and the maximum dose 
is <50 Gy (5000 rad). The use of stereotactic radiother-
apy may reduce damage to adjacent structures. Radio-
therapy for pituitary tumors has been associated with 
adverse mortality rates, mainly from cerebrovascular 
disease. The cumulative risk of developing a secondary 
tumor after conventional radiation is 1.3% after 10 years 
and 1.9% after 20 years.
Optic chiasm
Pituitary tumor
Venus plexus
of cavernous
sinus
Sphenoid
sinus
Sphenoid
bone
Surgical curette
Nasal septum
Oculomotor
nerve
Trochlear
nerve
Internal carotid
artery
Pituitary
tumor
Sphenoid
sinus
Trigeminal
nerve
FIGURE 38-5 
Transsphenoidal resection of pituitary mass via the endo-
nasal approach. (Adapted from R Fahlbusch: Endocrinol 
Metab Clin 21:669, 1992.)
453
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
Medical Medical therapy for pituitary tumors is 
highly specific and depends on tumor type. For prolacti-
nomas, dopamine agonists are the treatment of choice. 
For acromegaly, somatostatin analogues and GH recep-
tor antagonists are indicated. For TSH-secreting tumors, 
somatostatin analogues and occasionally dopamine 
agonists are indicated. ACTH-secreting tumors and 
nonfunctioning tumors are generally not responsive to 
medications and require surgery and/or irradiation.
PROLACTIN
SYNTHESIS
PRL consists of 198 amino acids and has a molecular 
mass of 21,500 kDa; it is weakly homologous to GH 
and human placental lactogen (hPL), reﬂecting the 
duplication and divergence of a common GH-PRL-
hPL precursor gene. PRL is synthesized in lactotropes, 
which constitute about 20% of anterior pituitary cells. 
Lactotropes and somatotropes are derived from a com-
mon precursor cell that may give rise to a tumor that 
secretes both PRL and GH. Marked lactotrope cell 
hyperplasia develops during pregnancy and the ﬁrst few 
months of lactation. These transient functional changes 
in the lactotrope population are induced by estrogen.
SECRETION
Normal adult serum PRL levels are about 10–25 μg/L 
in women and 10–20 μg/L in men. PRL secretion is 
pulsatile, with the highest secretory peaks occurring 
during rapid eye movement sleep. Peak serum PRL 
levels (up to 30 μg/L) occur between 4:00 and 6:00 A.M. 
The circulating half-life of PRL is about 50 min.
PRL is unique among the pituitary hormones in that 
the predominant central control mechanism is inhibi-
tory, reﬂecting dopamine-mediated suppression of 
PRL release. This regulatory pathway accounts for the 
spontaneous PRL hypersecretion that occurs with pitu-
itary stalk section, often a consequence of compressive 
mass lesions at the skull base. Pituitary dopamine type 
2 (D2) receptors mediate inhibition of PRL synthesis 
and secretion. Targeted disruption (gene knockout) of 
the murine D2 receptor in mice results in hyperprolac-
tinemia and lactotrope proliferation. As discussed later, 
dopamine agonists play a central role in the manage-
ment of hyperprolactinemic disorders.
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) (pyro Glu-
His-Pro-NH2) is a hypothalamic tripeptide that elicits 
prolactin release within 15–30 min after intravenous 
injection. The physiologic relevance of TRH for PRL 
regulation is unclear, and it appears primarily to regulate 
TSH. Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) also induces PRL 
release, whereas glucocorticoids and thyroid hormone 
weakly suppress PRL secretion.
Serum PRL levels rise transiently after exercise, 
meals, sexual intercourse, minor surgical procedures, 
general anesthesia, chest wall injury, acute myocardial 
infarction, and other forms of acute stress. PRL levels 
increase markedly (about tenfold) during pregnancy and 
decline rapidly within 2 weeks of parturition. If breast-
feeding is initiated, basal PRL levels remain elevated; 
suckling stimulates reﬂex increases in PRL levels that 
last for about 30–45 min. Breast suckling activates neu-
ral afferent pathways in the hypothalamus that induce 
PRL release. With time, suckling-induced responses 
diminish and interfeeding PRL levels return to normal.
ACTION
The PRL receptor is a member of the type I cytokine 
receptor family that also includes GH and interleu-
kin (IL) 6 receptors. Ligand binding induces receptor 
dimerization and intracellular signaling by Janus kinase 
(JAK), which stimulates translocation of the signal trans-
duction and activators of transcription (STAT) family 
to activate target genes. In the breast, the lobuloalveo-
lar epithelium proliferates in response to PRL, placen-
tal lactogens, estrogen, progesterone, and local paracrine 
growth factors, including IGF-I.
PRL acts to induce and maintain lactation, decrease 
reproductive function, and suppress sexual drive. These 
functions are geared toward ensuring that maternal lacta-
tion is sustained and not interrupted by pregnancy. PRL 
inhibits reproductive function by suppressing hypotha-
lamic GnRH and pituitary gonadotropin secretion and 
by impairing gonadal steroidogenesis in both women 
and men. In the ovary, PRL blocks folliculogenesis 
and inhibits granulosa cell aromatase activity, leading to 
hypoestrogenism and anovulation. PRL also has a luteo-
lytic effect, generating a shortened, or inadequate, luteal 
phase of the menstrual cycle. In men, attenuated LH 
secretion leads to low testosterone levels and decreased 
spermatogenesis. These hormonal changes decrease libido 
and reduce fertility in patients with hyperprolactinemia.
HYPERPROLACTINEMIA
Etiology
Hyperprolactinemia is the most common pituitary 
hormone hypersecretion syndrome in both men and 
women. PRL-secreting pituitary adenomas (prolactino-
mas) are the most common cause of PRL levels >200 μg/L 
(discussed later). Less pronounced PRL elevation can 
also be seen with microprolactinomas but is more 
454
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
commonly caused by drugs, pituitary stalk compression, 
hypothyroidism, or renal failure (Table 38-9).
Pregnancy and lactation are the important physi-
ologic causes of hyperprolactinemia. Sleep-associated 
hyperprolactinemia reverts to normal within an hour of 
awakening. Nipple stimulation and sexual orgasm also 
may increase PRL. Chest wall stimulation or trauma 
(including chest surgery and herpes zoster) invoke the 
reﬂex suckling arc with resultant hyperprolactinemia. 
Chronic renal failure elevates PRL by decreasing 
peripheral clearance. Primary hypothyroidism is associ-
ated with mild hyperprolactinemia, probably because of 
compensatory TRH secretion.
Lesions of the hypothalamic-pituitary region that 
disrupt hypothalamic dopamine synthesis, portal ves-
sel delivery, or lactotrope responses are associated with 
hyperprolactinemia. Thus, hypothalamic tumors, cysts, 
inﬁltrative disorders, and radiation-induced dam-
age cause elevated PRL levels, usually in the range of 
30–100 μg/L. Plurihormonal adenomas (including GH 
and ACTH tumors) may hypersecrete PRL directly. 
Pituitary masses, including clinically nonfunctioning 
pituitary tumors, may compress the pituitary stalk to 
cause hyperprolactinemia.
Drug-induced inhibition or disruption of dopami-
nergic receptor function is a common cause of hyper-
prolactinemia (Table 38-9). Thus, antipsychotics and 
antidepressants are a relatively common cause of mild 
hyperprolactinemia. Most patients receiving risperi-
done have elevated prolactin levels, sometimes exceed-
ing 200 μg/L. Methyldopa inhibits dopamine synthesis 
and verapamil blocks dopamine release, also leading to 
hyperprolactinemia. Hormonal agents that induce PRL 
include estrogens and TRH.
Presentation and diagnosis
Amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and infertility are the hall-
marks of hyperprolactinemia in women. If hyperprolac-
tinemia develops before menarche, primary amenorrhea 
results. More commonly, hyperprolactinemia develops 
later in life and leads to oligomenorrhea and ultimately 
to amenorrhea. If hyperprolactinemia is sustained, ver-
tebral bone mineral density can be reduced compared 
with age-matched controls, particularly when it is asso-
ciated with pronounced hypoestrogenemia. Galac-
torrhea is present in up to 80% of hyperprolactinemic 
women. Although usually bilateral and spontaneous, it 
may be unilateral or expressed only manually. Patients 
also may complain of decreased libido, weight gain, and 
mild hirsutism.
In men with hyperprolactinemia, diminished libido, 
infertility, and visual loss (from optic nerve compres-
sion) are the usual presenting symptoms. Gonadotropin 
suppression leads to reduced testosterone, impotence, 
TABLE 38-9 
ETIOLOGY OF HYPERPROLACTINEMIA
I.    Physiologic hypersecretion
Pregnancy
Lactation
Chest wall stimulation
Sleep
Stress
II.  Hypothalamic–pituitary stalk damage
Tumors
Craniopharyngioma
Suprasellar pituitary mass
Meningioma
Dysgerminoma
Metastases
Empty sella
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Adenoma with stalk compression
Granulomas
Rathke’s cyst
Irradiation
Trauma
Pituitary stalk section
Suprasellar surgery
III. Pituitary hypersecretion
Prolactinoma
Acromegaly
IV.  Systemic disorders
Chronic renal failure
Hypothyroidism
Cirrhosis
Pseudocyesis
Epileptic seizures
V.   Drug-induced hypersecretion
Dopamine receptor blockers
Atypical antipsychotics: risperidone
Phenothiazines: chlorpromazine, perphenazine
Butyrophenones: haloperidol
Thioxanthenes
Metoclopramide
Dopamine synthesis inhibitors
α-Methyldopa
Catecholamine depletors
Reserpine
Opiates
H2 antagonists
Cimetidine, ranitidine
 Imipramines
Amitriptyline, amoxapine
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine
Calcium channel blockers
Verapamil
Estrogens
TRH
Note: Hyperprolactinemia >200 μg/L almost invariably is indica-
tive of a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma. Physiologic causes, 
hypothyroidism, and drug-induced hyperprolactinemia should be 
excluded before extensive evaluation.
455
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
and oligospermia. True galactorrhea is uncommon in 
men with hyperprolactinemia. If the disorder is long-
standing, secondary effects of hypogonadism are evi-
dent, including osteopenia, reduced muscle mass, and 
decreased beard growth.
The diagnosis of idiopathic hyperprolactinemia is 
made by exclusion of known causes of hyperprolac-
tinemia in the setting of a normal pituitary MRI. Some 
of these patients may harbor small microadenomas 
below visible MRI sensitivity (∼2 mm).
GALACTORRHEA
Galactorrhea, the inappropriate discharge of milk-contain-
ing ﬂuid from the breast, is considered abnormal if it persists 
longer than 6 months after childbirth or discontinuation 
of breast-feeding. Postpartum galactorrhea associated with 
amenorrhea is a self-limiting disorder usually associated with 
moderately elevated PRL levels. Galactorrhea may occur 
spontaneously, or it may be elicited by nipple pressure. 
In both men and women, galactorrhea may vary in color 
and consistency (transparent, milky, or bloody) and arise 
either unilaterally or bilaterally. Mammography or ultra-
sound is indicated for bloody discharges (particularly from 
a single nipple), which may be caused by breast cancer. 
Galactorrhea is commonly associated with hyperprolac-
tinemia caused by any of the conditions listed in Table 
38-9. Acromegaly is associated with galactorrhea in about 
one-third of patients. Treatment of galactorrhea usually 
involves managing the underlying disorder (e.g., replac-
ing T4 for hypothyroidism, discontinuing a medication, 
treating prolactinoma).
Laboratory investigation
Basal, fasting morning PRL levels (normally <20 μg/L) 
should be measured to assess hypersecretion. Both false-
positive and false-negative results may be encountered. In 
patients with markedly elevated PRL levels (>1000 μg/L), 
reported results may be falsely lowered because of assay 
artifacts; sample dilution is required to measure these 
high values accurately. Falsely elevated values may be 
caused by aggregated forms of circulating PRL, which 
are usually biologically inactive (macroprolactinemia). 
Hypothyroidism should be excluded by measuring TSH 
and T4 levels.
TREATMENT 
Hyperprolactinemia
Treatment of hyperprolactinemia depends on the cause 
of elevated PRL levels. Regardless of the etiology, how-
ever, treatment should be aimed at normalizing PRL lev-
els to alleviate suppressive effects on gonadal function, 
halt galactorrhea, and preserve bone mineral density.  
Dopamine agonists are effective for most causes of hyper-
prolactinemia (see the treatment section for prolactinoma 
later in this chapter) regardless of the underlying cause.
If the patient is taking a medication known to cause 
hyperprolactinemia, the drug should be withdrawn, if 
possible. For psychiatric patients who require neurolep-
tic agents, supervised dose titration or the addition of a 
dopamine agonist can help restore normoprolactinemia 
and alleviate reproductive symptoms. However, dopa-
mine agonists sometimes worsen the underlying psy-
chiatric condition, especially at high doses. Hyperprolac-
tinemia usually resolves after adequate thyroid hormone 
replacement in hypothyroid patients or after renal trans-
plantation in patients undergoing dialysis. Resection of 
hypothalamic or sellar mass lesions can reverse hyperp-
rolactinemia caused by stalk compression and reduced 
dopamine tone. Granulomatous infiltrates occasionally 
respond to glucocorticoid administration. In patients 
with irreversible hypothalamic damage, no treatment 
may be warranted. In up to 30% of patients with hyper-
prolactinemia—usually without a visible pituitary micro-
adenoma—the condition may resolve spontaneously.
PROLACTINOMA
Etiology and prevalence
Tumors arising from lactotrope cells account for 
about half of all functioning pituitary tumors, with a 
population prevalence of ∼10/100,000 in men and 
∼30/100,000 in women. Mixed tumors that secrete 
combinations of GH and PRL, ACTH and PRL, and 
rarely TSH and PRL are also seen. These plurihor-
monal tumors are usually recognized by immuno-
histochemistry, sometimes without apparent clinical 
manifestations from the production of additional hor-
mones. Microadenomas are classiﬁed as <1 cm in diam-
eter and usually do not invade the parasellar region. 
Macroadenomas are >1 cm in diameter and may be 
locally invasive and impinge on adjacent structures. 
The female:male ratio for microprolactinomas is 20:1, 
whereas the sex ratio is near 1:1 for macroadenomas. 
Tumor size generally correlates directly with PRL con-
centrations; values >250 μg/L usually are associated 
with macroadenomas. Men tend to present with larger 
tumors than women, possibly because the features of 
male hypogonadism are less readily evident. PRL lev-
els remain stable in most patients, reﬂecting the slow 
growth of these tumors. About 5% of microadenomas 
progress in the long term to macroadenomas.
Presentation and diagnosis
Women usually present with amenorrhea, infertility, 
and galactorrhea. If the tumor extends outside the sella, 
456
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
visual ﬁeld defects or other mass effects may be seen. 
Men often present with impotence, loss of libido, infer-
tility, or signs of central CNS compression, including 
headaches and visual defects. Assuming that physiologic 
and medication-induced causes of hyperprolactinemia 
are excluded (Table 38-9), the diagnosis of prolacti-
noma is likely with a PRL level >200 μg/L. PRL lev-
els <100 μg/L may be caused by microadenomas, other 
sellar lesions that decrease dopamine inhibition, or non-
neoplastic causes of hyperprolactinemia. For this reason, 
an MRI should be performed in all patients with hyper-
prolactinemia. It is important to remember that hyper-
prolactinemia caused secondarily by the mass effects of 
nonlactotrope lesions is also corrected by treatment with 
dopamine agonists despite failure to shrink the underly-
ing mass. Consequently, PRL suppression by dopamine 
agonists does not necessarily indicate that the underlying 
lesion is a prolactinoma.
TREATMENT 
Prolactinoma
As microadenomas rarely progress to become macroad-
enomas, no treatment may be needed if fertility is not 
desired. Estrogen replacement is indicated to prevent 
bone loss and other consequences of hypoestrogen-
emia and does not appear to increase the risk of tumor 
ELEVATED PROLACTIN LEVELS
MANAGEMENT OF PROLACTINOMA
Symptomatic Prolactinoma
Microadenoma
Macroadenoma
Exclude secondary causes of hyperprolactinemia
MRI evidence for pituitary mass
Test visual
  fields
Test pituitary
  reserve function
Titrate
  dopamine agonist
Drug intolerance
Titrate
  dopamine agonist
Repeat MRI
  within 4 months
Tumor shrinkage
  and prolactin
  normalized
Monitor PRL
  and repeat
  MRI annually
No tumor shrinkage
  or tumor growth
  or persistent
  hyperprolactinemia
Change
  dopamine agonist
Serum PRL
,20
.50 (mg/L)
20–50
Maintenance
Rx
Consider Surgery
Reassess
  diagnosis
Increase dose
FIGURE 38-6 
Management of prolactinoma. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PRL, prolactin.
enlargement; these patients should be monitored by 
regular serial PRL and MRI measurements.
For symptomatic microadenomas, therapeutic goals 
include control of hyperprolactinemia, reduction of 
tumor size, restoration of menses and fertility, and reso-
lution of galactorrhea. Dopamine agonist doses should 
be titrated to achieve maximal PRL suppression and 
restoration of reproductive function (Fig. 38-6). A nor-
malized PRL level does not ensure reduced tumor size. 
However, tumor shrinkage usually is not seen in those 
who do not respond with lowered PRL levels. For mac-
roadenomas, formal visual field testing should be per-
formed before initiating dopamine agonists. MRI and 
visual fields should be assessed at 6- to 12-month inter-
vals until the mass shrinks and annually thereafter until 
maximum size reduction has occurred.
MEDICAL Oral dopamine agonists (cabergoline and 
bromocriptine) are the mainstay of therapy for patients 
with micro- or macroprolactinomas. Dopamine agonists 
suppress PRL secretion and synthesis as well as lacto-
trope cell proliferation. In patients with microadenomas 
who have achieved normoprolactinemia and significant 
reduction of tumor mass, the dopamine agonist may be 
withdrawn after 2 years. These patients should be moni-
tored carefully for evidence of prolactinoma recurrence. 
About 20% of patients (especially males) are resistant to 
dopaminergic treatment; these adenomas may exhibit 
457
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
decreased D2 dopamine receptor numbers or a postre-
ceptor defect. D2 receptor gene mutations in the pituitary 
have not been reported.
Cabergoline An ergoline derivative, cabergoline is 
a long-acting dopamine agonist with high D2 receptor 
affinity. The drug effectively suppresses PRL for >14 days 
after a single oral dose and induces prolactinoma shrink-
age in most patients. Cabergoline (0.5 to 1.0 mg twice 
weekly) achieves normoprolactinemia and resumption 
of normal gonadal function in ∼80% of patients with 
microadenomas; galactorrhea improves or resolves 
in 90% of patients. Cabergoline normalizes PRL and 
shrinks ∼70% of macroprolactinomas. Mass effect symp-
toms, including headaches and visual disorders, usually 
improve dramatically within days after cabergoline ini-
tiation; improvement of sexual function requires several 
weeks of treatment but may occur before complete nor-
malization of prolactin levels. After initial control of PRL 
levels has been achieved, cabergoline should be reduced 
to the lowest effective maintenance dose. In ∼5% of 
treated patients harboring a microadenoma, hyperpro-
lactinemia may resolve and not recur when dopamine 
agonists are discontinued after long-term treatment. 
Cabergoline also may be effective in patients resistant to 
bromocriptine. Adverse effects and drug intolerance are 
encountered less commonly than with bromocriptine.
Bromocriptine The ergot alkaloid bromocrip-
tine mesylate is a dopamine receptor agonist that sup-
presses prolactin secretion. Because it is short-acting, 
the drug is preferred when pregnancy is desired. In 
microadenomas bromocriptine rapidly lowers serum 
prolactin levels to normal in up to 70% of patients, 
decreases tumor size, and restores gonadal function. In 
patients with macroadenomas, prolactin levels are also 
normalized in 70% of patients and tumor mass shrink-
age (≥50%) is achieved in most patients.
Therapy is initiated by administering a low bro-
mocriptine dose (0.625–1.25 mg) at bedtime with a 
snack, followed by gradually increasing the dose. Most 
patients are controlled with a daily dose of ≤7.5 mg  
(2.5 mg tid).
Side Effects Side effects of dopamine agonists 
include constipation, nasal stuffiness, dry mouth, night-
mares, insomnia, and vertigo; decreasing the dose usually 
alleviates these problems. Nausea, vomiting, and postural 
hypotension with faintness may occur in ∼25% of patients 
after the initial dose. These symptoms may persist in some 
patients. In general, fewer side effects are reported with 
cabergoline. For the approximately 15% of patients who 
are intolerant of oral bromocriptine, cabergoline may be 
better tolerated. Intravaginal administration of bromocrip-
tine is often efficacious in patients with intractable gastro-
intestinal side effects. Auditory hallucinations, delusions, 
and mood swings have been reported in up to 5% of 
patients and may be due to the dopamine agonist prop-
erties or to the lysergic acid derivative of the compounds. 
Rare reports of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, pleural 
fibrosis, cardiac arrhythmias, and hepatitis have been 
described. Patients with Parkinson’s disease who receive 
at least 3 mg of cabergoline daily have been reported to 
be at risk for development of cardiac valve regurgitation. 
Studies analyzing over 500 prolactinoma patients receiv-
ing recommended doses of cabergoline (up to 2 mg 
weekly) have shown no evidence for an increased inci-
dence of valvular disorders. Nevertheless, as no controlled 
prospective studies are available, it is prudent to perform 
echocardiograms before initiating standard-dose caber-
goline therapy.
Surgery Indications for surgical adenoma debulk-
ing include dopamine resistance or intolerance and the 
presence of an invasive macroadenoma with compro-
mised vision that fails to improve after drug treatment. 
Initial PRL normalization is achieved in about 70% of 
microprolactinomas after surgical resection, but only 
30% of macroadenomas can be resected successfully. 
Follow-up studies have shown that hyperprolactinemia 
recurs in up to 20% of patients within the first year 
after surgery; long-term recurrence rates exceed 50% 
for macroadenomas. Radiotherapy for prolactinomas 
is reserved for patients with aggressive tumors that do 
not respond to maximally tolerated dopamine agonists 
and/or surgery.
PREGNANCY The pituitary increases in size during 
pregnancy, reflecting the stimulatory effects of estrogen 
and perhaps other growth factors on pituitary vascular-
ity and lactotrope cell hyperplasia. About 5% of micro-
adenomas significantly increase in size, but 15–30% of 
macroadenomas grow during pregnancy. Bromocrip-
tine has been used for more than 30 years to restore 
fertility in women with hyperprolactinemia, without 
evidence of teratogenic effects. Nonetheless, most 
authorities recommend strategies to minimize fetal 
exposure to the drug. For women taking bromocrip-
tine who desire pregnancy, mechanical contraception 
should be used through three regular menstrual cycles 
to allow for conception timing. When pregnancy is 
confirmed, bromocriptine should be discontinued and 
PRL levels followed serially, especially if headaches or 
visual symptoms occur. For women harboring macroad-
enomas, regular visual field testing is recommended, 
and the drug should be reinstituted if tumor growth is 
apparent. Although pituitary MRI may be safe during 
pregnancy, this procedure should be reserved for symp-
tomatic patients with severe headache and/or visual 
field defects. Surgical decompression may be indicated 
if vision is threatened. Although comprehensive data 
458
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
support the efficacy and relative safety of bromocriptine-
facilitated fertility, patients should be advised of poten-
tial unknown deleterious effects and the risk of tumor 
growth during pregnancy. As cabergoline is long-acting 
with a high D2-receptor affinity, it is not recommended 
for use in women when fertility is desired.
GROWTH HORMONE
SYNTHESIS
GH is the most abundant anterior pituitary hormone, 
and GH-secreting somatotrope cells constitute up to 
50% of the total anterior pituitary cell population. 
Mammosomatotrope cells, which coexpress PRL with 
GH, can be identiﬁed by using double immunostain-
ing techniques. Somatotrope development and GH 
transcription are determined by expression of the cell-
speciﬁc Pit-1 nuclear transcription factor. Five distinct 
genes encode GH and related proteins. The pituitary 
GH gene (hGH-N) produces two alternatively spliced 
products that give rise to 22-kDa GH (191 amino 
acids) and a less abundant 20-kDa GH molecule with 
similar biologic activity. Placental syncytiotrophoblast 
cells express a GH variant (hGH-V) gene; the related 
hormone human chorionic somatotropin (HCS) is 
expressed by distinct members of the gene cluster.
SECRETION
GH secretion is controlled by complex hypothalamic 
and peripheral factors. GHRH is a 44-amino-acid 
hypothalamic peptide that stimulates GH synthesis and 
release. Ghrelin, an octanoylated gastric-derived peptide, 
and synthetic agonists of the GHS-R induce GHRH 
and also directly stimulate GH release. Somatostatin 
(somatotropin-release inhibiting factor [SRIF]) is syn-
thesized in the medial preoptic area of the hypothala-
mus and inhibits GH secretion. GHRH is secreted in 
discrete spikes that elicit GH pulses, whereas SRIF sets 
basal GH secretory tone. SRIF also is expressed in many 
extrahypothalamic tissues, including the CNS, gastroin-
testinal tract, and pancreas, where it also acts to inhibit 
islet hormone secretion. IGF-I, the peripheral target 
hormone for GH, feeds back to inhibit GH; estrogen 
induces GH, whereas chronic glucocorticoid excess 
suppresses GH release.
Surface receptors on the somatotrope regulate GH 
synthesis and secretion. The GHRH receptor is a G 
protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) that signals through 
the intracellular cyclic AMP pathway to stimulate 
somatotrope cell proliferation as well as GH production. 
Inactivating mutations of the GHRH receptor cause 
profound dwarﬁsm (discussed later). A distinct surface 
receptor for ghrelin, the gastric-derived GH secreta-
gogue, is expressed in the hypothalamus and pituitary. 
Somatostatin binds to ﬁve distinct receptor subtypes 
(SSTR1 to SSTR5); SSTR2 and SSTR5 subtypes pref-
erentially suppress GH (and TSH) secretion.
GH secretion is pulsatile, with highest peak lev-
els occurring at night, generally correlating with sleep 
onset. GH secretory rates decline markedly with age 
so that hormone levels in middle age are about 15% 
of pubertal levels. These changes are paralleled by an 
age-related decline in lean muscle mass. GH secre-
tion is also reduced in obese individuals, though IGF-I 
levels may not be suppressed, suggesting a change in 
the setpoint for feedback control. Elevated GH levels 
occur within an hour of deep sleep onset as well as after 
exercise, physical stress, and trauma and during sepsis. 
Integrated 24-h GH secretion is higher in women and 
is also enhanced by estrogen replacement. Using stan-
dard assays, random GH measurements are undetectable 
in ∼50% of daytime samples obtained from healthy sub-
jects and are also undetectable in most obese and elderly 
subjects. Thus, single random GH measurements do not 
distinguish patients with adult GH deﬁciency from nor-
mal persons.
GH secretion is profoundly inﬂuenced by nutritional 
factors. Using newer ultrasensitive GH assays with a 
sensitivity of 0.002 μg/L, a glucose load suppresses GH 
to <0.7 μg/L in women and to <0.07 μg/L in men. 
Increased GH pulse frequency and peak amplitudes 
occur with chronic malnutrition or prolonged fasting. 
GH is stimulated by intravenous L-arginine, dopamine, 
and apomorphine (a dopamine receptor agonist), as well 
as by α-adrenergic pathways. β-Adrenergic blockage 
induces basal GH and enhances GHRH- and insulin-
evoked GH release.
ACTION
The pattern of GH secretion may affect tissue responses. 
The higher GH pulsatility observed in men compared 
with the relatively continuous GH secretion in women 
may be an important biologic determinant of linear 
growth patterns and liver enzyme induction.
The 70-kDa peripheral GH receptor protein has 
structural homology with the cytokine/hematopoi-
etic superfamily. A fragment of the receptor extracel-
lular domain generates a soluble GH binding protein 
(GHBP) that interacts with GH in the circulation. The 
liver and cartilage contain the greatest number of GH 
receptors. GH binding to preformed receptor dimers is 
followed by internal rotation and subsequent signaling 
through the JAK/STAT pathway. Activated STAT pro-
teins translocate to the nucleus, where they modulate 
expression of GH-regulated target genes. GH analogues 
459
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
that bind to the receptor but are incapable of mediating 
receptor signaling are potent antagonists of GH action. 
A GH receptor antagonist (pegvisomant) is approved for 
treatment of acromegaly.
GH induces protein synthesis and nitrogen retention 
and impairs glucose tolerance by antagonizing insulin 
action. GH also stimulates lipolysis, leading to increased 
circulating fatty acid levels, reduced omental fat mass, 
and enhanced lean body mass. GH promotes sodium, 
potassium, and water retention and elevates serum levels 
of inorganic phosphate. Linear bone growth occurs as a 
result of complex hormonal and growth factor actions, 
including those of IGF-I. GH stimulates epiphyseal 
prechondrocyte differentiation. These precursor cells 
produce IGF-I locally, and their proliferation is also 
responsive to the growth factor.
INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTORS
Although GH exerts direct effects in target tissues, 
many of its physiologic effects are mediated indirectly 
through IGF-I, a potent growth and differentiation fac-
tor. The liver is the major source of circulating IGF-I. 
In peripheral tissues, IGF-I exerts local paracrine actions 
that appear to be both dependent on and independent 
of GH. Thus, GH administration induces circulating 
IGF-I as well as stimulating local IGF-I production in 
multiple tissues.
Both IGF-I and IGF-II are bound to high-afﬁnity 
circulating IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs) that regulate 
IGF bioactivity. Levels of IGFBP3 are GH-dependent, 
and it serves as the major carrier protein for circulating 
IGF-I. GH deﬁciency and malnutrition usually are asso-
ciated with low IGFBP3 levels. IGFBP1 and IGFBP2 
regulate local tissue IGF action but do not bind appre-
ciable amounts of circulating IGF-I.
Serum IGF-I concentrations are profoundly affected 
by physiologic factors. Levels increase during puberty, 
peak at 16 years, and subsequently decline by >80% 
during the aging process. IGF-I concentrations are 
higher in women than in men. Because GH is the 
major determinant of hepatic IGF-I synthesis, abnor-
malities of GH synthesis or action (e.g., pituitary failure, 
GHRH receptor defect, GH receptor defect) reduce 
IGF-I levels. Hypocaloric states are associated with GH 
resistance; IGF-I levels are therefore low with cachexia, 
malnutrition, and sepsis. In acromegaly, IGF-I levels are 
invariably high and reﬂect a log-linear relationship with 
GH concentrations.
IGF-I physiology
IGF-I has been approved for use in patients with GH-
resistance syndromes. Injected IGF-I (100 μg/kg) 
induces hypoglycemia, and lower doses improve insulin 
sensitivity in patients with severe insulin resistance and 
diabetes. In cachectic subjects, IGF-I infusion (12 μg/kg per 
hour) enhances nitrogen retention and lowers choles-
terol levels. Longer-term subcutaneous IGF-I injections 
enhance protein synthesis and are anabolic. Although 
bone formation markers are induced, bone turnover also 
may be stimulated by IGF-I.
IGF-I side effects are dose-dependent, and overdose 
may result in hypoglycemia, hypotension, ﬂuid reten-
tion, temporomandibular jaw pain, and increased intra-
cranial pressure, all of which are reversible. Avascular 
femoral head necrosis has been reported. Chronic excess 
IGF-I administration presumably would result in features 
of acromegaly.
DISORDERS OF GROWTH AND 
DEVELOPMENT
Skeletal maturation and somatic growth
The growth plate is dependent on a variety of hormonal 
stimuli, including GH, IGF-I, sex steroids, thyroid hor-
mones, paracrine growth factors, and cytokines. The 
growth-promoting process also requires caloric energy, 
amino acids, vitamins, and trace metals and consumes 
about 10% of normal energy production. Malnutrition 
impairs chondrocyte activity and reduces circulating 
IGF-I and IGFBP3 levels.
Linear bone growth rates are very high in infancy and 
are pituitary-dependent. Mean growth velocity is ∼6 cm/
year in later childhood and usually is maintained within 
a given range on a standardized percentile chart. Peak 
growth rates occur during midpuberty when bone age is 
12 (girls) or 13 (boys). Secondary sexual development is 
associated with elevated sex steroids that cause progres-
sive epiphyseal growth plate closure. Bone age is delayed 
in patients with all forms of true GH deﬁciency or GH 
receptor defects that result in attenuated GH action.
Short stature may occur as a result of constitutive 
intrinsic growth defects or because of acquired extrin-
sic factors that impair growth. In general, delayed bone 
age in a child with short stature is suggestive of a hor-
monal or systemic disorder, whereas normal bone age 
in a short child is more likely to be caused by a genetic 
cartilage dysplasia or growth plate disorder.
GH deﬁciency in children
GH deﬁciency
Isolated GH deﬁciency is characterized by short stat-
ure, micropenis, increased fat, high-pitched voice, and a 
propensity to hypoglycemia due to relatively unopposed 
insulin action. Familial modes of inheritance are seen 
in one-third of these individuals and may be autosomal 
dominant, recessive, or X-linked. About 10% of children 
with GH deﬁciency have mutations in the GH-N gene, 
including gene deletions and a wide range of point 
460
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
mutations. Mutations in transcription factors Pit-1 and 
Prop-1, which control somatotrope development result 
in GH deﬁciency in combination with other pituitary 
hormone deﬁciencies, which may become manifest only 
in adulthood. The diagnosis of idiopathic GH deﬁciency 
(IGHD) should be made only after known molecular 
defects have been rigorously excluded.
GHRH receptor mutations
Recessive mutations of the GHRH receptor gene in 
subjects with severe proportionate dwarﬁsm are asso-
ciated with low basal GH levels that cannot be stimu-
lated by exogenous GHRH, GHRP, or insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia, as well as anterior pituitary hypoplasia. 
The syndrome exempliﬁes the importance of the 
GHRH receptor for somatotrope cell proliferation and 
hormonal responsiveness.
Growth hormone insensitivity
This is caused by defects of GH receptor structure or 
signaling. Homozygous or heterozygous mutations of 
the GH receptor are associated with partial or complete 
GH insensitivity and growth failure (Laron syndrome). 
The diagnosis is based on normal or high GH levels, 
with decreased circulating GHBP, and low IGF-I levels. 
Very rarely, defective IGF-I, IGF-I receptor, or IGF-I 
signaling defects are also encountered. STAT5B muta-
tions result in immunodeﬁciency with abrogated GH 
signaling, leading to short stature with normal or ele-
vated GH levels and low IGF-I levels.
Nutritional short stature
Caloric deprivation and malnutrition, uncontrolled dia-
betes, and chronic renal failure represent secondary causes 
of abrogated GH receptor function. These conditions also 
stimulate production of proinﬂammatory cytokines, which 
act to exacerbate the block of GH-mediated signal trans-
duction. Children with these conditions typically exhibit 
features of acquired short stature with normal or elevated 
GH, and low IGF-I levels. Circulating GH receptor anti-
bodies may rarely cause peripheral GH insensitivity.
Psychosocial short stature
Emotional and social deprivation lead to growth retar-
dation accompanied by delayed speech, discordant 
hyperphagia, and an attenuated response to administered 
GH. A nurturing environment restores growth rates.
Presentation and diagnosis
Short stature is commonly encountered in clinical prac-
tice, and the decision to evaluate these children requires 
clinical judgment in association with auxologic data and 
family history. Short stature should be evaluated com-
prehensively if a patient’s height is >3 standard devia-
tions (SD) below the mean for age or if the growth rate 
has decelerated. Skeletal maturation is best evaluated by 
measuring a radiologic bone age, which is based mainly 
on the degree of wrist bone growth plate fusion. Final 
height can be predicted using standardized scales (Bayley-
Pinneau or Tanner-Whitehouse) or estimated by adding 
6.5 cm (boys) or subtracting 6.5 cm (girls) from the 
midparental height.
Laboratory investigation
Because GH secretion is pulsatile, GH deﬁciency is 
best assessed by examining the response to provoca-
tive stimuli, including exercise, insulin-induced hypo-
glycemia, and other pharmacologic tests that normally 
increase GH to >7 μg/L in children. Random GH 
measurements do not distinguish normal children from 
those with true GH deﬁciency. Adequate adrenal and 
thyroid hormone replacement should be assured before 
testing. Age- and sex-matched IGF-I levels are not suf-
ﬁciently sensitive or speciﬁc to make the diagnosis but 
can be useful to conﬁrm GH deﬁciency. Pituitary MRI 
may reveal pituitary mass lesions or structural defects. 
Molecular analyses for known mutations should be 
undertaken when the cause of short stature remains 
cryptic, or when additional clinical features suggest a 
gentic cause.
TREATMENT 
Disorders of Growth and Development
Replacement therapy with recombinant GH (0.02–0.05 
mg/kg per day subcutaneously) restores growth veloc-
ity in GH-deficient children to ∼10 cm/year. If pituitary 
insufficiency is documented, other associated hor-
mone deficits should be corrected—especially adrenal 
steroids. GH treatment is also moderately effective for 
accelerating growth rates in children with Turner’s syn-
drome and chronic renal failure.
In patients with GH insensitivity and growth retar-
dation due to mutations of the GH receptor, treatment 
with IGF-I bypasses the dysfunctional GH receptor.
ADULT GH DEFICIENCY (AGHD)
This disorder usually is caused by hypothalamic or pitu-
itary somatotrope damage. Acquired pituitary hormone 
deﬁciency follows a typical pattern in which loss of 
adequate GH reserve foreshadows subsequent hormone 
deﬁcits. The sequential order of hormone loss is usually 
GH → FSH/LH → TSH → ACTH.
Presentation and diagnosis
The clinical features of AGHD include changes in body 
composition, lipid metabolism, and quality of life and 
461
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
cardiovascular dysfunction (Table 38-10). Body com-
position changes are common and include reduced lean 
body mass, increased fat mass with selective deposition 
of intraabdominal visceral fat, and increased waist-to-
hip ratio. Hyperlipidemia, left ventricular dysfunction, 
hypertension, and increased plasma ﬁbrinogen levels 
also may be present. Bone mineral content is reduced, 
with resultant increased fracture rates. Patients may 
experience social isolation, depression, and difﬁculty 
maintaining gainful employment. Adult hypopituitarism 
is associated with a threefold increase in cardiovascular 
mortality rates in comparison to age- and sex-matched 
controls, and this may be due to GH deﬁciency, as 
patients in these studies were replaced with other deﬁ-
cient pituitary hormones.
Laboratory investigation
AGHD is rare, and in light of the nonspeciﬁc nature 
of associated clinical symptoms, patients appropriate for 
TABLE 38-10 
FEATURES OF ADULT GROWTH HORMONE 
DEFICIENCY
Clinical
Impaired quality of life
Decreased energy and drive
Poor concentration
Low self-esteem
Social isolation
Body composition changes
Increased body fat mass
Central fat deposition
Increased waist-hip ratio
Decreased lean body mass
Reduced exercise capacity
Reduced maximum O2 uptake
Impaired cardiac function
Reduced muscle mass
Cardiovascular risk factors
Impaired cardiac structure and function
Abnormal lipid proﬁle
Decreased ﬁbrinolytic activity
Atherosclerosis
Omental obesity
Imaging
Pituitary: mass or structural damage
Bone: reduced bone mineral density
Abdomen: excess omental adiposity
Laboratory
Evoked GH <3 ng/mL
IGF-I and IGFBP3 low or normal
Increased LDL cholesterol
Concomitant gonadotropin, TSH, and/or ACTH reserve 
deﬁcits may be present
Abbreviation: LDL, low-density lipoprotein. For other abbrevia-
tions, see text.
testing should be selected carefully on the basis of well-
deﬁned criteria. With few exceptions, testing should be 
restricted to patients with the following predisposing fac-
tors: (1) pituitary surgery, (2) pituitary or hypothalamic 
tumor or granulomas, (3) history of cranial irradiation, 
(4) radiologic evidence of a pituitary lesion, (5) child-
hood requirement for GH replacement therapy, and 
rarely (6) unexplained low age- and sex-matched IGF-I 
levels. The transition of a GH-deﬁcient adolescent to 
adulthood requires retesting to document subsequent 
adult GH deﬁciency. Up to 20% of patients previously 
treated for childhood-onset GH deﬁciency are found to 
be GH-sufﬁcient on repeat testing as adults.
A signiﬁcant proportion (∼25%) of truly GH-deﬁ-
cient adults have low-normal IGF-I levels. Thus, as 
in the evaluation of GH deﬁciency in children, valid 
age- and sex-matched IGF-I measurements provide a 
useful index of therapeutic responses but are not suf-
ﬁciently sensitive for diagnostic purposes. The most 
validated test to distinguish pituitary-sufﬁcient patients 
from those with AGHD is insulin-induced (0.05–0.1 
U/kg) hypoglycemia. After glucose reduction to 
∼40 mg/dL, most individuals experience neurogly-
copenic symptoms, and peak GH release occurs at 
60 min and remains elevated for up to 2 h. About 
90% of healthy adults exhibit GH responses >5 μg/L; 
AGHD is deﬁned by a peak GH response to hypogly-
cemia of <3 μg/L. Although insulin-induced hypogly-
cemia is safe when performed under appropriate super-
vision, it is contraindicated in patients with diabetes, 
ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, or epi-
lepsy and in elderly patients. Alternative stimulatory 
tests include intravenous arginine (30 g), GHRH (1 μg/
kg), GHRP-6 (90 μg), and glucagon (1 mg). Combina-
tions of these tests may evoke GH secretion in subjects 
who are not responsive to a single test.
TREATMENT 
Adult GH Deﬁciency
Once the diagnosis of AGHD is unequivocally estab-
lished, replacement of GH may be indicated. Contrain-
dications to therapy include the presence of an active 
neoplasm, intracranial hypertension, and uncontrolled 
diabetes and retinopathy. The starting dose of 0.1–0.2 
mg/d should be titrated (up to a maximum of 1.25 
mg/d) to maintain IGF-I levels in the mid-normal range 
for age- and sex-matched controls (Fig. 38-7). Women 
require higher doses than men, and elderly patients 
require less GH. Long-term GH maintenance sustains 
normal IGF-I levels and is associated with persistent 
body composition changes (e.g., enhanced lean body 
mass and lower body fat). High-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol increases, but total cholesterol and insulin levels 
462
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
do not change significantly. Lumbar spine bone mineral 
density increases, but this response is gradual (>1 year). 
Many patients note significant improvement in quality 
of life when evaluated by standardized questionnaires. 
The effect of GH replacement on mortality rates in GH-
deficient patients is currently the subject of long-term 
prospective investigation.
About 30% of patients exhibit reversible dose-
related fluid retention, joint pain, and carpal tunnel syn-
drome, and up to 40% exhibit myalgias and paresthesia. 
Patients receiving insulin require careful monitoring for 
dosing adjustments, as GH is a potent counterregula-
tory hormone for insulin action. Patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus initially develop further insulin resis-
tance. However, glycemic control improves with the sus-
tained loss of abdominal fat associated with long-term 
GH replacement. Headache, increased intracranial pres-
sure, hypertension, and tinnitus occur rarely. Pituitary 
tumor regrowth and progression of skin lesions or other 
tumors are being assessed in long-term surveillance 
programs. To date, development of these potential side 
effects does not appear significant.
stem-cell adenomas, features of hyperprolactinemia 
(hypogonadism and galactorrhea) predominate over 
the less clinically evident signs of acromegaly. Occa-
sionally, mixed plurihormonal tumors are encountered 
that also secrete ACTH, the glycoprotein hormone α 
subunit, or TSH in addition to GH. Patients with par-
tially empty sellas may present with GH hypersecretion 
due to a small GH-secreting adenoma within the com-
pressed rim of pituitary tissue; some of these may reﬂect 
the spontaneous necrosis of tumors that were previously 
larger. GH-secreting tumors rarely arise from ectopic 
pituitary tissue remnants in the nasopharynx or midline 
sinuses.
There are case reports of ectopic GH secretion by 
tumors of pancreatic, ovarian, lung, or hematopoietic 
origin. Rarely, excess GHRH production may cause 
acromegaly because of chronic stimulation of somato-
tropes. These patients present with classic features of 
acromegaly, elevated GH levels, pituitary enlargement 
History of pituitary pathology
Clinical features present
Evoked GH  3 g/L
Treat with
  GH 0.1–0.3 mg/d
Exclude contraindications
Titrate GH dose
  up to 1.25 mg/d
Check IGF-I after 1 mo
No
response
Response
6 mo
Discontinue Rx
Monitor
  IGF-I Levels
MANAGEMENT OF ADULT GH DEFICIENCY
FIGURE 38-7 
Management of adult growth hormone (GH) deﬁciency. 
IGF, insulin-like growth factor.
ACROMEGALY
Etiology
GH hypersecretion is usually the result of a somatotrope 
adenoma but may rarely be caused by extrapituitary 
lesions (Table 38-11). In addition to more common 
GH-secreting somatotrope adenomas, mixed mammo-
somatotrope tumors and acidophilic stem-cell adenomas 
secrete both GH and PRL. In patients with acidophilic 
TABLE 38-11 
CAUSES OF ACROMEGALY
PREVALENCE, %
Excess Growth Hormone Secretion
Pituitary
98
Densely or sparsely granulated GH cell 
adenoma
60
Mixed GH cell and PRL cell adenoma
25
Mammosomatrope cell adenoma
10
Plurihormonal adenoma
GH cell carcinoma or metastases
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 (GH cell 
adenoma)
McCune-Albright syndrome
Ectopic sphenoid or parapharyngeal 
sinus pituitary adenoma
Extrapituitary tumor
Pancreatic islet cell tumor
<1
Lymphoma
Excess Growth Hormone–Releasing Hormone Secretion
Central
<1
Hypothalamic hamartoma, choristoma, 
ganglioneuroma
<1
Peripheral
<1
Bronchial carcinoid, pancreatic islet cell 
tumor, small cell lung cancer, adrenal 
adenoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, 
pheochromocytoma
Source: Adapted from S Melmed: N Engl J Med 322:966, 1990.
Abbreviations: GH, growth hormone; PRL, prolactin.
463
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
on MRI, and pathologic characteristics of pituitary 
hyperplasia. The most common cause of GHRH-
mediated acromegaly is a chest or abdominal carcinoid 
tumor. Although these tumors usually express positive 
GHRH immunoreactivity, clinical features of acro-
megaly are evident in only a minority of patients with 
carcinoid disease. Excessive GHRH also may be elabo-
rated by hypothalamic tumors, usually choristomas or 
neuromas.
Presentation and diagnosis
Protean manifestations of GH and IGF-I hypersecre-
tion are indolent and often are not clinically diagnosed 
for 10 years or more. Acral bony overgrowth results in 
frontal bossing, increased hand and foot size, mandibu-
lar enlargement with prognathism, and widened space 
between the lower incisor teeth. In children and ado-
lescents, initiation of GH hypersecretion before epiphy-
seal long bone closure is associated with development 
of pituitary gigantism (Fig. 38-8). Soft tissue swell-
ing results in increased heel pad thickness, increased 
shoe or glove size, ring tightening, characteristic coarse 
facial features, and a large ﬂeshy nose. Other commonly 
encountered clinical features include hyperhidrosis, a 
deep and hollow-sounding voice, oily skin, arthropa-
thy, kyphosis, carpal tunnel syndrome, proximal muscle 
weakness and fatigue, acanthosis nigricans, and skin tags. 
Generalized visceromegaly occurs, including cardio-
megaly, macroglossia, and thyroid gland enlargement.
The most signiﬁcant clinical impact of GH excess 
occurs with respect to the cardiovascular system. Cor-
onary heart disease, cardiomyopathy with arrhythmias, 
left ventricular hypertrophy, decreased diastolic func-
tion, and hypertension ultimately occur in most patients 
if untreated. Upper airway obstruction with sleep apnea 
occurs in more than 60% of patients and is associated 
with both soft tissue laryngeal airway obstruction and 
central sleep dysfunction. Diabetes mellitus develops 
in 25% of patients with acromegaly, and most patients 
are intolerant of a glucose load (as GH counteracts 
the action of insulin). Acromegaly is associated with 
an increased risk of colon polyps and mortality from 
colonic malignancy; polyps are diagnosed in up to one-
third of patients. Overall mortality is increased about 
threefold and is due primarily to cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular disorders and respiratory disease. Unless 
GH levels are controlled, survival is reduced by an aver-
age of 10 years compared with an age-matched control 
population.
Laboratory investigation
Age- and sex-matched serum IGF-I levels are elevated 
in acromegaly. Consequently, an IGF-I level provides 
a useful laboratory screening measure when clinical 
FIGURE 38-8 
Features of acromegaly/gigantism. A 22-year-old man 
with gigantism due to excess growth hormone is shown 
to the left of his identical twin. The increased height and 
prognathism (A) and enlarged hand (B) and foot (C) of the 
affected twin are apparent. Their clinical features began to 
diverge at the age of approximately 13 years. (Reproduced 
from R Gagel, IE McCutcheon: N Engl J Med 340:524, 1999; 
with permission.)
464
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
features raise the possibility of acromegaly. Due to 
the pulsatility of GH secretion, measurement of a sin-
gle random GH level is not useful for the diagnosis or 
exclusion of acromegaly and does not correlate with 
disease severity. The diagnosis of acromegaly is con-
ﬁrmed by demonstrating the failure of GH suppres-
sion to <0.4 μg/L within 1–2 h of an oral glucose load 
(75 g). When newer ultrasensitive GH assays are used, 
normal nadir GH levels are even lower (<0.05 μg/L). 
About 20% of patients exhibit a paradoxical GH rise 
after glucose. PRL should be measured, as it is elevated 
in ∼25% of patients with acromegaly. Thyroid func-
tion, gonadotropins, and sex steroids may be attenuated 
because of tumor mass effects. Because most patients 
will undergo surgery with glucocorticoid coverage, tests 
of ACTH reserve in asymptomatic patients are more 
efﬁciently deferred until after surgery.
TREATMENT 
Acromegaly
The goal of treatment is to control GH and IGF-I hyper-
secretion, ablate or arrest tumor growth, ameliorate 
comorbidities, restore mortality rates to normal, and 
preserve pituitary function.
Surgical resection of GH-secreting adenomas is the 
initial treatment for most patients (Fig. 38-9). Soma-
tostatin analogues are used as adjuvant treatment 
for preoperative shrinkage of large invasive macroad-
enomas, immediate relief of debilitating symptoms, 
and reduction of GH hypersecretion; in frail patients 
experiencing morbidity; and in patients who decline 
surgery or, when surgery fails, to achieve biochemical 
control. Irradiation or repeat surgery may be required 
for patients who cannot tolerate or do not respond 
to adjunctive medical therapy. The high rate of late 
hypopituitarism and the slow rate (5–15 years) of bio-
chemical response are the main disadvantages of 
radiotherapy. Irradiation is also relatively ineffective in 
normalizing IGF-I levels. Stereotactic ablation of GH-
secreting adenomas by gamma-knife radiotherapy is 
promising, but initial reports suggest that long-term 
results and side effects are similar to those observed 
with conventional radiation. Somatostatin analogues 
may be required while awaiting the full benefits of 
radiotherapy. Systemic sequelae of acromegaly, includ-
ing cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and arthritis, 
should be managed aggressively. Mandibular surgical 
repair may be indicated.
SURGERY Transsphenoidal surgical resection by 
an experienced surgeon is the preferred primary treat-
ment for both microadenomas (cure rate ∼70%) and 
macroadenomas (<50% cured). Soft tissue swelling 
improves immediately after tumor resection. GH levels 
return to normal within an hour, and IGF-I levels are 
normalized within 3–4 days. In ∼10% of patients, acro-
megaly may recur several years after apparently suc-
cessful surgery; hypopituitarism develops in up to 15% 
of patients after surgery.
SOMATOSTATIN ANALOGUES Somatosta-
tin analogues exert their therapeutic effects through 
SSTR2 and SSTR5 receptors, both of which invariably are 
expressed by GH-secreting tumors. Octreotide acetate is 
an eight-amino-acid synthetic somatostatin analogue. In 
contrast to native somatostatin, the analogue is relatively 
resistant to plasma degradation. It has a 2-h serum half-
life and possesses 40-fold greater potency than native 
somatostatin to suppress GH. Octreotide is administered 
by subcutaneous injection, beginning with 50 μg tid; the 
dose can be increased gradually up to 1500 μg/d. Fewer 
than 10% of patients do not respond to the analogue. 
Octreotide suppresses integrated GH levels and normal-
izes IGF-I levels in ∼75% of treated patients.
The long-acting somatostatin depot formulations, 
octreotide and lanreotide, are the preferred medical 
treatment for patients with acromegaly. Sandostatin-
LAR is a sustained-release, long-acting formulation of 
octreotide incorporated into microspheres that sustain 
drug levels for several weeks after intramuscular injec-
tion. GH suppression occurs for as long as 6 weeks after 
a 30-mg intramuscular injection; long-term monthly 
treatment sustains GH and IGF-I suppression and 
also reduces pituitary tumor size in ∼50% of patients. 
Lanreotide autogel, a slow-release depot somatosta-
tin preparation, is a cyclic somatostatin octapeptide 
analogue that suppresses GH and IGF-I hypersecre-
tion after a 60-mg subcutaneous injection. Long-term 
monthly administration controls GH hypersecretion 
in two-thirds of treated patients and improves patient 
compliance because of the long interval required 
between drug injections. Rapid relief of headache and 
soft tissue swelling occurs in ∼75% of patients within 
days to weeks of somatostatin analogue initiation. Most 
patients report symptomatic improvement, including 
amelioration of headache, perspiration, obstructive 
apnea, and cardiac failure.
Side Effects Somatostatin analogues are well toler-
ated in most patients. Adverse effects are short-lived and 
mostly relate to drug-induced suppression of gastrointes-
tinal motility and secretion. Nausea, abdominal discom-
fort, fat malabsorption, diarrhea, and flatulence occur in 
one-third of patients, and these symptoms usually remit 
within 2 weeks. Octreotide suppresses postprandial gall-
bladder contractility and delays gallbladder emptying; up 
to 30% of patients develop long-term echogenic sludge 
or asymptomatic cholesterol gallstones. Other side 
effects include mild glucose intolerance due to transient 
insulin suppression, asymptomatic bradycardia, hypothy-
roxinemia, and local injection site discomfort.
465
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
GH 
RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST Pegvisomant 
antagonizes endogenous GH action by blocking periph-
eral GH binding to its receptor. Consequently, serum 
IGF-I levels are suppressed, reducing the deleteri-
ous effects of excess endogenous GH. Pegvisomant is 
administered by daily subcutaneous injection (10–20 
mg) and normalizes IGF-I in >90% of patients. GH lev-
els, however, remain elevated as the drug does not have 
antitumor actions. Side effects include reversible liver 
enzyme elevation, lipodystrophy, and injection site pain. 
Tumor size should be monitored by MRI.
Combined treatment with monthly somatostatin 
analogues and weekly or biweekly pegvisomant injec-
tions has been used effectively in resistant patients.
DOPAMINE AGONISTS Bromocriptine and cab-
ergoline may modestly suppress GH secretion in some 
patients. High doses of bromocriptine (≥20 mg/d) or 
cabergoline (0.5 mg/d) are usually required to achieve 
modest GH therapeutic efficacy. Combined treatment 
with octreotide and cabergoline may induce additive 
biochemical control compared with either drug alone.
RADIATION External radiation therapy or high-
energy stereotactic techniques are used as adjuvant 
therapy for acromegaly. An advantage of radiation is 
that patient compliance with long-term treatment is 
not required. Tumor mass is reduced, and GH levels are 
attenuated over time. However, 50% of patients require 
at least 8 years for GH levels to be suppressed to <5 μg/L; 
this level of GH reduction is achieved in about 90% of 
patients after 18 years but represents suboptimal GH 
suppression. Patients may require interim medical ther-
apy for several years before attaining maximal radiation 
benefits. Most patients also experience hypothalamic-
pituitary damage, leading to gonadotropin, ACTH, and/
or TSH deficiency within 10 years of therapy.
In summary, surgery is the preferred primary treat-
ment for GH-secreting microadenomas (Fig. 38-9). The 
high frequency of GH hypersecretion after macroade-
noma resection usually necessitates adjuvant or primary 
medical therapy for these larger tumors. Patients unable 
to receive or respond to unimodal medical treatment 
may benefit from combined treatments or can be offered 
radiation.
ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE 
SYNTHESIS
ACTH-secreting corticotrope cells constitute about 
20% of the pituitary cell population. ACTH (39 amino 
acids) is derived from the POMC precursor protein (266 
amino acids) that also generates several other peptides, 
GH-Secreting
Adenoma
Surgery
Debulking required
  for CNS pressure effects
Somatostatin analogue
Somatostatin
  analogue
Assess likelihood
  of surgical cure
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
Increase dose/frequency of somatostatin
analogue; add GH receptor antagonist;
or add dopamine agonist
Likely
Unlikely
Monitor
controlled
controlled
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
• GH receptor 
  antagonist
• Radiation therapy
• Reoperation
Monitor
controlled
uncontrolled
Monitor
controlled
uncontrolled
elevated
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
MANAGEMENT OF ACROMEGALY
FIGURE 38-9 
Management of acromegaly. GH, growth hormone; CNS, 
central nervous system; IGF, insulin-like growth factor. (Adapted 
from S Melmed et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:1509–1517, 
2009; © The Endocrine Society.)
466
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
including β-lipotropin, β-endorphin, met-enkephalin, 
α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH), and cor-
ticotropin-like intermediate lobe protein (CLIP). The 
POMC gene is potently suppressed by glucocorticoids 
and induced by CRH, arginine vasopressin (AVP), and 
proinﬂammatory cytokines, including IL-6, as well as 
leukemia inhibitory factor.
CRH, a 41-amino-acid hypothalamic peptide syn-
thesized in the paraventricular nucleus as well as in 
higher brain centers, is the predominant stimulator of 
ACTH synthesis and release. The CRH receptor is a 
GPCR that is expressed on the corticotrope and signals 
to induce POMC transcription.
SECRETION
ACTH secretion is pulsatile and exhibits a characteris-
tic circadian rhythm, peaking at 6 A.M. and reaching a 
nadir about midnight. Adrenal glucocorticoid secre-
tion, which is driven by ACTH, follows a parallel 
diurnal pattern. ACTH circadian rhythmicity is deter-
mined by variations in secretory pulse amplitude rather 
than changes in pulse frequency. Superimposed on this 
endogenous rhythm, ACTH levels are increased by 
physical and psychological stress, exercise, acute illness, 
and insulin-induced hypoglycemia.
Loss of cortisol feedback inhibition, as occurs in pri-
mary adrenal failure, results in extremely high ACTH 
levels. Glucocorticoid-mediated negative regulation of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis occurs as 
a consequence of both hypothalamic CRH suppression 
and direct attenuation of pituitary POMC gene expres-
sion and ACTH release.
Acute inﬂammatory or septic insults activate the 
HPA axis through the integrated actions of proinﬂam-
matory cytokines, bacterial toxins, and neural signals. 
The overlapping cascade of ACTH-inducing cytokines 
(tumor necrosis factor [TNF]; IL-1, -2, and -6; and leu-
kemia inhibitory factor) activates hypothalamic CRH 
and AVP secretion, pituitary POMC gene expression, 
and local pituitary paracrine cytokine networks. The 
resulting cortisol elevation restrains the inﬂammatory 
response and enables host protection. Concomitantly, 
cytokine-mediated central glucocorticoid receptor resis-
tance impairs glucocorticoid suppression of the HPA. 
Thus, the neuroendocrine stress response reﬂects the net 
result of highly integrated hypothalamic, intrapituitary, 
and peripheral hormone and cytokine signals.
ACTION
The major function of the HPA axis is to maintain 
metabolic homeostasis and mediate the neuroendocrine 
stress response. ACTH induces adrenocortical ste-
roidogenesis by sustaining adrenal cell proliferation and 
function. The receptor for ACTH, designated melano-
cortin-2 receptor, is a GPCR that induces steroidogenesis 
by stimulating a cascade of steroidogenic enzymes.
ACTH DEFICIENCY
Presentation and diagnosis
Secondary adrenal insufﬁciency occurs as a result of 
pituitary ACTH deﬁciency. It is characterized by 
fatigue, weakness, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and, 
occasionally, hypoglycemia. In contrast to primary adre-
nal failure, hypocortisolism associated with pituitary fail-
ure usually is not accompanied by hyperpigmentation or 
mineralocorticoid deﬁciency.
ACTH deﬁciency is commonly due to glucocor-
ticoid withdrawal after treatment-associated suppres-
sion of the HPA axis. Isolated ACTH deﬁciency may 
occur after surgical resection of an ACTH-secreting 
pituitary adenoma that has suppressed the HPA axis; 
this phenomenon is suggestive of a surgical cure. The 
mass effects of other pituitary adenomas or sellar lesions 
may lead to ACTH deﬁciency, but usually in combina-
tion with other pituitary hormone deﬁciencies. Partial 
ACTH deﬁciency may be unmasked in the presence 
of an acute medical or surgical illness, when clinically 
signiﬁcant hypocortisolism reﬂects diminished ACTH 
reserve. Rarely, TPIT or POMC mutations result in 
primary ACTH deﬁciency.
Laboratory diagnosis
Inappropriately low ACTH levels in the setting of low 
cortisol levels are characteristic of diminished ACTH 
reserve. Low basal serum cortisol levels are associated 
with blunted cortisol responses to ACTH stimula-
tion and impaired cortisol response to insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia, or testing with metyrapone or CRH. 
TREATMENT 
ACTH Deﬁciency
Glucocorticoid replacement therapy improves most fea-
tures of ACTH deficiency. The total daily dose of hydrocor-
tisone replacement preferably should not exceed 25 mg 
daily, divided into two or three doses. Prednisone (5 mg 
each morning) is longer-acting and has fewer mineralo-
corticoid effects than hydrocortisone. Some authorities 
advocate lower maintenance doses in an effort to avoid 
cushingoid side effects. Doses should be increased sever-
alfold during periods of acute illness or stress.
467
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
CUSHING’S SYNDROME 
(ACTH-PRODUCING ADENOMA)
Etiology and prevalence
Pituitary corticotrope adenomas account for 70% of patients 
with endogenous causes of Cushing’s syndrome. However, 
it should be emphasized that iatrogenic hypercortisolism is 
the most common cause of cushingoid features. Ectopic 
tumor ACTH production, cortisol-producing adrenal ade-
nomas, adrenal carcinoma, and adrenal hyperplasia account 
for the other causes; rarely, ectopic tumor CRH production 
is encountered.
ACTH-producing adenomas account for about 
10–15% of all pituitary tumors. Because the clinical fea-
tures of Cushing’s syndrome often lead to early diagno-
sis, most ACTH-producing pituitary tumors are rela-
tively small microadenomas. However, macroadenomas 
also are seen while some ACTH-expressing adenomas 
are clinically silent. Cushing’s disease is 5–10 times 
more common in women than in men. These pitu-
itary adenomas exhibit unrestrained ACTH secretion, 
with resultant hypercortisolemia. However, they retain 
partial suppressibility in the presence of high doses of 
administered glucocorticoids, providing the basis for 
dynamic testing to distinguish pituitary from nonpitu-
itary causes of Cushing’s syndrome.
Presentation and diagnosis
The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome presents two great 
challenges: (1) to distinguish patients with pathologic 
cortisol excess from those with physiologic or other dis-
turbances of cortisol production and (2) to determine 
the etiology of cortisol excess.
Typical features of chronic cortisol excess include 
thin skin, central obesity, hypertension, plethoric 
moon facies, purple striae and easy bruisability, glu-
cose intolerance or diabetes mellitus, gonadal dysfunc-
tion, osteoporosis, proximal muscle weakness, signs of 
hyperandrogenism (acne, hirsutism), and psychological 
disturbances (depression, mania, and psychoses) (Table 
38-12). Hematopoietic features of hypercortisolism 
include leukocytosis, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. 
Immune suppression includes delayed hypersensitivity. 
These protean yet commonly encountered manifesta-
tions of hypercortisolism make it challenging to decide 
which patients mandate formal laboratory evaluation. 
Certain features make pathologic causes of hypercor-
tisolism more likely; they include characteristic central 
redistribution of fat, thin skin with striae and bruis-
ing, and proximal muscle weakness. In children and in 
young females, early osteoporosis may be particularly 
prominent. The primary cause of death is cardiovas-
cular disease, but infections and risk of suicide are also 
increased.
Rapid development of features of hypercortisolism 
associated with skin hyperpigmentation and severe 
myopathy suggests an ectopic source of ACTH. Hyper-
tension, hypokalemic alkalosis, glucose intolerance, 
and edema are also more pronounced in these patients. 
Serum potassium levels <3.3 mmol/L are evident in 
∼70% of patients with ectopic ACTH secretion but 
are seen in <10% of patients with pituitary-dependent 
Cushing’s syndrome.
Laboratory investigation
The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome is based on labo-
ratory documentation of endogenous hypercortisolism. 
Measurement of 24-h urine free cortisol (UFC) is a 
precise and cost-effective screening test. Alternatively, 
the failure to suppress plasma cortisol after an overnight 
1-mg dexamethasone suppression test can be used to 
identify patients with hypercortisolism. As nadir levels 
TABLE 38-12
CLINICAL FEATURES OF CUSHING’S SYNDROME 
(ALL AGES)
SYMPTOMS/SIGNS
FREQUENCY, %
Obesity or weight gain (>115% 
ideal body weight)
80
Thin skin
80
Moon facies
75
Hypertension
75
Purple skin striae
65
Hirsutism
65
Menstrual disorders (usually 
amenorrhea)
60
Plethora
60
Abnormal glucose tolerance
55
Impotence
55
Proximal muscle weakness
50
Truncal obesity
50
Acne
45
Bruising
45
Mental changes
45
Osteoporosis
40
Edema of lower extremities
30
Hyperpigmentation
20
Hypokalemic alkalosis
15
Diabetes mellitus
15
Source: Adapted from MA Magiokou et al, in ME Wierman (ed): 
Diseases of the Pituitary. Totowa, NJ, Humana, 1997.
468
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
of cortisol occur at night, elevated midnight samples 
of cortisol are suggestive of Cushing’s syndrome. Basal 
plasma ACTH levels often distinguish patients with 
ACTH-independent (adrenal or exogenous gluco-
corticoid) from those with ACTH-dependent (pitu-
itary, ectopic ACTH) Cushing’s syndrome. Mean basal 
ACTH levels are about eightfold higher in patients with 
ectopic ACTH secretion than in those with pituitary 
ACTH-secreting adenomas. However, extensive over-
lap of ACTH levels in these two disorders precludes 
using ACTH measurements to make the distinction. 
Instead, dynamic testing based on differential sensitiv-
ity to glucocorticoid feedback or ACTH stimulation in 
response to CRH or cortisol reduction is used to dis-
tinguish ectopic from pituitary sources of excess ACTH 
(Table 38-13). Very rarely, circulating CRH levels are 
elevated, reﬂecting ectopic tumor-derived secretion of 
CRH and often ACTH. 
Most ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors are <5 mm 
in diameter, and about half are undetectable by sensi-
tive MRI. The high prevalence of incidental pituitary 
microadenomas diminishes the ability to distinguish 
ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors accurately from non-
secreting incidentalomas.
Inferior petrosal venous sampling
Because pituitary MRI with gadolinium enhancement is 
insufﬁciently sensitive to detect small (<2 mm) pituitary 
ACTH-secreting adenomas, bilateral inferior petrosal 
sinus ACTH sampling before and after CRH adminis-
tration may be required to distinguish these lesions from 
ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors that may have simi-
lar clinical and biochemical characteristics. Simultane-
ous assessment of ACTH in each inferior petrosal vein 
and in the peripheral circulation provides a strategy for 
conﬁrming and localizing pituitary ACTH production. 
Sampling is performed at baseline and 2, 5, and 10 min 
after intravenous bovine CRH (1 μg/kg) injection. An 
increased ratio (>2) of inferior petrosal:peripheral vein 
ACTH conﬁrms pituitary Cushing’s syndrome. After 
CRH injection, peak petrosal:peripheral ACTH ratios 
≥3 conﬁrm the presence of a pituitary ACTH-secreting 
tumor. The sensitivity of this test is >95%, with very 
rare false-positive results. False-negative results may be 
encountered in patients with aberrant venous drain-
age. Petrosal sinus catheterizations are technically difﬁ-
cult, and about 0.05% of patients develop neurovascular 
complications. The procedure should not be performed 
TABLE 38-13
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ACTH-DEPENDENT CUSHING’S SYNDROMEa
ACTH-SECRETING PITUITARY TUMOR
ECTOPIC ACTH SECRETION
Etiology
Pituitary corticotrope adenoma
Plurihormonal adenoma
Bronchial, abdominal carcinoid
Small cell lung cancer
Thymoma
Sex
F > M
M > F
Clinical features
Slow onset
Rapid onset
Pigmentation
Severe myopathy
Serum potassium <3.3 μg/L
<10%
75%
24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC)
High
High
Basal ACTH level
Inappropriately high
Very high
Dexamethasone suppression
1 mg overnight
Low dose (0.5 mg q6h)
Cortisol >5 μg/dL
Cortisol >5 μg/dL
High dose (2 mg q6h)
Cortisol <5 μg/dL
Cortisol >5 μg/dL
UFC >80% suppressed
Microadenomas: 90%
Macroadenomas: 50%
10%
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS)
Basal
 IPSS: peripheral
>2
<2
CRH-induced
 IPSS: peripheral
>3
<3
aACTH-independent causes of Cushing’s syndrome are diagnosed by suppressed ACTH levels and an adrenal mass in the setting of hypercor-
tisolism. Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome is excluded by history.
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; F, female; M, male.
469
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
in patients with hypertension or in the presence of a 
well-visualized pituitary adenoma on MRI.
TREATMENT 
Cushing’s Syndrome
Selective transsphenoidal resection is the treatment of 
choice for Cushing’s disease (Fig. 38-10). The remission 
rate for this procedure is ∼80% for microadenomas but 
<50% for macroadenomas. After successful tumor resec-
tion, most patients experience a postoperative period 
of symptomatic ACTH deficiency that may last up to  
12 months. This usually requires low-dose cortisol 
replacement, as patients experience both steroid with-
drawal symptoms and have a suppressed HPA axis. 
Biochemical recurrence occurs in approximately 5% of 
patients in whom surgery was initially successful.
When initial surgery is unsuccessful, repeat surgery 
is sometimes indicated, particularly when a pituitary 
source for ACTH is well documented. In older patients, 
in whom issues of growth and fertility are less impor-
tant, hemi- or total hypophysectomy may be necessary 
if a discrete pituitary adenoma is not recognized. Pitu-
itary irradiation may be used after unsuccessful surgery, 
but it cures only about 15% of patients. Because the 
effects of radiation are slow and only partially effective 
in adults, steroidogenic inhibitors are used in combina-
ACTH-dependent
hypercortisolism 
Biochemical
  cure
Persistent
  hypercortisolism
Pituitary
  irradiation
Consider chest/abdomen
imaging
Ectopic ACTH excluded
Glucocorticoid
  replacement,
  if needed
Follow-up:
Steroidogenic
  inhibitors
and/or
Pituitary MRI
Petrosal sinus
  ACTH sampling*
ACTH-secreting
  pituitary adenoma
Transsphenoidal surgical
  resection
Adrenalectomy
Serial biochemical
  and MRI
  evaluation
?Irradiation
Risk of Nelson’s
syndrome
MANAGEMENT OF CUSHING’S DISEASE
FIGURE 38-10 
Management of Cushing’s syndrome. ACTH, adrenocorti-
cotropin hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. *Not 
usually required.
tion with pituitary irradiation to block adrenal effects of 
persistently high ACTH levels.
Ketoconazole, an imidazole derivative antimycotic 
agent, inhibits several P450 enzymes and effectively 
lowers cortisol in most patients with Cushing’s disease 
when administered twice daily (600–1200 mg/d). Ele-
vated hepatic transaminases, gynecomastia, impotence, 
gastrointestinal upset, and edema are common side 
effects. Metyrapone (2–4 g/d) inhibits 11β-hydroxylase 
activity and normalizes plasma cortisol in up to 75% of 
patients. Side effects include nausea and vomiting, rash, 
and exacerbation of acne or hirsutism. Mitotane (o,p′-
DDD; 3–6 g/d orally in four divided doses) suppresses 
cortisol hypersecretion by inhibiting 11β-hydroxylase 
and cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzymes and by 
destroying adrenocortical cells. Side effects of mitotane 
include gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, gyneco-
mastia, hyperlipidemia, skin rash, and hepatic enzyme 
elevation. It also may lead to hypoaldosteronism. Other 
agents include aminoglutethimide (250 mg tid), trilo-
stane (200–1000 mg/d), cyproheptadine (24 mg/d), and 
IV etomidate (0.3 mg/kg per hour). Glucocorticoid insuf-
ficiency is a potential side effect of agents used to block 
steroidogenesis.
The use of steroidogenic inhibitors has decreased 
the need for bilateral adrenalectomy. Removal of both 
adrenal glands corrects hypercortisolism but may be 
associated with significant morbidity rates and necessi-
tates permanent glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid 
replacement. Adrenalectomy in the setting of residual 
corticotrope adenoma tissue predisposes to the devel-
opment of Nelson’s syndrome, a disorder characterized 
by rapid pituitary tumor enlargement and increased 
pigmentation secondary to high ACTH levels. Radiation 
therapy may be indicated to prevent the development 
of Nelson’s syndrome after adrenalectomy.
GONADOTROPINS: FSH AND LH
SYNTHESIS AND SECRETION
Gonadotrope cells constitute about 10% of anterior 
pituitary cells and produce two gonadotropins—LH and 
FSH. Like TSH and hCG, LH and FSH are glycopro-
tein hormones that consist of α and β subunits. The α 
subunit is common to these glycoprotein hormones; 
speciﬁcity is conferred by the β subunits, which are 
expressed by separate genes.
Gonadotropin synthesis and release are dynami-
cally regulated. This is particularly true in women, in 
whom rapidly ﬂuctuating gonadal steroid levels vary 
throughout the menstrual cycle. Hypothalamic GnRH, 
a 10-amino-acid peptide, regulates the synthesis and 
secretion of both LH and FSH. GnRH is secreted in 
discrete pulses every 60–120 min, and the pulses in 
470
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
turn elicit LH and FSH pulses (Fig. 38-3). The pulsatile 
mode of GnRH input is essential to its action; pulses 
prime gonadotrope responsiveness, whereas continuous 
GnRH exposure induces desensitization. Based on this 
phenomenon, long-acting GnRH agonists are used to 
suppress gonadotropin levels in children with preco-
cious puberty and in men with prostate cancer and are 
used in some ovulation-induction protocols to reduce 
levels of endogenous gonadotropins. Estrogens act at 
both the hypothalamus and the pituitary to modulate 
gonadotropin secretion. Chronic estrogen exposure 
is inhibitory, whereas rising estrogen levels, as occur 
during the preovulatory surge, exert positive feedback 
to increase gonadotropin pulse frequency and ampli-
tude. Progesterone slows GnRH pulse frequency but 
enhances gonadotropin responses to GnRH. Testoster-
one feedback in men also occurs at the hypothalamic 
and pituitary levels and is mediated in part by its con-
version to estrogens.
Although GnRH is the main regulator of LH and FSH 
secretion, FSH synthesis is also under separate control by 
the gonadal peptides inhibin and activin, which are mem-
bers of the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) family. 
Inhibin selectively suppresses FSH, whereas activin stimu-
lates FSH synthesis.
ACTION
The gonadotropin hormones interact with their respec-
tive GPCRs expressed in the ovary and testis, evok-
ing germ cell development and maturation and steroid 
hormone biosynthesis. In women, FSH regulates ovar-
ian follicle development and stimulates ovarian estrogen 
production. LH mediates ovulation and maintenance 
of the corpus luteum. In men, LH induces Leydig cell 
testosterone synthesis and secretion and FSH stimu-
lates seminiferous tubule development and regulates 
spermatogenesis.
GONADOTROPIN DEFICIENCY
Hypogonadism is the most common presenting feature 
of adult hypopituitarism even when other pituitary hor-
mones are also deﬁcient. It is often a harbinger of hypo-
thalamic or pituitary lesions that impair GnRH production 
or delivery through the pituitary stalk. As noted earlier, 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is a common presenting 
feature of hyperprolactinemia.
A variety of inherited and acquired disorders are asso-
ciated with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). 
Hypothalamic defects associated with GnRH deﬁciency 
include two X-linked disorders, Kallmann syndrome 
(discussed earlier) and mutations in the DAX1 gene, as 
well as dominant mutations in FGFR1. Mutations in 
GPR54, kisspeptin, the GnRH receptor, and the LH β 
or FSH β subunit genes are additional causes of selec-
tive gonadotropin deﬁciency. Acquired forms of GnRH 
deﬁciency leading to hypogonadotropism are seen in 
association with anorexia nervosa, stress, starvation, and 
extreme exercise but also may be idiopathic. Hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism in these disorders is reversed 
by removal of the stressful stimulus or by caloric 
replenishment.
Presentation and diagnosis
In premenopausal women, hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism presents as diminished ovarian function leading 
to oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, infertility, decreased 
vaginal secretions, decreased libido, and breast atrophy. 
In hypogonadal adult men, secondary testicular failure is 
associated with decreased libido and potency, infertility, 
decreased muscle mass with weakness, reduced beard 
and body hair growth, soft testes, and characteristic ﬁne 
facial wrinkles. Osteoporosis occurs in both untreated 
hypogonadal women and men.
Laboratory investigation
Central hypogonadism is associated with low or inap-
propriately normal serum gonadotropin levels in the 
setting of low sex hormone concentrations (testoster-
one in men, estradiol in women). Because gonadotro-
pin secretion is pulsatile, valid assessments may require 
repeated measurements or the use of pooled serum sam-
ples. Men have reduced sperm counts.
Intravenous GnRH (100 μg) stimulates gonadotropes 
to secrete LH (which peaks within 30 min) and FSH 
(which plateaus during the ensuing 60 min). Normal 
responses vary according to menstrual cycle stage, age, 
and sex of the patient. Generally, LH levels increase 
about threefold, whereas FSH responses are less pro-
nounced. In the setting of gonadotropin deﬁciency, 
a normal gonadotropin response to GnRH indicates 
intact pituitary gonadotrope function and suggests a 
hypothalamic abnormality. An absent response, how-
ever, cannot reliably distinguish pituitary from hypotha-
lamic causes of hypogonadism. For this reason, GnRH 
testing usually adds little to the information gained 
from baseline evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
gonadotrope axis except in cases of isolated GnRH 
deﬁciency (e.g., Kallmann syndrome).
MRI examination of the sellar region and assess-
ment of other pituitary functions usually are indicated in 
patients with documented central hypogonadism.
TREATMENT 
Gonadotropin Deﬁciency
In males, testosterone replacement is necessary to 
achieve and maintain normal growth and development 
471
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
of the external genitalia, secondary sex characteristics, 
male sexual behavior, and androgenic anabolic effects, 
including maintenance of muscle function and bone 
mass. Testosterone may be administered by intramuscu-
lar injections every 1–4 weeks or by using skin patches 
that are replaced daily. Testosterone gels are also avail-
able. Gonadotropin injections (hCG or human meno-
pausal gonadotropin [hMG]) over 12–18 months are 
used to restore fertility. Pulsatile GnRH therapy (25–150 
ng/kg every 2 h), administered by a subcutaneous infu-
sion pump, is also effective for treatment of hypotha-
lamic hypogonadism when fertility is desired.
In premenopausal women, cyclical replacement of 
estrogen and progesterone maintains secondary sexual 
characteristics and integrity of genitourinary tract mucosa 
and prevents premature osteoporosis. Gonadotropin 
therapy is used for ovulation induction. Follicular growth 
and maturation are initiated using hMG or recombinant 
FSH; hCG or human luteinizing hormone (hLH) is subse-
quently injected to induce ovulation. As in men, pulsatile 
GnRH therapy can be used to treat hypothalamic causes of 
gonadotropin deficiency.
NONFUNCTIONING AND GONADOTROPIN-
PRODUCING PITUITARY ADENOMAS
Etiology and prevalence
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas include those that 
secrete little or no pituitary hormones as well as tumors 
that produce too little hormone to result in recogniz-
able clinical features. They are the most common type 
of pituitary adenoma and are usually macroadenomas 
at the time of diagnosis because clinical features are 
not apparent until tumor mass effects occur. Based on 
immunohistochemistry, most clinically nonfunctioning 
adenomas can be shown to originate from gonadotrope 
cells. These tumors typically produce small amounts of 
intact gonadotropins (usually FSH) as well as uncom-
bined α, LH β, and FSH β subunits. Tumor secretion 
may lead to elevated α and FSH β subunits and, rarely, 
to increased LH β subunit levels. Some adenomas 
express α subunits without FSH or LH. TRH admin-
istration often induces an atypical increase of tumor-
derived gonadotropins or subunits.
Presentation and diagnosis
Clinically nonfunctioning tumors often present with 
optic chiasm pressure and other symptoms of local 
expansion or may be incidentally discovered on an 
MRI performed for another indication (incidentaloma). 
Rarely, menstrual disturbances or ovarian hyperstimula-
tion occur in women with large tumors that produce 
FSH and LH. More commonly, adenoma compression 
of the pituitary stalk or surrounding pituitary tissue 
leads to attenuated LH and features of hypogonadism. 
PRL levels are usually slightly increased, also because 
of stalk compression. It is important to distinguish this 
circumstance from true prolactinomas, as nonfunction-
ing tumors do not shrink in response to treatment with 
dopamine agonists.
Laboratory investigation
The goal of laboratory testing in clinically nonfunction-
ing tumors is to classify the type of the tumor, identify 
hormonal markers of tumor activity, and detect possible 
hypopituitarism. Free α subunit levels may be elevated 
in 10–15% of patients with nonfunctioning tumors. 
In female patients, peri- or postmenopausal basal FSH 
concentrations are difﬁcult to distinguish from tumor-
derived FSH elevation. Premenopausal women have 
cycling FSH levels, also preventing clear-cut diagnostic 
distinction from tumor-derived FSH. In men, gonad-
otropin-secreting tumors may be diagnosed because of 
slightly increased gonadotropins (FSH > LH) in the set-
ting of a pituitary mass. Testosterone levels are usually 
low despite the normal or increased LH level, perhaps 
reﬂecting reduced LH bioactivity or the loss of nor-
mal LH pulsatility. Because this pattern of hormone 
test results is also seen in primary gonadal failure and, 
to some extent, with aging, the ﬁnding of increased 
gonadotropins alone is insufﬁcient for the diagnosis 
of a gonadotropin-secreting tumor. In the majority of 
patients with gonadotrope adenomas, TRH administra-
tion stimulates LH β subunit secretion; this response is 
not seen in normal individuals. GnRH testing, how-
ever, is not helpful for making the diagnosis. For non-
functioning and gonadotropin-secreting tumors, the 
diagnosis usually rests on immunohistochemical analyses 
of surgically resected tumor tissue, as the mass effects of 
these tumors usually necessitate resection.
Although acromegaly or Cushing’s syndrome usually 
presents with unique clinical features, clinically inappar-
ent (silent) somatotrope or corticotrope adenomas may 
only be diagnosed by immunostaining of resected tumor 
tissue. If PRL levels are <100 μg/L in a patient harbor-
ing a pituitary mass, a nonfunctioning adenoma causing 
pituitary stalk compression should be considered.
TREATMENT 
 Nonfunctioning and Gonadotropin-
Producing Pituitary Adenomas
Asymptomatic small nonfunctioning microadenomas ade-
nomas with no threat to vision may be followed with regu-
lar MRI and visual field testing without immediate inter-
vention. However, for macroadenomas, transsphenoidal 
surgery is indicated to reduce tumor size and relieve mass 
472
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
effects (Fig. 38-11). Although it is not usually possible 
to remove all adenoma tissue surgically, vision improves 
in 70% of patients with preoperative visual field defects. 
Preexisting hypopituitarism that results from tumor mass 
effects may improve or resolve completely. Beginning 
about 6 months postoperatively, MRI scans should be per-
formed yearly to detect tumor regrowth. Within 5–6 years 
after successful surgical resection, ∼15% of nonfunctioning 
tumors recur. When substantial tumor remains after trans-
sphenoidal surgery, adjuvant radiotherapy may be indi-
cated to prevent tumor regrowth. Radiotherapy may be 
deferred if no postoperative residual mass is evident.
Nonfunctioning pituitary tumors respond poorly to 
dopamine agonist treatment and somatostatin ana-
logues are largely ineffective for shrinking these tumors. 
The selective GnRH antagonist Nal-Glu GnRH sup-
presses FSH hypersecretion but has no effect on ade-
noma size.
THYROID-STIMULATING HORMONE
SYNTHESIS AND SECRETION
TSH-secreting thyrotrope cells constitute 5% of the 
anterior pituitary cell population. TSH is structurally 
related to LH and FSH. It shares a common α subunit 
with these hormones but contains a speciﬁc TSH β sub-
unit. TRH is a hypothalamic tripeptide (pyroglutamyl 
FIGURE 38-11 
Management of a nonfunctioning pituitary mass.
Low risk of
  visual loss
Nonfunctioning Pituitary Mass
MANAGEMENT OF A NONFUNCTIONING PITUITARY MASS
Differential diagnosis based on MRI and clinical features
Dynamic pituitary reserve testing
Exclude aneurysm
Follow-up: MRI
MRI
Trophic hormone
  testing and
  replacement
May require
  disease-specific
  therapy
MRI
Trophic hormone
  testing and
  replacement
Surgery
Histologic diagnosis
Other sellar mass (not adenoma)
Microadenoma
Macroadenoma
Observe
Surgery
Nonfunctioning adenoma
histidylprolinamide) that acts through a GPCR to stim-
ulate TSH synthesis and secretion; it also stimulates the 
lactotrope cell to secrete PRL. TSH secretion is stimu-
lated by TRH, whereas thyroid hormones, dopamine, 
somatostatin, and glucocorticoids suppress TSH by 
overriding TRH induction.
Thyrotrope growth and TSH secretion are both 
induced when negative feedback inhibition by thyroid 
hormones is removed. Thus, thyroid damage (including 
surgical thyroidectomy), radiation-induced hypothyroidism, 
chronic thyroiditis, and prolonged goitrogen exposure are 
associated with increased TSH. Long-standing untreated 
hypothyroidism can lead to thyrotrope hyperplasia and 
pituitary enlargement, which may be evident on MRI.
ACTION
TSH is secreted in pulses, though the excursions are 
modest in comparison to other pituitary hormones 
because of the low amplitude of the pulses and the rela-
tively long half-life of TSH. Consequently, single deter-
minations of TSH sufﬁce to assess its circulating levels. 
TSH binds to a GPCR on thyroid follicular cells to stim-
ulate thyroid hormone synthesis and release.
TSH DEFICIENCY
Features of central hypothyroidism due to TSH deﬁ-
ciency mimic those seen with primary hypothyroidism 
but are generally less severe. Pituitary hypothyroidism 
473
 
CHAPTER 38
Neurologic Disorders of the Pituitary and Hypothalamus
is characterized by low basal TSH levels in the set-
ting of low free thyroid hormone. In contrast, patients 
with hypothyroidism of hypothalamic origin (presum-
ably due to a lack of endogenous TRH) may exhibit 
normal or even slightly elevated TSH levels. The TSH 
produced in this circumstance appears to have reduced 
biologic activity because of altered glycosylation.
TRH (200 μg) injected intravenously causes a two- 
to threefold increase in TSH (and PRL) levels within 
30 min. Although TRH testing can be used to assess 
TSH reserve, abnormalities of the thyroid axis usually 
can be detected based on basal free T4 and TSH levels, 
and TRH testing is rarely indicated.
Thyroid-replacement therapy should be initiated 
after adequate adrenal function has been established. 
Dose adjustment is based on thyroid hormone levels 
and clinical parameters rather than the TSH level.
TSH-SECRETING ADENOMAS
TSH-producing macroadenomas are rare but are often 
large and locally invasive when they occur. Patients 
usually present with thyroid goiter and hyperthyroid-
ism, reﬂecting overproduction of TSH. Diagnosis is 
based on demonstrating elevated serum free T4 levels, 
inappropriately normal or high TSH secretion, and 
MRI evidence of a pituitary adenoma.
It is important to exclude other causes of inap-
propriate TSH secretion, such as resistance to thy-
roid hormone, an autosomal dominant disorder caused 
by mutations in the thyroid hormone β receptor. The 
presence of a pituitary mass and elevated α subunit 
levels are suggestive of a TSH-secreting tumor. Dysal-
buminemic hyperthyroxinemia syndromes, caused by 
mutations in serum thyroid hormone binding proteins, 
are also characterized by elevated thyroid hormone lev-
els, but with normal rather than suppressed TSH levels. 
Moreover, free thyroid hormone levels are normal in 
these disorders, most of which are familial.
TREATMENT 
TSH-Secreting Adenomas
The initial therapeutic approach is to remove or debulk 
the tumor mass surgically, usually using a transsphenoi-
dal approach. Total resection is not often achieved as 
most of these adenomas are large and locally invasive. 
Normal circulating thyroid hormone levels are achieved 
in about two-thirds of patients after surgery. Thyroid 
ablation or antithyroid drugs (methimazole and pro-
pylthiouracil) can be used to reduce thyroid hormone 
levels. Somatostatin analogue treatment effectively 
normalizes TSH and α subunit hypersecretion, shrinks 
the tumor mass in 50% of patients, and improves visual 
fields in 75% of patients; euthyroidism is restored in 
most patients. Because somatostatin analogues mark-
edly suppress TSH, biochemical hypothyroidism often 
requires concomitant thyroid hormone replacement, 
which may also further control tumor growth.
 Stephen L. Hauser 
■  Douglas S. Goodin 
474
 Demyelinating disorders are immune-mediated condi-
tions characterized by preferential destruction of central 
nervous system (CNS) myelin. The peripheral nervous 
system (PNS) is spared, and most patients have no evi-
dence of an associated systemic illness. Multiple sclerosis 
(MS), the most common disease in this category, is sec-
ond only to trauma as a cause of neurologic disability 
beginning in early to middle adulthood. 
 MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
 Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease characterized 
by inﬂ ammation, demyelination, gliosis (scarring), and 
neuronal loss; the course can be relapsing-remitting or 
progressive. Lesions of MS typically occur at different 
times and in different CNS locations (i.e., disseminated 
in time and space). MS affects ∼350,000 individuals in 
the United States and 2.5 million individuals world-
wide. Manifestations of MS vary from a benign illness 
to a rapidly evolving and incapacitating disease requir-
ing profound lifestyle adjustments. 
 PATHOGENESIS 
 Anatomy 
 New MS lesions begin with perivenular cufﬁ ng by 
inﬂ ammatory mononuclear cells, predominantly T cells 
and macrophages, which also inﬁ ltrate the surround-
ing white matter. At sites of inﬂ ammation, the blood-
brain barrier (BBB) is disrupted, but unlike vasculitis, 
the vessel wall is preserved. Involvement of the humoral 
immune system is also evident; small numbers of B lym-
phocytes also inﬁ ltrate the nervous system, and myelin-
speciﬁ c autoantibodies are present on degenerating 
myelin sheaths. As lesions evolve, there is prominent 
 MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS AND OTHER 
DEMYELINATING DISEASES 
 CHAPTER 39 
astrocytic proliferation (gliosis). Surviving oligodendro-
cytes or those that differentiate from precursor cells can 
partially remyelinate the surviving naked axons, pro-
ducing so-called shadow plaques. In many lesions, oli-
godendrocyte precursor cells are present in large num-
bers but fail to differentiate and remyelinate. Over time, 
ectopic lymphocyte follicles appear in perivascular and 
perimeningeal regions, consisting of aggregates of T and 
B cells and resembling secondary lymphoid structures. 
Although relative sparing of axons is typical of MS, 
partial or total axonal destruction can also occur, espe-
cially within highly inﬂ ammatory lesions. Thus, MS is 
not solely a disease of myelin, and neuronal pathology 
is increasingly recognized as a major contributor to irre-
versible neurologic disability. Inﬂ ammation and plaque 
formation are present in the cerebral cortex, and sig-
niﬁ cant axon loss indicating death of neurons is wide-
spread, specially in advanced cases (see “Neurodegen-
eration,” later in this chapter). 
 Physiology 
 Nerve conduction in myelinated axons occurs in a sal-
tatory manner, with the nerve impulse jumping from 
one node of Ranvier to the next without depolariza-
tion of the axonal membrane underlying the myelin 
sheath between nodes ( Fig. 39-1 ). This produces con-
siderably faster conduction velocities (∼70 m/s) than 
the slow velocities (∼1 m/s) produced by continuous 
propagation in unmyelinated nerves. Conduction block 
occurs when the nerve impulse is unable to traverse 
the demyelinated segment. This can happen when the 
resting axon membrane becomes hyperpolarized due 
to the exposure of voltage-dependent potassium chan-
nels that are normally buried underneath the myelin 
sheath. A temporary conduction block often follows a 
demyelinating event before sodium channels (originally 
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
475
One proposed explanation for the latitude effect on 
MS is that there is a protective effect of sun exposure. 
Exposure of the skin to ultraviolet-B (UVB) radiation 
from the sun is essential for the biosynthesis of vitamin 
D, and this endogenous production is the most impor-
tant source of vitamin D in most individuals. At high 
latitudes, the amount of UVB radiation reaching the 
earth’s surface is often insufﬁcient, particularly during 
winter months, and, consequently, low serum levels of 
vitamin D are common in temperate zones. Prospec-
tive studies have conﬁrmed that vitamin D deﬁciency 
is associated with an increase in MS risk and prelimi-
nary data also suggest that ongoing deﬁciency may 
increase the relapse rate in established MS. Immunoreg-
ulatory effects of vitamin D could explain this apparent 
relationship.
At least three sequential (population-wide) envi-
ronmental events are implicated in the causal pathway 
leading to MS. The ﬁrst factor seems to occur either in 
utero or in the early postnatal period and is supported, 
in part, by the almost twofold increase in MS risk for 
dizygotic twins of MS probands (5.4%) compared to 
siblings (2.9%). It is also supported by the month-of-
birth effect (in the northern hemisphere), in which 
May babies are signiﬁcantly more likely, and Novem-
ber babies less likely, to develop MS compared to babies 
born in other months. Importantly, a recently published 
population-based study in the southern hemisphere 
(Australia) found a similar (but inverted) month-of-birth 
effect with the zenith in risk occurring for November/
December babies and the nadir occurring for May/June 
babies. This month-of-birth effect provides evidence for 
an early environmental event, involved in MS patho-
genesis, that is both coupled to the solar cycle and time-
locked to birth.
A second factor seems to occur during adolescence. 
Thus, several studies suggest that when individuals move 
(prior to their adolescent years) from an area of high MS 
prevalence to an area of low prevalence (or vice versa), 
their MS risk becomes similar to that of the region to 
which they moved. By contrast, when they make the 
same move after adolescence, their MS risk remains sim-
ilar to that of the region from which they moved.
Because both of these ﬁrst two factors occur well 
before the onset of clinically evident MS, presumably 
other factors are also necessary. In addition, the iden-
tiﬁcation of possible point epidemics suggests a possible 
role for infectious agents, although the only (partially) 
convincing example of this occurred in the Faeroe 
Islands north of Denmark after the British occupation 
during World War II.
The prevalence of MS has increased steadily (and 
dramatically) in several regions around the world over 
the past half-century, presumably reﬂecting the impact 
of some environmental shift. Moreover, the fact that 
concentrated at the nodes) redistribute along the 
naked axon (Fig. 39-1). This redistribution ultimately 
allows continuous propagation of nerve action poten-
tials through the demyelinated segment. Conduction 
block may be incomplete, affecting high- but not low- 
frequency volleys of impulses. Variable conduction 
block can occur with raised body temperature or meta-
bolic alterations and may explain clinical ﬂuctuations that 
vary from hour to hour or appear with fever or exercise. 
Conduction slowing occurs when the demyelinated seg-
ments of the axonal membrane is reorganized to support 
continuous (slow) nerve impulse propagation.
Epidemiology
MS is approximately threefold more common in women 
than men. The age of onset is typically between 20 and 
40 years (slightly later in men than in women), but the 
disease can present across the life span. In ∼10% of cases 
it begins before age 18 years, and in a small percentage, 
it begins before the age of 10 years.
Geographic gradients have been repeatedly observed 
in MS, with the highest known prevalence for MS (250 
per 100,000) in the Orkney Islands, located north of 
Scotland. In other temperate zone areas (e.g., northern 
North America, northern Europe, southern Austra-
lia, and south New Zealand), the prevalence of MS is 
0.1–0.2%. By contrast, in the tropics (e.g., Asia, equato-
rial Africa, and the Middle East), the prevalence is often 
ten- to twentyfold less.
Saltatory nerve impulse
Myelin sheath
Axon
Node of Ranvier
Na+ channels
Continuous nerve impulse
Myelin sheath
Myelin sheath
Axon
Na+ channels
A
B
FIGURE 39-1 
Nerve conduction in myelinated and demyelinated axons. 
A. Saltatory nerve conduction in myelinated axons occurs 
with the nerve impulse jumping from one node of Ran-
vier to the next. Sodium channels (shown as breaks in the 
solid black line) are concentrated at the nodes where axonal 
depolarization occurs. B. Following demyelination, additional 
sodium channels are redistributed along the axon itself, 
thereby allowing continuous propagation of the nerve action 
potential despite the absence of myelin.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
476
to T cells) and speciﬁcally the highly polymorphic 
DRB1 locus, which contributes to MS risk in a allele-
dependent hierarchical fashion, with the strongest asso-
ciation consistently found with the DRB1*15:01 allele; a 
secondary signal that appears to be protective against MS 
is located in the class 1 region near HLA-C. Whole-
genome association studies have now identiﬁed more 
than 50 MS susceptibility genes, each of which has only 
a very small effect on MS risk. DRB1*15:01 increases 
MS risk by approximately threefold in the heterozy-
gous state, and ninefold in the homozygous state; by 
contrast, other MS-associated variants increase risk only 
by 15–30%. Most MS-associated genetic variants have 
known roles in the immune system (i.e., genes for the 
interleukin [IL]-7 receptor [CD127], the IL-2 receptor 
[CD25], and the T cell co-stimulatory molecule LFA-3 
[CD58]); some variants also inﬂuence susceptibility to 
other autoimmune diseases in addition to MS. The vari-
ants identiﬁed thus far all lack speciﬁcity and sensitivity 
for MS; thus they are not useful for diagnosis or to pre-
dict the future course of the disease.
Immunology
Autoreactive T lymphocytes
Myelin basic protein (MBP) is an important T cell anti-
gen in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), 
a laboratory model, and probably also in human MS. 
Activated MBP-reactive T cells have been identiﬁed 
in the blood, in cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), and within 
MS lesions. Moreover, DRB1∗15:01 may inﬂuence the 
autoimmune response because it binds with high afﬁn-
ity to a fragment of MBP (spanning amino acids 89–96), 
stimulating T cell responses to this self-protein. Two 
different populations of proinﬂammatory T cells are 
likely to mediate autoimmunity in MS. T-helper type 
1 (TH1) cells producing interferon γ (IFN-γ) are one 
key effector population, and more recently a role for 
highly proinﬂammatory TH17 T cells has been estab-
lished. TH17 cells are induced by transforming growth 
factor β (TGF-β) and IL-6, and are ampliﬁed by IL-21 
and IL-23. TH17 cells, and levels of their corresponding 
cytokine IL-17, are increased in MS lesions and also in 
the circulation of people with active MS. High circu-
lating levels of IL-17 may also be a marker of a more 
severe course of MS. TH1 cytokines including interleu-
kin (IL) 2, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α, and inter-
feron (IFN) γ also play key roles in activating and main-
taining autoimmune responses, and TNF-α and IFN-γ 
may directly injure oligodendrocytes or the myelin 
membrane.
Humoral autoimmunity
B cell activation and antibody responses also appear to 
be necessary for the full development of demyelinating 
this increase has occurred primarily (or exclusively) in 
women indicates that women are more responsive to 
whatever this environmental change has been. Interest-
ingly, recent epidemiologic data suggest that the latitude 
effect on MS currently may be decreasing. The reason 
for these changes are not known but, potentially, could 
be related to the increased use of sun block, which (at 
SPF-15) blocks 94% of the incoming UVB radiation, 
and which would be expected to exacerbate any pop-
ulation-wide vitamin D deﬁciency and might also miti-
gate the impact of differences in UVB exposure.
MS risk also correlates with high socioeconomic sta-
tus, which may reﬂect improved sanitation and delayed 
initial exposures to infectious agents. By analogy, some 
viral infections (e.g., poliomyelitis and measles viruses) 
produce neurologic sequelae more frequently when the 
age of initial infection is delayed. Evidence of a remote 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection playing some role in 
MS is supported by a number of epidemiologic and lab-
oratory studies. A higher risk of infectious mononucle-
osis (associated with relatively late EBV infection) and 
higher antibody titers to latency-associated EBV nuclear 
antigen are associated with MS. At this time, however, 
a causal role for EBV is not deﬁnitively established.
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Whites are inherently at higher risk for MS than 
Africans or Asians, even when residing in a simi-
lar environment. MS also aggregates within some 
families, and adoption, half-sibling, twin, and spou-
sal studies indicate that familial aggregation is due to 
genetic, and not environmental, factors (Table 39-1).
Whites to MS is polygenic, with each gene con-
tributing a relatively small amount to the overall risk. 
Despite this, the inﬂuence of genetics on MS pathogen-
esis is substantial. The major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) on chromosome 6 is by far the strongest 
MS susceptibility region in the genome. Fine mapping 
studies implicate primarily the class II region (encoding 
HLA molecules involved in presenting peptide antigens 
TABLE 39-1
RISK OF DEVELOPING MS
1 in 3
If an identical twin has MS
1 in 15
If a fraternal twin has MS
1 in 25
If a sibling has MS
1 in 50
If a parent or half-sibling has MS
1 in 100
If a ﬁrst cousin has MS
1 in 1000
If a spouse has MS
1 in 1000
If no one in the family has MS
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
477
injury through the release of NO and oxygen radicals 
and via glutamate, which is toxic to oligodendrocytes 
and neurons. Interestingly, NMDA (glutamate) recep-
tors are expressed on naked axon membranes that have 
undergone demyelination, perhaps providing a mecha-
nism for glutamate-mediated calcium entry and cell 
death.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The onset of MS may be abrupt or insidious. Symptoms 
may be severe or seem so trivial that a patient may not 
seek medical attention for months or years. Indeed, at 
autopsy, approximately 0.1% of individuals who were 
asymptomatic during life will be found, unexpect-
edly, to have pathologic evidence of MS. Similarly, in 
the modern era, an MRI scan obtained for an unre-
lated reason may show evidence of asymptomatic MS. 
Symptoms of MS are extremely varied and depend on 
the location and severity of lesions within the CNS 
(Table 39-2). Examination often reveals evidence of 
neurologic dysfunction, often in asymptomatic locations. 
For example, a patient may present with symptoms in 
one leg but signs in both.
Weakness of the limbs may manifest as loss of strength, 
speed, or dexterity, as fatigue, or a disturbance of gait. 
Exercise-induced weakness is a characteristic symp-
tom of MS. The weakness is of the upper motor neu-
ron type (Chap. 12) and is usually accompanied by 
other pyramidal signs such as spasticity, hyperreﬂexia, 
and Babinski’s signs. Occasionally a tendon reﬂex may 
be lost (simulating a lower motor neuron lesion) if an 
MS lesion disrupts the afferent reﬂex ﬁbers in the spinal 
cord (Fig.  12-2).
lesions to occur, both in experimental models and in 
human MS. Increased numbers of clonally expanded 
B cells with properties of postgerminal center memory 
or antibody-producing lymphocytes are present in MS 
lesions and in CSF. Myelin-speciﬁc autoantibodies, 
some directed against myelin oligodendrocyte glyco-
protein (MOG), have been detected bound to vesicu-
lated myelin debris in MS plaques. In the CSF, elevated 
levels of locally synthesized immunoglobulins and oli-
goclonal antibodies derived from expansion of clonally 
restricted plasma cells are also characteristic of MS. The 
pattern of oligoclonal banding is unique to each indi-
vidual, and attempts to identify the targets of these anti-
bodies have been largely unsuccessful.
Triggers
Serial MRI studies in early relapsing-remitting MS 
reveal that bursts of focal inﬂammatory disease activity 
occur far more frequently than would have been pre-
dicted by the frequency of relapses. Thus, early in MS 
most disease activity is clinically silent. The triggers 
causing these bursts are unknown, although the fact 
that patients may experience relapses after nonspeciﬁc 
upper respiratory infections suggests that either molec-
ular mimicry between viruses and myelin antigens or 
viral super-antigens activating pathogenic T cells may 
be responsible.
Neurodegeneration
Axonal damage occurs in every newly formed MS 
lesion, and cumulative axonal loss is considered to be 
the major cause of progressive and irreversible neuro-
logic disability in MS. As many as 70% of axons are 
lost from the lateral corticospinal (e.g., motor) tracts in 
patients with advanced paraparesis from MS, and lon-
gitudinal MRI studies suggest there is progressive axo-
nal loss over time within established, inactive lesions. 
Knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for axonal 
injury is incomplete and, despite the fact that axonal 
transactions are most conspicuous in acute inﬂamma-
tory lesions, it is still unclear whether demyelination is 
a prerequisite for axonal injury in MS. Demyelination 
can result in reduced trophic support for axons, redis-
tribution of ion channels, and destabilization of action 
potential membrane potentials. Axons can adapt initially 
to these injuries; with time distal and retrograde degen-
eration often occurs. Therefore, promotion of remy-
elination and preservation of oligodendrocytes early in 
the disease course remain important therapeutic goals 
in MS. Some evidence suggests that axonal damage is 
mediated directly by resident and invading inﬂam-
matory cells and their toxic products, in particular by 
microglia, macrophages, and CD8 T lymphocytes. Acti-
vated microglia are particularly likely to cause axonal 
TABLE 39-2
INITIAL SYMPTOMS OF MS
SYMPTOM
PERCENT 
OF CASES
SYMPTOM
PERCENT 
OF CASES
Sensory loss
37
Lhermitte’s
3
Optic neuritis
36
Pain
3
Weakness
35
Dementia
2
Paresthesias
24
Visual loss
2
Diplopia
15
Facial palsy
1
Ataxia
11
Impotence
1
Vertigo
6
Myokymia
1
Paroxysmal 
attacks
4
Epilepsy
1
Bladder
4
Falling
1
Source: After WB Matthews et al: McAlpine’s Multiple Sclerosis, 
New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1991.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
478
Bladder dysfunction is present in >90% of MS 
patients, and in a third of patients, dysfunction results 
in weekly or more frequent episodes of incontinence. 
During normal reﬂex voiding, relaxation of the blad-
der sphincter (α-adrenergic innervation) is coordi-
nated with contraction of the detrusor muscle in the 
bladder wall (muscarinic cholinergic innervation). 
Detrusor hyperreﬂexia, due to impairment of supraseg-
mental inhibition, causes urinary frequency, urgency, 
nocturia, and uncontrolled bladder emptying. Detru-
sor sphincter dyssynergia, due to loss of synchronization 
between detrusor and sphincter muscles, causes difﬁ-
culty in initiating and/or stopping the urinary stream, 
producing hesitancy, urinary retention, overﬂow incon-
tinence, and recurrent infection.
Constipation occurs in >30% of patients. Fecal urgency 
or bowel incontinence is less common (15%) but can be 
socially debilitating.
Cognitive dysfunction can include memory loss, impaired 
attention, difﬁculties in executive functioning, memory, 
problem solving, slowed information processing, and 
problems shifting between cognitive tasks. Euphoria 
(elevated mood) was once thought to be characteristic 
of MS but is actually uncommon, occurring in <20% of 
patients. Cognitive dysfunction sufﬁcient to impair activ-
ities of daily living is rare.
Depression, experienced by approximately half of patients, 
can be reactive, endogenous, or part of the illness itself, 
and can contribute to fatigue. Fatigue is experienced by 
90% of patients; this symptom is the most common rea-
son for work-related disability in MS. Fatigue can be 
exacerbated by elevated temperatures, by depression, by 
expending exceptional effort to accomplish basic activities 
of daily living, or by sleep disturbances (e.g., from frequent 
nocturnal awakenings to urinate).
Sexual dysfunction may manifest as decreased libido, 
impaired genital sensation, impotence in men, and dimin-
ished vaginal lubrication or adductor spasms in women.
Facial weakness due to a lesion in the pons may resem-
ble idiopathic Bell’s palsy (Chap. 34). Unlike Bell’s palsy, 
facial weakness in MS is usually not associated with ipsi-
lateral loss of taste sensation or retroauricular pain.
Vertigo may appear suddenly from a brainstem lesion, 
superﬁcially resembling acute labyrinthitis (Chap. 11). 
Hearing loss may also occur in MS but is uncommon.
Ancillary symptoms
Heat sensitivity refers to neurologic symptoms produced 
by an elevation of the body’s core temperature. For 
example, unilateral visual blurring may occur during a 
hot shower or with physical exercise (Uhthoff’s symptom). 
It is also common for MS symptoms to worsen tran-
siently, sometimes dramatically, during febrile illnesses 
Spasticity (Chap. 12) is commonly associated with 
spontaneous and movement-induced muscle spasms. 
More than 30% of MS patients have moderate to severe 
spasticity, especially in the legs. This is often accom-
panied by painful spasms interfering with ambulation, 
work, or self-care. Occasionally spasticity provides sup-
port for the body weight during ambulation, and in 
these cases treatment of spasticity may actually do more 
harm than good.
Optic neuritis (ON) presents as diminished visual acu-
ity, dimness, or decreased color perception (desatura-
tion) in the central ﬁeld of vision. These symptoms can 
be mild or may progress to severe visual loss. Rarely, 
there is complete loss of light perception. Visual symp-
toms are generally monocular but may be bilateral. 
Periorbital pain (aggravated by eye movement) often 
precedes or accompanies the visual loss. An afferent 
pupillary defect (Chap. 21) is usually present. Fundu-
scopic examination may be normal or reveal optic disc 
swelling (papillitis). Pallor of the optic disc (optic atro-
phy) commonly follows ON. Uveitis is uncommon and 
should raise the possibility of alternative diagnoses such 
as sarcoid or lymphoma.
Visual blurring in MS may result from ON or diplo-
pia (double vision); if the symptom resolves when either 
eye is covered, the cause is diplopia.
Diplopia may result from internuclear ophthalmople-
gia (INO) or from palsy of the sixth cranial nerve (rarely 
the third or fourth). An INO consists of impaired 
adduction of one eye due to a lesion in the ipsilateral 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (Chap. 21). Prominent 
nystagmus is often observed in the abducting eye, along 
with a small skew deviation. A bilateral INO is partic-
ularly suggestive of MS. Other common gaze distur-
bances in MS include (1) a horizontal gaze palsy, (2) a 
“one and a half” syndrome (horizontal gaze palsy plus 
an INO), and (3) acquired pendular nystagmus.
Sensory symptoms are varied and include both pares-
thesias (e.g., tingling, prickling sensations, formications, 
“pins and needles,” or painful burning) and hypesthesia 
(e.g., reduced sensation, numbness, or a “dead” feeling). 
Unpleasant sensations (e.g., feelings that body parts are 
swollen, wet, raw, or tightly wrapped) are also common. 
Sensory impairment of the trunk and legs below a hori-
zontal line on the torso (a sensory level) indicates that 
the spinal cord is the origin of the sensory disturbance. It 
is often accompanied by a bandlike sensation of tightness 
around the torso. Pain is a common symptom of MS, 
experienced by >50% of patients. Pain can occur any-
where on the body and can change locations over time.
Ataxia usually manifests as cerebellar tremors (Chap. 31). 
Ataxia may also involve the head and trunk or the voice, 
producing a characteristic cerebellar dysarthria (scanning 
speech).
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
479
1. Secondary progressive MS (SPMS) always begins as 
RRMS (Fig. 39-2B). At some point, however, the 
clinical course changes so that the patient experiences 
a steady deterioration in function unassociated with 
acute attacks (which may continue or cease during 
the progressive phase). SPMS produces a greater 
amount of ﬁxed neurologic disability than RRMS. 
For a patient with RRMS, the risk of develop-
ing SPMS is ∼2% each year, meaning that the great 
majority of RRMS ultimately evolves into SPMS. 
SPMS appears to represent a late stage of the same 
underlying illness as RRMS.
1. Primary progressive MS (PPMS) accounts for ∼15% of 
cases. These patients do not experience attacks but 
only a steady functional decline from disease onset 
(Fig. 39-2C). Compared to RRMS, the sex distri-
bution is more even, the disease begins later in life 
(mean age ∼40 years), and disability develops faster 
(at least relative to the onset of the ﬁrst clinical 
symptom). Despite these differences, PPMS appears 
to represent the same underlying illness as RRMS.
2. Progressive/relapsing MS (PRMS) overlaps PPMS and 
SPMS and accounts for ∼5% of MS patients. Like 
patients with PPMS, these patients experience a 
steady deterioration in their condition from disease 
onset. However, like SPMS patients, they experi-
ence occasional attacks superimposed upon their 
progressive course (Fig. 39-2D).
(see “Acute Attacks or Initial Demyelinating Episodes,” 
later). Such heat-related symptoms probably result from 
transient conduction block (discussed earlier).
Lhermitte’s symptom is an electric shock–like sensation 
(typically induced by ﬂexion or other movements of the 
neck) that radiates down the back into the legs. Rarely, 
it radiates into the arms. It is generally self-limited but 
may persist for years. Lhermitte’s symptom can also 
occur with other disorders of the cervical spinal cord 
(e.g., cervical spondylosis).
Paroxysmal symptoms are distinguished by their brief 
duration (10 s to 2 min), high frequency (5–40 epi-
sodes per day), lack of any alteration of consciousness 
or change in background electroencephalogram dur-
ing episodes, and a self-limited course (generally last-
ing weeks to months). They may be precipitated by 
hyperventilation or movement. These syndromes may 
include Lhermitte’s symptom; tonic contractions of a 
limb, face, or trunk (tonic seizures); paroxysmal dysar-
thria and ataxia; paroxysmal sensory disturbances; and 
several other less well characterized syndromes. Parox-
ysmal symptoms probably result from spontaneous dis-
charges, arising at the edges of demyelinated plaques 
and spreading to adjacent white matter tracts.
Trigeminal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyn-
geal neuralgia (Chap. 34) can occur when the demyelin-
ating lesion involves the root entry (or exit) zone of the 
ﬁfth, seventh, and ninth cranial nerve, respectively. Tri-
geminal neuralgia (tic douloureux) is a very brief lan-
cinating facial pain often triggered by an afferent input 
from the face or teeth. Most cases of trigeminal neural-
gia are not MS related; however, atypical features such 
as onset before age 50 years, bilateral symptoms, objec-
tive sensory loss, or nonparoxysmal pain should raise 
concerns that MS could be responsible.
Facial myokymia consists of either persistent rapid 
ﬂickering contractions of the facial musculature (espe-
cially the lower portion of the orbicularis oculi) or a 
contraction that slowly spreads across the face. It results 
from lesions of the corticobulbar tracts or brainstem 
course of the facial nerve.
DISEASE COURSE
Four clinical types of MS have been described (Fig. 39-2):
1. Relapsing/remitting MS (RRMS) accounts for 85% 
of MS cases at onset and is characterized by discrete 
attacks that generally evolve over days to weeks 
(rarely over hours). There is often complete recov-
ery over the ensuing weeks to months (Fig. 39-2A). 
However, when ambulation is severely impaired dur-
ing an attack, approximately half will fail to improve. 
Between attacks, patients are neurologically stable.
A
Disability
Time
RRMS
C
Disability
Time
PPMS
B
Disability
Time
SPMS
D
Disability
Time
PRMS
FIGURE 39-2 
Clinical course of multiple sclerosis (MS). A. Relapsing/
remitting MS. B. Secondary progressive MS. C. Primary pro-
gressive MS. D. Progressive/relapsing MS.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
480
neurologic examination. The second may be docu-
mented by abnormal paraclinical tests such as MRI or 
evoked potentials (EPs). Similarly, in the most recent 
diagnostic scheme, the second clinical event (in time) 
may be supported solely by paraclinical information, 
usually the development of new focal white matter 
lesions on MRI. In patients who experience gradual 
progression of disability for ≥6 months without super-
imposed relapses, documentation of intrathecal IgG syn-
thesis may be used to support the diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
There is no deﬁnitive diagnostic test for MS. Diagnos-
tic criteria for clinically deﬁnite MS require documenta-
tion of two or more episodes of symptoms and two or 
more signs that reﬂect pathology in anatomically noncon-
tiguous white matter tracts of the CNS (Table 39-3). 
Symptoms must last for >24 h and occur as distinct 
episodes that are separated by a month or more. At 
least one of the two required signs must be present on 
TABLE 39-3
 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR MS
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
ADDITIONAL DATA NEEDED FOR MS DIAGNOSIS
2 or more attacks; objective 
clinical evidence of 2 or more 
lesions or objective clinical 
evidence of 1 lesion with rea-
sonable historical evidence of a 
prior attack
None
2 or more attacks; objective 
clinical evidence of 1 lesion
Dissemination in space, demonstrated by
• ≥1 T2 lesion on MRI in at least two out of four MS-typical regions of the CNS 
(periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial, or spinal cord)
OR
• Await a further clinical attack implicating a different CNS site
1 attack; objective clinical  
evidence of 2 or more lesions
Dissemination in time, demonstrated by
• Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic gadolinium-enhancing and nonenhancing 
lesions at any time
OR
• A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing lesion(s) on follow-up MRI, irrespective of its  
timing with reference to a baseline scan
OR
• Await a second clinical attack
1 attack; objective clinical  
evidence of 1 lesion (clinically 
isolated syndrome)
Dissemination in space and time, demonstrated by:
For dissemination in space
• ≥1 T2 lesion in at least two out of four MS-typical regions of the CNS (periventricular, 
juxtacortical, infratentorial, or spinal cord)
OR
• Await a second clinical attack implicating a different CNS site
AND
For dissemination in time
• Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic gadolinium-enhancing and nonenhancing 
lesions at any time
OR
• A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing lesion(s) on follow-up MRI, irrespective of its timing 
with reference to a baseline scan
OR
• Await a second clinical attack
Insidious neurologic progression  
suggestive of MS (PPMS)
One year of disease progression (retrospectively or prospectively determined)
PLUS
Two out of the three following criteria
Evidence for dissemination in space in the brain based on ≥1 T2+ lesions in the MS-
characteristic periventricular, juxtacortical, or infratentorial regions
Evidence for dissemination in space in the spinal cord based on ≥2 T2+ lesions in the cord
Positive CSF (isoelectric focusing evidence of oligoclonal bands and/or elevated IgG index)
Source: From CH Polman et al: Ann Neurol 69:292, 2011.
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
481
early in the development of an MS lesion and serves as a 
useful marker of inﬂammation. Gd enhancement persists 
for approximately 1 month, and the residual MS plaque 
remains visible indeﬁnitely as a focal area of hyperinten-
sity (a lesion) on spin-echo (T2-weighted) and proton-
density images. Lesions are frequently oriented perpen-
dicular to the ventricular surface, corresponding to the 
pathologic pattern of perivenous demyelination (Daw-
son’s ﬁngers). Lesions are multifocal within the brain, 
brainstem, and spinal cord. Lesions larger than 6 mm 
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI has revolutionized the diagnosis and manage-
ment of MS (Fig. 39-3); characteristic abnormalities 
are found in >95% of patients, although more than 90% 
of the lesions visualized by MRI are asymptomatic. An 
increase in vascular permeability from a breakdown of 
the BBB is detected by leakage of intravenous gado-
linium (Gd) into the parenchyma. Such leakage occurs 
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 39- 3 
MRI ﬁndings in MS. A. Axial ﬁrst-echo image from 
T2-weighted sequence demonstrates multiple bright sig-
nal abnormalities in white matter, typical for MS. B. Sagit-
tal T2-weighted FLAIR (ﬂuid attenuated inversion recovery) 
image in which the high signal of CSF has been suppressed. 
CSF appears dark, while areas of brain edema or demy-
elination appear high in signal as shown here in the corpus 
callosum (arrows). Lesions in the anterior corpus callosum 
are frequent in MS and rare in vascular disease. C. Sagittal 
T2-weighted fast spin echo image of the thoracic spine dem-
onstrates a fusiform high-signal-intensity lesion in the mid-
thoracic spinal cord. D. Sagittal T1-weighted image obtained 
after the intravenous administration of gadolinium DTPA 
reveals focal areas of blood-brain barrier disruption, identi-
ﬁed as high-signal-intensity regions (arrows).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
482
The measurement of oligoclonal banding (OCB) in the 
CSF also assesses intrathecal production of IgG. OCBs 
are detected by agarose gel electrophoresis. Two or more 
OCBs are found in 75–90% of patients with MS. OCBs 
may be absent at the onset of MS, and in individual 
patients the number of bands may increase with time. 
It is important that paired serum samples be studied to 
exclude a peripheral (i.e., non-CNS) origin of any OCBs 
detected in the CSF.
A mild CSF pleocytosis (>5 cells/μL) is present in 
∼25% of cases, usually in young patients with RRMS. 
A pleocytosis of >75 cells/μL, the presence of polymor-
phonuclear leukocytes, or a protein concentration >1 
g/L (>100 mg/dL) in CSF should raise concern that the 
patient may not have MS.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
No single clinical sign or test is diagnostic of MS. The 
diagnosis is readily made in a young adult with relaps-
ing and remitting symptoms involving different areas 
of CNS white matter. The possibility of an alternative 
diagnosis should always be considered (Table 39-4), 
located in the corpus callosum, periventricular white 
matter, brainstem, cerebellum, or spinal cord are par-
ticularly helpful diagnostically. Different criteria for the 
use of MRI in the diagnosis of MS have been proposed 
(Table 39-3).
The total volume of T2-weighted signal abnormal-
ity (the “burden of disease”) shows a signiﬁcant (albeit 
weak) correlation with clinical disability, as do mea-
sures of brain atrophy. Approximately one-third of 
T2-weighted lesions appear as hypointense lesions 
(black holes) on T1-weighted imaging. Black holes may 
be a marker of irreversible demyelination and axonal 
loss, although even this measure depends on the timing 
of the image acquisition (e.g., most acute Gd-enhancing 
T2 lesions are T1 dark).
Newer MRI measures such as magnetization transfer 
ratio (MTR) imaging, and proton magnetic resonance 
spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) may ultimately serve as 
surrogate markers of clinical disability. MRSI can quan-
titate molecules such as N-acetyl aspartate, which is a 
marker of axonal integrity, and MTR may be able to 
distinguish demyelination from edema.
Evoked potentials
EP testing assesses function in afferent (visual, auditory, 
and somatosensory) or efferent (motor) CNS pathways. 
EPs use computer averaging to measure CNS electric 
potentials evoked by repetitive stimulation of selected 
peripheral nerves or of the brain. These tests provide 
the most information when the pathways studied are 
clinically uninvolved. For example, in a patient with a 
remitting and relapsing spinal cord syndrome with sen-
sory deﬁcits in the legs, an abnormal somatosensory EP 
following posterior tibial nerve stimulation provides lit-
tle new information. By contrast, an abnormal visual EP 
in this circumstance would permit a diagnosis of clini-
cally deﬁnite MS (Table 39-3). Abnormalities on one or 
more EP modalities occur in 80–90% of MS patients. 
EP abnormalities are not speciﬁc to MS, although a 
marked delay in the latency of a speciﬁc EP component 
(as opposed to a reduced amplitude or distorted wave-
shape) is suggestive of demyelination.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid
CSF abnormalities found in MS include a mononuclear 
cell pleocytosis and an increased level of intrathecally syn-
thesized IgG. The total CSF protein is usually normal or 
slightly elevated. Various formulas distinguish intrathe-
cally synthesized IgG from IgG that may have entered 
the CNS passively from the serum. One formula, the 
CSF IgG index, expresses the ratio of IgG to albumin 
in the CSF divided by the same ratio in the serum. The 
IgG synthesis rate uses serum and CSF IgG and albumin 
measurements to calculate the rate of CNS IgG synthesis. 
TABLE 39-4
 DISORDERS THAT CAN MIMIC MS
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Behçet’s disease
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy, subcortical 
infarcts, and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
Congenital leukodystrophies (e.g., adrenoleukodystrophy, 
metachromatic leukodystrophy)
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection
Ischemic optic neuropathy (arteritic and nonarteritic)
Lyme disease
Mitochondrial encephalopathy with lactic acidosis and 
stroke (MELAS)
Neoplasms (e.g., lymphoma, glioma, meningioma)
Sarcoid
Sjögren’s syndrome
Stroke and ischemic cerebrovascular disease
Syphilis
Systemic lupus erythematosus and related collagen  
vascular disorders
Tropical spastic paraparesis (HTLV I/II infection)
Vascular malformations (especially spinal dural AV ﬁstulas)
Vasculitis (primary CNS or other)
Vitamin B12 deﬁciency
Abbreviations: AV, arteriovenous; CNS, central nervous system; 
HTLV, human T cell lymphotropic virus.
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
483
20 years is ∼80%. Conversely, with a normal brain MRI, 
the likelihood of developing MS is <20%. Similarly, 
two or more Gd-enhancing lesions at baseline is highly 
predictive of future MS, as is the appearance of either 
new T2-weighted lesions or new Gd enhancement 
≥3 months after the initial episode.
Mortality as a direct consequence of MS is uncom-
mon, although it has been estimated that the 25-year 
survival is only 85% of expected. Death can occur dur-
ing an acute MS attack, although this is distinctly rare. 
More commonly, death occurs as a complication of MS 
(e.g., pneumonia in a debilitated individual). Death can 
also result from suicide.
Effect of pregnancy
Pregnant MS patients experience fewer attacks than 
expected during gestation (especially in the last trimes-
ter), but more attacks than expected in the ﬁrst 3 months 
postpartum. When considering the pregnancy year as a 
whole (i.e., 9 months pregnancy plus 3 months postpar-
tum), the overall disease course is unaffected. Decisions 
about childbearing should thus be made based on (1) 
the mother’s physical state, (2) her ability to care for the 
child, and (3) the availability of social support. Disease-
modifying therapy is generally discontinued during preg-
nancy, although the actual risk from the interferons and 
glatiramer acetate (discussed later) appears to be low.
TREATMENT 
 Multiple Sclerosis
Therapy for MS can be divided into several categories: 
(1) treatment of acute attacks, (2) treatment with dis-
ease-modifying agents that reduce the biological activ-
ity of MS, and (3) symptomatic therapy. Treatments that 
promote remyelination or neural repair do not currently 
exist but would be highly desirable.
The Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) is a use-
ful measure of neurologic impairment in MS (Table 39-5). 
Most patients with EDSS scores <3.5 have RRMS, walk nor-
mally, and are generally not disabled; by contrast, patients 
with EDSS scores >5.5 have progressive MS (SPMS or 
PPMS), are gait-impaired, and, typically, are occupation-
ally disabled.
ACUTE ATTACKS OR INITIAL DEMYELINAT-
ING EPISODES When patients experience acute 
deterioration, it is important to consider whether this 
change reflects new disease activity or a “pseudoex-
acerbation” resulting from an increase in ambient tem-
perature, fever, or an infection. When the clinical change 
is thought to reflect a pseudoexacerbation, glucocor-
ticoid treatment is inappropriate. Glucocorticoids are  
used to manage either first attacks or acute exacerbations. 
particularly when (1) symptoms are localized exclu-
sively to the posterior fossa, craniocervical junction, or 
spinal cord; (2) the patient is aged <15 or >60 years; 
(3) the clinical course is progressive from onset; (4) the 
patient has never experienced visual, sensory, or blad-
der symptoms; or (5) laboratory ﬁndings (e.g., MRI, 
CSF, or EPs) are atypical. Similarly, uncommon or rare 
symptoms in MS (e.g., aphasia, parkinsonism, chorea, 
isolated dementia, severe muscular atrophy, periph-
eral neuropathy, episodic loss of consciousness, fever, 
headache, seizures, or coma) should increase concern 
about an alternative diagnosis. Diagnosis is also difﬁ-
cult in patients with a rapid or explosive (stroke-like) 
onset or with mild symptoms and a normal neurologic 
examination. Rarely, intense inﬂammation and swell-
ing may produce a mass lesion that mimics a primary or 
metastatic tumor. The speciﬁc tests required to exclude 
alternative diagnoses will vary with each clinical situa-
tion; however, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum 
B12 level, ANA, and treponemal antibody should prob-
ably be obtained in all patients with suspected MS.
PROGNOSIS
Most patients with clinically evident MS ultimately 
experience progressive neurologic disability. In older 
studies, 15 years after onset, only 20% of patients had 
no functional limitation, and between one-third and 
one-half progressed to SPMS and required assistance 
with ambulation; furthermore, 25 years after onset, 
∼80% of MS patients reached this level of disability. For 
unclear reasons, the long-term prognosis for untreated 
MS appears to have improved in recent years. In addi-
tion, the development of disease-modifying therapies 
for MS also appears to have favorably improved the 
long-term outlook. Although the prognosis in an indi-
vidual is difﬁcult to establish, certain clinical features 
suggest a more favorable prognosis. These include ON 
or sensory symptoms at onset, fewer than two relapses 
in the ﬁrst year of illness, and minimal impairment after 
5 years. By contrast, patients with truncal ataxia, action 
tremor, pyramidal symptoms, or a progressive disease 
course are more likely to become disabled. Patients 
with a long-term favorable course are likely to have 
developed fewer MRI lesions during the early years of 
disease, and vice versa. Importantly, some MS patients 
have a benign variant of MS and never develop neuro-
logic disability. The likelihood of having benign MS is 
thought to be <20%. Patients with benign MS 15 years 
after onset who have entirely normal neurologic exami-
nations are likely to maintain their benign course.
In patients with their ﬁrst demyelinating event (i.e., 
a clinically isolated syndrome), the brain MRI provides 
prognostic information. With three or more typical 
T2-weighted lesions, the risk of developing MS after 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
484
TABLE 39-5
SCORING SYSTEMS FOR MS
Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS)
0.0 = Normal neurologic exam (all grade 0 in functional status [FS])
1.0 = No disability, minimal signs in one FS (i.e., grade 1)
1.5 =  No disability, minimal signs in more than one FS (more 
than one grade 1)
2.0 = Minimal disability in one FS (one FS grade 2, others 0 or 1)
2.5 = Minimal disability in two FS (two FS grade 2, others 0 or 1)
3.0 =  Moderate disability in one FS (one FS grade 3, others 0 or 1) 
or mild disability in three or four FS (three/four FS grade 2, 
others 0 or 1) though fully ambulatory
3.5 =  Fully ambulatory but with moderate disability in one FS 
(one grade 3) and one or two FS grade 2; or two FS grade 3; 
or ﬁve FS grade 2 (others 0 or 1)
4.0 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ∼500 m
4.5 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ∼300 m
5.0 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ∼200 m
5.5 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ∼100 m
6.0 =  Unilateral assistance required to walk about 100 m with or 
without resting
6.5 =  Constant bilateral assistance required to walk about 
20 m without resting
7.0 =  Unable to walk beyond about 5 m even with aid; 
essentially restricted to wheelchair; wheels self and 
transfers alone
7.5 =  Unable to take more than a few steps; restricted to 
wheelchair; may need aid to transfer
8.0 =  Essentially restricted to bed or chair or perambulated 
in wheelchair, but out of bed most of day; retains many 
self-care functions; generally has effective use of arms
8.5 =  Essentially restricted to bed much of the day; has some 
effective use of arm(s); retains some self-care functions
9.0 = Helpless bed patient; can communicate and eat
9.5 =  Totally helpless bed patient; unable to communicate 
or eat
10.0 = Death due to MS
Functional Status (FS) Score
A. Pyramidal functions
  0 = Normal
  1 = Abnormal signs without disability
  2 = Minimal disability
  3 =  Mild or moderate paraparesis or hemiparesis, or severe 
monoparesis
  4 =  Marked paraparesis or hemiparesis, moderate quadripa-
resis, or monoplegia
  5 = Paraplegia, hemiplegia, or marked quadriparesis
  6 = Quadriplegia
B. Cerebellar functions
  0 = Normal
  1 = Abnormal signs without disability
  2 = Mild ataxia
  3 = Moderate truncal or limb ataxia
  4 = Severe ataxia all limbs
  5 = Unable to perform coordinated movements due to ataxia
C. Brainstem functions
  0 = Normal
  1 = Signs only
  2 = Moderate nystagmus or other mild disability
  3 =  Severe nystagmus, marked extraocular weakness, 
or moderate disability of other cranial nerves
  4 = Marked dysarthria or other marked disability
  5 = Inability to swallow or speak
D. Sensory functions
  0 = Normal
  1 = Vibration or ﬁgure-writing decrease only, in 1 or 2 limbs
  2 =  Mild decrease in touch or pain or position sense, and/or 
moderate decrease in vibration in 1 or 2 limbs, or vibra-
tory decrease alone in 3 or 4 limbs
  3 =  Moderate decrease in touch or pain or position sense, 
and/or essentially lost vibration in 1 or 2 limbs, or mild 
decrease in touch or pain, and/or moderate decrease in all 
proprioceptive tests in 3 or 4 limbs
  4 =  Marked decrease in touch or pain or loss of propriocep-
tion, alone or combined, in 1 or 2 limbs or moderate 
decrease in touch or pain and/or severe proprioceptive 
decrease in more than 2 limbs
  5 =  Loss (essentially) of sensation in 1 or 2 limbs or mod-
erate decrease in touch or pain and/or loss of pro-
prioception for most of the body below the head
  6 = Sensation essentially lost below the head
E. Bowel and bladder functions
  0 = Normal
  1 = Mild urinary hesitancy, urgency, or retention
  2 =  Moderate hesitancy, urgency, retention of bowel or 
bladder, or rare urinary incontinence
  3 = Frequent urinary incontinence
  4 = In need of almost constant catheterization
  5 = Loss of bladder function
  6 = Loss of bowel and bladder function
F. Visual (or optic) functions
  0 = Normal
  1 =  Scotoma with visual acuity (corrected) better than 
20/30
  2 =  Worse eye with scotoma with maximal visual acuity 
(corrected) of 20/30 to 20/59
  3 =  Worse eye with large scotoma, or moderate decrease 
in ﬁelds, but with maximal visual acuity (corrected) of 
20/60 to 20/99
  4 =  Worse eye with marked decrease of ﬁelds and maxi-
mal acuity (corrected) of 20/100 to 20/200; grade 3 
plus maximal acuity of better eye of 20/60 or less
  5 =  Worse eye with maximal visual acuity (corrected) less 
than 20/200; grade 4 plus maximal acuity of better 
eye of 20/60 or less
  6 =  Grade 5 plus maximal visual acuity of better eye of 
20/60 or less
G. Cerebral (or mental) functions
  0 = Normal
  1 = Mood alteration only (does not affect EDSS score)
  2 = Mild decrease in mentation
  3 = Moderate decrease in mentation
  4 = Marked decrease in mentation
  5 = Chronic brain syndrome—severe or incompetent
Source: After JF Kurtzke: Neurology 33:1444, 1983.
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
485
because of its potential toxicity it is generally reserved 
for patients with progressive disability who have failed 
other treatments. When considering the data in Table 
39-6, however, it is important to note that the relative 
efficacy of the different agents cannot be determined 
by cross-trial comparisons. Relative efficacy can only be 
determined from a non-biased head-to-head clinical 
trial.
Interferon-a IFN-β is a class I interferon originally 
identified by its antiviral properties. Efficacy in MS prob-
ably results from immunomodulatory properties, includ-
ing (1) downregulating expression of MHC molecules on 
antigen-presenting cells, (2) inhibiting proinflammatory 
and increasing regulatory cytokine levels, (3) inhibition 
of T cell proliferation, and (4) limiting the trafficking of 
inflammatory cells in the CNS. IFN-β reduces the attack 
rate and improves disease severity measures such as  
EDSS progression and MRI-documented disease burden. 
IFN-β should be considered in patients with either 
RRMS or SPMS with superimposed relapses. In patients 
with SPMS but without relapses, efficacy has not been 
established. Head-to-head trials suggest that higher 
IFN-β doses have slightly greater efficacy but are also 
more likely to induce neutralizing antibodies, which may 
reduce the clinical benefit (discussed later). IFN-β-1a 
(Avonex), 30 μg, is administered by intramuscular injec-
tion once every week. IFN-β-1a (Rebif), 44 μg, is admin-
istered by subcutaneous injection three times per week. 
IFN-β-1b (Betaseron), 250 μg, is administered by subcu-
taneous injection every other day.
Common side effects of IFN-β therapy include flulike 
symptoms (e.g., fevers, chills, and myalgias) and mild 
abnormalities on routine laboratory evaluation (e.g., ele-
vated liver function tests or lymphopenia). Rarely, more 
severe hepatotoxicity may occur. Subcutaneous IFN-β 
also causes reactions at the injection site (e.g., pain, red-
ness, induration, or, rarely, skin necrosis). Side effects 
can usually be managed with concomitant nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory medications and with the use of 
an autoinjector. Depression, increased spasticity, and 
cognitive changes have been reported, although these 
symptoms can also be due to the underlying disease. In 
any event, side effects to IFN-β therapy usually subside 
with time.
Approximately 2–10% of IFN-β-1a (Avonex) recipi-
ents, 15–25% of IFN-β-1a (Rebif) recipients, and 30–40% 
of IFN-β-1b (Betaseron) recipients develop neutralizing 
antibodies to IFN-β, which may disappear over time. 
Two very large randomized trials (one with more than 
2000 patients) provide unequivocal evidence that neu-
tralizing antibodies reduce efficacy as determined by 
several MRI outcomes. Paradoxically, however, these 
same trials, despite abundant statistical power, failed 
to demonstrate any concomitant impact on the clinical 
They provide short-term clinical benefit by reducing 
the severity and shortening the duration of attacks. 
Whether treatment provides any long-term benefit 
on the course of the illness is less clear. Therefore, mild 
attacks are often not treated. Physical and occupational 
therapy can help with mobility and manual dexterity.
Glucocorticoid treatment is usually administered as 
intravenous methylprednisolone, 500–1000 mg/d for 
3–5 days, either without a taper or followed by a course 
of oral prednisone beginning at a dose of 60–80 mg/d 
and gradually tapered over 2 weeks. Orally administered 
methylprednisolone or dexamethasone (in equivalent 
dosages) can be substituted for the intravenous por-
tion of the therapy, although GI complications are more 
common by this route. Outpatient treatment is almost 
always possible.
Side effects of short-term glucocorticoid therapy 
include fluid retention, potassium loss, weight gain, gas-
tric disturbances, acne, and emotional lability. Concur-
rent use of a low-salt, potassium-rich diet and avoidance 
of potassium-wasting diuretics is advisable. Lithium 
carbonate (300 mg orally bid) may help to manage 
emotional lability and insomnia associated with gluco-
corticoid therapy. Patients with a history of peptic ulcer 
disease may require cimetidine (400 mg bid) or raniti-
dine (150 mg bid). Proton pump inhibitors such as pan-
toprazole (40 mg orally bid) may reduce the likelihood of 
gastritis, especially when large doses are administered 
orally. Plasma exchange (5–7 exchanges: 40–60 mL/kg 
per exchange, every other day for 14 days) may benefit 
patients with fulminant attacks of demyelination (from 
MS and other fulminant causes) that are unresponsive to 
glucocorticoids. However, the cost is high, and conclu-
sive evidence of efficacy is lacking.
DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR 
RELAPSING FORMS OF MS (RRMS, SPMS 
WITH 
EXACERBATIONS) Seven such agents 
are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA): (1) IFN-β-1a (Avonex), (2) IFN-β-1a (Rebif), 
(3) IFN-β-1b (Betaseron), (4) glatiramer acetate (Copax-
one), (5) natalizumab (Tysabri), (6) fingolimod (Gilenya), 
and (7) mitoxantrone (Novantrone). An eighth, cladrib-
ine (Leustatin), is currently awaiting an FDA decision 
on its approval. Each of these treatments is also used 
in SPMS patients who continue to experience attacks, 
because SPMS can be difficult to distinguish from RRMS, 
and because the available clinical trials suggest that 
such patients also derive therapeutic benefit. In Phase  
III clinical trials, recipients of IFN-β-1b, IFN-β-1a, glat-
iramer acetate, natalizumab, and fingolimod experi-
enced fewer clinical exacerbations and fewer new MRI 
lesions compared to placebo recipients (Table 39-6). 
Mitoxantrone (Novantrone), an immune suppressant, 
has also been approved in the United States, although 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
486
IFN-β doses. Glatiramer acetate, 20 mg, is administered by 
subcutaneous injection every day. Injection-site reactions 
also occur with glatiramer acetate. Initially, these were 
thought to be less severe than with IFN-β-1b, although 
two recent head-to-head comparisons of high-dose IFN-β 
to glatiramer acetate did not bear out this impression. In 
addition, approximately 15% of patients experience one 
or more episodes of flushing, chest tightness, dyspnea, 
palpitations, and anxiety after injection. This systemic 
reaction is unpredictable, brief (duration <1 h), and tends 
not to recur. Finally, some patients experience lipoatro-
phy, which, on occasion, can be disfiguring and require 
cessation of treatment.
Natalizumab Natalizumab (Tysabri) is a humanized 
monoclonal antibody directed against the α4 subunit of 
α4β1 integrin, a cellular adhesion molecule expressed on 
the surface of lymphocytes. It prevents lymphocytes from 
binding to endothelial cells, thereby preventing lympho-
cytes from penetrating the BBB and entering the CNS. 
Natalizumab greatly reduces the attack rate and significantly 
improves all measures of disease severity in MS. Moreover, 
it is well tolerated and the dosing schedule of monthly 
intravenous infusions make it very convenient for patients. 
outcomes of disability and relapse rate. The reason for 
this clinical-radiologic dissociation is unresolved. For-
tunately, however, there are few situations where mea-
surement of antibodies is necessary. Thus, for a patient 
doing well on therapy, the presence of antibodies 
should not affect treatment. Conversely, for a patient 
doing poorly on therapy, alternative treatment should be 
considered, even if there are no detectable antibodies.
Glatiramer Acetate Glatiramer acetate is a syn-
thetic, random polypeptide composed of four amino 
acids (L-glutamic acid, L-lysine, L-alanine, and L-tyrosine). 
Its mechanism of action may include (1) induction of anti-
gen-specific suppressor T cells; (2) binding to MHC mol-
ecules, thereby displacing bound MBP; or (3) altering the 
balance between proinflammatory and regulatory cyto-
kines. Glatiramer acetate reduces the attack rate (whether 
measured clinically or by MRI) in RRMS. Glatiramer 
acetate may also benefit disease severity measures, 
although this is less well established than for the relapse 
rate. Therefore, glatiramer acetate should be considered 
in RRMS patients. Its usefulness in progressive disease is 
entirely unknown. Head-to-head clinical trials suggest 
that glatiramer acetate has about equal efficacy to high 
TABLE 39-6
TWO-YEAR OUTCOMES FOR FDA-APPROVED THERAPIES FOR MULTIPLE SCLEROSISa
CLINICAL OUTCOMESb
MRI OUTCOMESc
DOSE, ROUTE, AND 
SCHEDULE
ATTACK RATE, MEAN
CHANGE IN DISEASE 
SEVERITY
NEW T2 LESIONSd
TOTAL BURDEN OF 
DISEASE
IFN-β-1b, 250 μg SC qod
−34%e
−29% (ns)
−83%f
−17%e
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
−18%g
−37%g
−36%f
−4% (ns)
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
−32%e
−30%g
−78%e
−15%e
GA, 20 mg SC qd
−29%f
−12% (ns)
−38%f
−8%f
MTX, 12 mg/m2 IV q3mo
−66%e
−75%g
−79%g
   nr
NTZ, 300 mg IV qmo
−68%e
−42%e
−83%e
−18%e
FGM, 0.5 mg PO qd
−55%e
−27%f
−74%e
−23%e
CLDh, 3.5 mg/kg PO qyr
−58%e
−33%g
−73%e
   nr
aPercentage reductions (or increases) have been calculated by dividing the reported rates in the treated group by the comparable rates in the 
placebo group, except for MRI disease burden, which was calculated as the difference in the median percentage change between the treated 
and placebo groups.
bSeverity = 1 point EDSS progression, sustained for 3 months (in the IFN-β-1a 30 μg qw trial, this change was sustained for 6 months; in the 
IFN-β-1b trial, this was over 3 years).
cDifferent studies measured these MRI measures differently, making comparisons difﬁcult (numbers for new T2 represent the best case scenario 
for each trial).
dNew lesions seen on T2-weighted MRI.
ep = .001.
fp = .01.
gp = .05.
hNot FDA-approved at time of publication.
Abbreviations: IFN-β, interferon β; GA, glatiramer acetate; MTX, mitoxantrone; NTZ, natalizumab; FGM, ﬁngolimod; CLD, cladribine; IM, intra-
muscular; SC, subcutaneous; IV, intravenous; PO, oral; qod, every other day; qw, once per week; tiw, three times per week; qd, daily; q3mo, 
once every 3 months; qmo, once per month; qyr, once per year; ns, not signiﬁcant; nr, not reported.
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
487
ation of the medication is necessary. First-degree heart 
block and bradycardia can also occur, the latter necessi-
tating the prolonged (6-h) observation of patients receiv-
ing their first dose.
Teriﬂunomide Teriflunomide (Aubagio) is an oral 
inhibitor of the enzyme dihydroorotate dehydroge-
nase involved in pyramiding synthesis. Clinical trials 
using once daily dosages of 7 or 14 mg revealed modest 
effects on relapse rate (approximately 30% compared 
to placebo), and an effect on disability at the higher 
dose. Possible side effects include hepatic toxicity, nau-
sea, and hair thinning. Teriflunomide can remain in the 
blood for many months following administration and is 
considered teratogenic.
Mitoxantrone    Hydrochloride Mitoxantrone 
(Novantrone), an anthracenedione, exerts its antineoplas-
tic action by (1) intercalating into DNA and producing 
both strand breaks and interstrand cross-links, (2) interfer-
ing with RNA synthesis, and (3) inhibiting topoisomerase II 
(involved in DNA repair). The FDA approved mitoxantrone 
on the basis of a single (relatively small) phase III clinical 
trial in Europe, in addition to an even smaller phase II study 
completed earlier. Mitoxantrone received (from the FDA) 
the broadest indication of any current treatment for MS. 
Thus, mitoxantrone is indicated for use in SPMS, in PRMS, 
and in patients with worsening RRMS (defined as patients 
whose neurologic status remains significantly abnormal 
between MS attacks). Despite this broad indication, how-
ever, the data supporting its efficacy are weaker than for 
other approved therapies.
Mitoxantrone can be cardiotoxic (e.g., cardiomyopa-
thy, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, and irre-
versible congestive heart failure). As a result, a cumula-
tive dose >140 mg/m2 is not recommended. At currently 
approved doses (12 mg/m2 every 3 months), the maxi-
mum duration of therapy can be only 2–3 years. Fur-
thermore, >40% of women will experience amenorrhea, 
which may be permanent. Finally, there is risk of acute 
leukemia, and this complication has already been 
reported in several mitoxantrone-treated MS patients.
Given these risks, mitoxantrone should not be used 
as a first-line agent in either RRMS or relapsing SPMS. 
It is reasonable to consider mitoxantrone in selected 
patients with a progressive course who have failed 
other approved therapies.
Cladribine Cladribine (Leustatin) is a purine ana-
log that inhibits DNA synthesis and repair, and acts 
as a general immunosuppressant. Cladribine reduces 
the attack rate and significantly improves several mea-
sures of disease severity in MS. It seems to be well tol-
erated and the easy oral dosing schedule of only tak-
ing the drug for 2 weeks/year make it very convenient 
for patients. Again, however, the principal concern is 
However, because of the development of progressive mul-
tifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in approximately 0.2% 
of patients treated with natalizumab for more than 2 years, 
natalizumab is currently recommended only for patients 
who have failed other therapies or who have particularly 
aggressive disease presentations. Its usefulness in the treat-
ment of progressive disease has not been studied. Head-to-
head data for natalizumab against low-dose (weekly) IFN-β 
showed a clear superiority of natalizumab in RRMS; the trial 
design, however, was biased against IFN-β (i.e., patients 
recruited could already be considered IFN-β treatment fail-
ures). Natalizumab, 300 μg, is administered by IV infusion 
each month. Treatment with natalizumab is, in general, well 
tolerated. A small percentage (<10%) of patients experience 
hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis) and ∼6% 
develop neutralizing antibodies to the molecule.
The major concern with long-term treatment is the 
risk of PML. Because the risk is extremely low during the 
first year of treatment with natalizumab, we currently 
recommend treatment for periods of 12–18 months 
only for most patients; after this time, a change to 
another disease-modifying therapy should be consid-
ered. Recently, a blood test to detect antibodies against 
the PML (JC) virus has shown promise in identifying indi-
viduals who are at risk for this complication. In prelimi-
nary studies, approximately half of the adult population 
are antibody-positive, indicating that they experienced 
an asymptomatic infection with the virus at some time 
in the past, and to date all cases of natalizumab-associ-
ated PML have occurred in seropositive individuals.
Fingolimod Fingolimod (Gilenya) is a sphingosine-
1-phosphate (S1P) inhibitor and it prevents the egress of 
lymphocytes from the secondary lymphoid organs such 
as the lymph nodes and spleen. Its mechanism of action 
is probably due, in part, to the trapping of lymphocytes 
in the periphery and the prevention, thereby, of lympho-
cytes reaching the brain. However, because S1P receptors 
are widely expressed in the CNS tissue and because fin-
golimod is able to cross the BBB, it may also have central 
effects. Fingolimod reduces the attack rate and signifi-
cantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS. It 
is well tolerated, and the oral dosing schedule makes it 
very convenient for patients. Moreover, from the clinical 
trial data presented thus far, it seems to be a reasonably 
safe therapy and it is approved for first-line use by the 
FDA. However, as with any new therapy, long-term safety 
remains to be established. A large head-to-head phase III 
randomized study demonstrated the clear superiority of 
fingolimod over low dose (weekly) IFN-β. Fingolimod, 0.5 
mg, is administered orally each day. Treatment with fin-
golimod is also, in general, well tolerated. Mild abnormali-
ties on routine laboratory evaluation (e.g., elevated liver 
function tests or lymphopenia) are more common than in 
controls. Although rarely severe, sometimes discontinu-
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
488
and requiring assistance to ambulate. Unfortunately, 
however, already established progressive symptoms do 
not respond well to treatment with these disease-modi-
fying therapies. Because progressive symptoms are likely 
to result from delayed effects of earlier focal demyelinat-
ing episodes, many experts now believe that very early 
treatment with a disease-modifying drug is appropriate 
for most MS patients. It is reasonable to delay initiating 
treatment in patients with (1) normal neurologic exams, 
(2) a single attack or a low attack frequency, and (3) a low 
burden of disease as assessed by brain MRI. Untreated 
patients, however, should be followed closely with peri-
odic brain MRI scans; the need for therapy is reassessed if 
scans reveal evidence of ongoing, subclinical disease.
DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR PRO-
GRESSIVE MS
SPMS High-dose IFN-β probably has a beneficial 
effect in patients with SPMS who are still experiencing 
acute relapses. IFN-β is probably ineffective in patients 
with SPMS who are not having acute attacks. Glatiramer 
acetate and natalizumab have not been studied in this 
long-term safety, a concern that is heightened by the 
long-term immunosuppression that occurs in some 
patients and, also, by the fact that, in the pivotal RCT, 
10 neoplasms and all 20 herpes zoster cases occurred in 
Leustatin-treated patients.
Initiating and Changing Treatment Currently, 
most patients with relapsing forms of MS receive IFN-β 
or glatiramer acetate as first-line therapy. Although 
approved for first-line use, the role of fingolimod in this 
situation has yet to be defined. Regardless of which 
agent is chosen first, treatment should probably be 
changed in patients who continue to have frequent 
attacks or progressive disability (Fig. 39-4). The value of 
combination therapy is unknown.
The long-term efficacy of these treatments remains 
uncertain, although several recent studies suggest that 
these agents can improve the long-term outcome of MS, 
especially when administered early in the RRMS stage of 
the illness. Beneficial effects seen in early MS include a 
reduction in the relapse rate, a reduction in CNS inflam-
mation as measured by MRI, and a prolongation in the 
time to reach certain disability outcomes such as SPMS 
DECISION-MAKING ALGORITHM FOR RELAPSING-REMITTING MS 
Continue
therapy
Good
response
Intolerant or
poor response
Continue periodic
clinical/ MRI
assessments
No
change
Intolerant or poor response
Natalizumab
Successive trials
of alternatives
Prophylaxis
1. IFN-β1a, or
2. IFN-β1b, or
3. Glatiramer acetate or
4. Fingolimod
Methylprednisolone/
prednisone
Identify and treat any
underlying infection or trauma
Symptomatic
therapy
Exacerbation
Pseudoexacerbation
Acute neurologic change
Stable
Relapsing-Remitting MS
Functional
impairment
No functional
impairment
?- Low attack frequency or
    single attack
?- Normal neurologic exam
?- Low disease burden by MRI
No
Yes
Repeat clinical exam
and MRI in 6 months
A
Clinical or
MRI change
Secondary
progressive MS
With relapses
Without relapses
Consider
1. IFN-β1a, or
2. IFN-β1b
Intolerant or
poor response
1. Mitoxantrone
2. Azathioprine
3. Methotrexate
4. Pulse cyclophosphamide
5. IVIg
6. Pulse methylprednisolone
No proven treatment
Primary
progressive MS
Symptomatic therapy
Progressive MS
Consider Rx with one of the following:
B
DECISION-MAKING ALGORITHM FOR PROGRESSIVE MS
FIGURE 39-4 
Therapeutic decision-making for MS.
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
489
example, no reliable case of mercury poisoning resem-
bling typical MS has ever been described.
Although potential roles for EBV, HHV-6, or chlamydia 
have been suggested for MS, these reports are uncon-
firmed, and treatment with antiviral agents or antibiot-
ics is not currently appropriate.
Most recently, chronic cerebrospinal insufficiency 
(CCSVI) has been proposed as a cause of multiple scle-
rosis and vascular-surgical intervention recommended. 
However, the failure of independent investigators to 
even approximate the initial claims of 100% sensitivity 
and 100% specificity for the diagnostic procedure raised 
considerable doubt that CCSVI is a real entity. Certainly, 
any potentially dangerous surgery should be avoided 
until more rigorous science is available.
SYMPTOMATIC THERAPY For all patients, it 
is useful to encourage attention to a healthy lifestyle, 
including maintaining an optimistic outlook, a healthy 
diet, and regular exercise as tolerated (swimming is 
often well tolerated because of the cooling effect of 
cold water). It is reasonable also to correct vitamin 
D deficiency with oral vitamin D, and to recommend 
dietary supplementation with long-chain (omega-3) 
unsaturated fatty acids (present in oily fish such as 
salmon) because of their immunomodulatory proper-
ties. Ataxia/tremor is often intractable. Clonazepam, 
1.5–20 mg/d; Mysoline, 50–250 mg/d; propranolol, 
40–200 mg/d; or ondansetron, 8–16 mg/d, may help. 
Wrist weights occasionally reduce tremor in the arm or 
hand. Thalamotomy or deep-brain stimulation has been 
tried with mixed success.
Spasticity and spasms may improve with physical ther-
apy, regular exercise, and stretching. Avoidance of triggers 
(e.g., infections, fecal impactions, bed sores) is extremely 
important. Effective medications include baclofen (Lio-
resal) (20–120 mg/d), diazepam (2–40 mg/d), tizanidine 
(8–32 mg/d), dantrolene (25–400 mg/d), and cyclobenza-
prine hydrochloride (10–60 mg/d). For severe spasticity, 
a baclofen pump (delivering medication directly into the 
CSF) can provide substantial relief.
Weakness can sometimes be improved with the use 
of potassium channel blockers such as 4-amino pyridine 
(10–40 mg/d) and 3,4-di-aminopyridine (40–80 mg/d), 
particularly in the setting where lower extremity weak-
ness interferes with the patient’s ability to ambulate. The 
FDA has approved 4-amino pyridine (at 20 mg/d), and 
this can be obtained either as dalfampridine (Ampyra) 
or, more cheaply, through a compounding pharmacy. 
The principal concern with the use of these agents is the 
possibility of inducing seizures at high doses.
Pain is treated with anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, 
100–1000 mg/d; phenytoin, 300–600 mg/d; gabapentin, 
patient population. Although mitoxantrone has been 
approved for patients with progressive MS, this is not 
the population studied in the pivotal trial. Therefore, 
no evidence-based recommendation can be made with 
regard to its use in this setting.
PPMS No therapies have been convincingly shown 
to modify the course of PPMS. A phase III clinical trial 
of glatiramer acetate in PPMS was stopped because of 
lack of efficacy. A phase II/III trial of rituximab in PPMS 
was also negative, but in a preplanned secondary analy-
sis treatment appeared to slow disability progression in 
patients with gadolinium-enhancing lesions at entry; a 
follow-up trial with the humanized anti-CD20 therapy 
ocrelizumab will soon begin. A trial of mitoxantrone in 
PPMS is ongoing.
OFF-LABEL 
TREATMENT 
OPTIONS 
FOR 
RRMS AND SPMS Azathioprine (2–3 mg/kg per 
day) has been used primarily in SPMS. Meta-analysis of 
published trials suggests that azathioprine is marginally 
effective at lowering relapse rates, although a benefit on 
disability progression has not been demonstrated.
Methotrexate (7.5–20 mg/week) was shown in one 
study to slow the progression of upper-extremity dys-
function in SPMS. Because of the possibility of develop-
ing irreversible liver damage, some experts recommend 
a blind liver biopsy after 2 years of therapy.
Cyclophosphamide (700 mg/m2, every other month) 
may be helpful for treatment-refractory patients who 
are (1) otherwise in good health, (2) ambulatory, and 
(3) <40 years of age. Because cyclophosphamide can be 
used for periods in excess of 3 years, it may be prefer-
able to mitoxantrone in these circumstances.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), administered in 
monthly pulses (up to 1 g/kg) for up to 2 years, appears 
to reduce annual exacerbation rates. However, its use is 
limited because of its high cost, questions about opti-
mal dose, and uncertainty about its effect on long-term 
disability outcome.
Methylprednisolone administered in one study as 
monthly high-dose intravenous pulses reduced disabil-
ity progression (discussed earlier).
OTHER THERAPEUTIC CLAIMS Many pur-
ported treatments for MS have never been subjected to 
scientific scrutiny. These include dietary therapies (e.g., 
the Swank diet in addition to others), megadose vita-
mins, calcium orotate, bee stings, cow colostrum, hyper-
baric oxygen, Procarin (a combination of histamine and 
caffeine), chelation, acupuncture, acupressure, various 
Chinese herbal remedies, and removal of mercury-amal-
gam tooth fillings, among many others. Patients should 
avoid costly or potentially hazardous unproven treat-
ments. Many such treatments lack biologic plausibility. For 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
490
of pain, spasticity, fatigue, and bladder/bowel dysfunc-
tion may also help. Sildenafil (50–100 mg), tadalafil (5–20 
mg), or vardenafil (5–20 mg) taken 1–2 h before sex are 
now the standard treatments for maintaining erections.
PROMISING 
EXPERIMENTAL 
THERAPIES  
Numerous clinical trials are currently underway. These 
include (1) dimethyl fumarate (BG-12), an oral immu-
nomodulator that reduced relapses and disability accu-
mulation in phase 3 trials; (2) monoclonal antibodies 
against CD20 to deplete B cells, against the IL-2 recep-
tor, or against CD52 to induce global lymphocyte 
depletion; and (3) novel oral sphingosine-1-phosphate 
receptor antagonists to sequester lymphocytes in the 
secondary lymphoid organs. 
300–3600 mg/d; or pregabalin, 50–300 mg/d), antidepres-
sants (amitriptyline, 25–150 mg/d; nortriptyline, 25–150 
mg/d; desipramine, 100–300 mg/d; or venlafaxine, 75–225 
mg/d), or antiarrhythmics (mexiletine, 300–900 mg/d). 
If these approaches fail, patients should be referred to a 
comprehensive pain management program.
Bladder dysfunction management is best guided by 
urodynamic testing. Evening fluid restriction or fre-
quent voluntary voiding may help detrusor hyperreflexia. 
If these methods fail, propantheline bromide (10–15 
mg/d), oxybutynin (5–15 mg/d), hyoscyamine sulfate 
(0.5–0.75 mg/d), tolterodine tartrate (2–4 mg/d), or solif-
enacin (5–10 mg/d) may help. Coadministration of pseu-
doephedrine (30–60 mg) is sometimes beneficial.
Detrusor/sphincter dyssynergia may respond to phenoxy-
benzamine (10–20 mg/d) or terazosin hydrochloride 
(1–20 mg/d). Loss of reflex bladder wall contraction may 
respond to bethanechol (30–150 mg/d). However, both 
conditions often require catheterization.
Urinary tract infections should be treated promptly. 
Patients with large postvoid residual urine volumes are 
predisposed to infections. Prevention by urine acidifi-
cation (with cranberry juice or vitamin C) inhibits some 
bacteria. Prophylactic administration of antibiotics is 
sometimes necessary but may lead to colonization by 
resistant organisms. Intermittent catheterization may 
help to prevent recurrent infections.
Treatment of constipation includes high-fiber diets 
and fluids. Natural or other laxatives may help. Fecal 
incontinence may respond to a reduction in dietary fiber.
Depression should be treated. Useful drugs include 
the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (fluoxetine, 
20–80 mg/d; or sertraline, 50–200 mg/d), the tricyclic 
antidepressants (amitriptyline, 25–150 mg/d; nortripty-
line, 25–150 mg/d; or desipramine, 100–300 mg/d), and 
the non-tricyclic antidepressants (venlafaxine, 75–225 
mg/d).
Fatigue may improve with assistive devices, help 
in the home, or successful management of spasticity. 
Patients with frequent nocturia may benefit from anti-
cholinergic medication at bedtime. Primary MS fatigue 
may respond to amantadine (200 mg/d), methylpheni-
date (5–25 mg/d), or modafinil (100–400 mg/d).
Cognitive problems may respond to the cholinester-
ase inhibitor donepezil hydrochloride (10 mg/d).
Paroxysmal symptoms respond dramatically to low-
dose anticonvulsants (acetazolamide, 200–600 mg/d; 
carbamazepine, 50–400 mg/d; phenytoin, 50–300 mg/d; 
or gabapentin, 600–1800 mg/d).
Heat sensitivity may respond to heat avoidance, air-
conditioning, or cooling garments.
Sexual dysfunction may be helped by lubricants to aid 
in genital stimulation and sexual arousal. Management 
CLINICAL VARIANTS OF MS
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO), or Devic’s syndrome, is an 
aggressive inﬂammatory disorder consisting most typi-
cally of attacks of acute ON and myelitis. Attacks of 
ON can be bilateral (rare in MS) or unilateral; myelitis 
can be severe and transverse (rare in MS) and is typi-
cally longitudinally extensive, involving three or more 
contiguous vertebral segments. Attacks of ON may be 
precede or follow an attack of myelitis by days, months, 
or years, or vice versa. In contrast to MS, progressive 
symptoms do not occur in NMO. The brain MRI was 
classically thought to be normal at the onset of NMO, 
but recent studies now indicate that asymptomatic 
lesions sometimes resembling typical MS are common. 
Lesions involving the hypothalamus, periaqueductal 
region of the brainstem, or “cloud-like” white mat-
ter lesions in the cerebral hemispheres are suggestive of 
NMO. Brainstem disease can present with nausea and 
vertigo, and large hemispheral lesions can present as 
encephalopathy or seizures. Spinal cord MRI typically 
reveals a focal enhancing region of swelling and cavita-
tion, extending over three or more spinal cord segments 
and often located in central gray matter structures. His-
topathology of these lesions may reveal thickening of 
blood-vessel walls, demyelination, deposition of anti-
body and complement, a characteristic loss of astrocytes, 
and aquaporin-4 staining not seen in MS.
NMO, which is uncommon in whites compared 
with Asians and Africans, is best understood as a syn-
drome with diverse causes. Up to 40% of patients have 
a systemic autoimmune disorder, often systemic lupus 
erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, p-ANCA (peri-
nuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody)–associated 
vasculitis, myasthenia gravis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 
 
CHAPTER 39
Multiple Sclerosis and Other Demyelinating Diseases
491
ACUTE DISSEMINATED 
ENCEPHALOMYELITIS (ADEM)
ADEM has a monophasic course and is most frequently 
associated with an antecedent infection (postinfectious 
encephalomyelitis); approximately 5% of ADEM cases 
follow immunization (postvaccinal encephalomyelitis). 
ADEM is more common in children than adults. The 
hallmark of ADEM is the presence of widely scattered 
small foci of perivenular inﬂammation and demyelination 
in contrast to larger conﬂuent demyelinating lesions typ-
ical of MS. In the most explosive form of ADEM, acute 
hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis, the lesions are vasculitic 
and hemorrhagic, and the clinical course is devastating.
Postinfectious encephalomyelitis is most frequently 
associated with the viral exanthems of childhood. Infec-
tion with measles virus is the most common antecedent 
(1 in 1000 cases). Worldwide, measles encephalomyeli-
tis is still common, although use of the live measles vac-
cine has dramatically reduced its incidence in developed 
countries. An ADEM-like illness rarely follows vaccina-
tion with live measles vaccine (1–2 in 106 immuniza-
tions). ADEM is now most frequently associated with 
varicella (chickenpox) infections (1 in 4000–10,000 
cases). It may also follow infection with rubella, mumps, 
inﬂuenza, parainﬂuenza, Epstein-Barr, HIV, and other 
viruses, and Mycoplasma. Some patients may have a non-
speciﬁc upper respiratory tract infection or no known 
antecedent illness. In addition to measles, postvaccinal 
encephalomyelitis may also follow the administration of 
smallpox (5 cases per million), the Semple rabies, and 
Japanese encephalitis vaccines. Modern vaccines that do 
not require viral culture in CNS tissue have reduced the 
ADEM risk.
All forms of ADEM presumably result from a cross-
reactive immune response to the infectious agent or 
vaccine that then triggers an inﬂammatory demyelin-
ating response. Autoantibodies to MBP and to other 
myelin antigens have been detected in the CSF from 
many patients with ADEM. Attempts to demonstrate 
direct viral invasion of the CNS have been unsuccessful.
or mixed connective tissue disease. In others, onset 
may be associated with acute infection with varicella-
zoster virus, EBV, HIV, or tuberculosis. Rare cases 
appear to be paraneoplastic and associated with breast, 
lung, or other cancers. NMO is often idiopathic, how-
ever. NMO is usually disabling over time; in one series, 
respiratory failure from cervical myelitis was present in 
one-third of patients, and 8 years after onset 60% of 
patients were blind and more than half had permanent 
paralysis of one or more limbs.
A highly speciﬁc autoantibody directed against the 
water channel protein aquaporin-4 is present in the 
sera of 60–70% of patients who have a clinical diag-
nosis of NMO. Seropositive patients have a very high 
risk for future relapses. Aquaporin-4 is localized to the 
foot processes of astrocytes in close apposition to endo-
thelial surfaces. It is likely that aquaporin-4 antibodies 
are directly pathogenic in NMO, as passive transfer of 
antibodies from NMO patients into laboratory animals 
reproduced histologic features of the disease.
When MS affects individuals of African or Asian 
ancestry, there is a propensity for demyelinating lesions 
to involve predominantly the optic nerve and spinal 
cord, an MS subtype termed “opticospinal MS.” Inter-
estingly, some individuals with opticospinal MS are 
seropositive for aquaporin-4 antibodies, suggesting that 
such cases represent an NMO spectrum disorder.
Acute MS (Marburg’s variant) is a fulminant demyelin-
ating process that in some cases progresses inexorably to 
death within 1–2 years. Typically, there are no remissions. 
When acute MS presents as a solitary, usually cavitary, 
lesion, a brain tumor is often suspected. In such cases, a 
brain biopsy is usually required to establish the diagnosis. 
An antibody-mediated process appears to be responsible 
for most cases. Marburg’s variant does not seem to fol-
low infection or vaccination, and it is unclear whether this 
syndrome represents an extreme form of MS or another 
disease altogether. No controlled trials of therapy exist; 
high-dose glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and cyclo-
phosphamide have been tried, with uncertain beneﬁt.
TREATMENT 
 Neuromyelitis Optica
Disease-modifying therapies have not been rigor-
ously studied in NMO. Acute attacks of NMO are usually 
treated with high-dose glucocorticoids (Solu-Medrol 
1–2 g/d for 5–10 days followed by a prednisone taper). 
Because of the likelihood that NMO is antibody-medi-
ated, plasma exchange (typically 7 qod exchanges of 
1.5 plasma volumes) has also been used empirically for 
acute episodes that fail to respond to glucocorticoids. 
Prophylaxis against relapses can be achieved in some 
patients with one of the following regimens: mycophe-
nolate mofetil (250 mg bid gradually increasing to 1000 
mg bid); B cell depletion with anti-CD20 monoclonal 
antibody (Rituxan); or a combination of glucocorti-
coids (500 mg IV methylprednisolone daily for 5 days; 
then oral prednisone 1 mg/kg per day × 2 months, fol-
lowed by slow taper) plus azathioprine (2 mg/kg per day 
started on week 3). By contrast, available evidence sug-
gests that use of IFN-β is ineffective and paradoxically 
may increase the risk of NMO relapses.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
492
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
In severe cases, onset is abrupt and progression rapid 
(hours to days). In postinfectious ADEM, the neurologic 
syndrome generally begins late in the course of the viral 
illness as the exanthem is fading. Fever reappears, and 
headache, meningismus, and lethargy progressing to coma 
may develop. Seizures are common. Signs of disseminated 
neurologic disease are consistently present (e.g., hemipa-
resis or quadriparesis, extensor plantar responses, lost or 
hyperactive tendon reﬂexes, sensory loss, and brainstem 
involvement). In ADEM due to chickenpox, cerebellar 
involvement is often conspicuous. CSF protein is mod-
estly elevated (0.5–1.5 g/L [50–150 mg/dL]). Lympho-
cytic pleocytosis, generally 200 cells/μL, occurs in 80% 
of patients. Occasional patients have higher counts or a 
mixed polymorphonuclear-lymphocytic pattern during 
the initial days of the illness. Transient CSF oligoclonal 
banding has been reported. MRI usually reveals extensive 
changes in the brain and spinal cord, consisting of white 
matter hyperintensities on T2 and FLAIR sequences with 
gadolinium enhancement on T1-weighted sequences.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis is easily established when there is a history 
of recent vaccination or viral exanthematous illness. In 
severe cases with predominantly cerebral involvement, 
acute encephalitis due to infection with herpes simplex or 
other viruses including HIV may be difﬁcult to exclude 
(Chap. 40); other considerations include hypercoagu-
lable states including the antiphospholipid antibody syn-
drome, vasculitis, neurosarcoid, or metastatic cancer. An 
explosive presentation of MS can mimic ADEM, and 
especially in adults, it may not be possible to distinguish 
these conditions at onset. The simultaneous onset of dis-
seminated symptoms and signs is common in ADEM and 
rare in MS. Similarly, meningismus, drowsiness, coma, or 
seizures suggest ADEM rather than MS. Unlike MS, in 
ADEM optic nerve involvement is generally bilateral and 
transverse myelopathy complete. MRI ﬁndings that favor 
ADEM include extensive and relatively symmetric white 
matter abnormalities, basal ganglia or cortical gray matter 
lesions, and Gd enhancement of all abnormal areas. By 
contrast, oligoclonal bands in the CSF are more common 
in MS. In one study of adult patients initially thought to 
have ADEM, 30% experienced additional relapses over 
a follow-up period of 3 years and they were now clas-
siﬁed as having MS. Occasional patients with “recurrent 
ADEM” have also been reported especially in children; 
however, it is not possible to distinguish this entity from 
atypical MS.
TREATMENT 
 Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis
Initial treatment is with high-dose glucocorticoids as for 
exacerbations of NMO (discussed earlier); depending 
on the response, treatment may need to be continued 
for 4–8 weeks. Patients who fail to respond within a few 
days may benefit from a course of plasma exchange or 
intravenous immunoglobulin. The prognosis reflects 
the severity of the underlying acute illness. Measles 
encephalomyelitis is associated with a mortality rate of 
5–20%, and most survivors have permanent neurologic 
sequelae. Children who recover may have persistent sei-
zures and behavioral and learning disorders.
 Karen L. Roos 
■  Kenneth L. Tyler 
493
 Acute infections of the nervous system are among the 
most important problems in medicine because early recog-
nition, efﬁ cient decision-making, and rapid institution 
of therapy can be lifesaving. These distinct clinical syn-
dromes include acute bacterial meningitis, viral menin-
gitis, encephalitis, focal infections such as brain abscess 
and subdural empyema, and infectious thrombophle-
bitis. Each may present with a nonspeciﬁ c prodrome 
of fever and headache, which in a previously healthy 
individual may initially be thought to be benign, until 
(with the exception of viral meningitis) altered con-
sciousness, focal neurologic signs, or seizures appear. 
Key goals of early management are to emergently dis-
tinguish between these conditions, identify the respon-
sible pathogen, and initiate appropriate antimicrobial 
therapy. 
 APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess,
 
and Empyema 
 ( Fig. 40-1 ) The fi rst task is to identify whether an infec-
tion predominantly involves the subarachnoid space 
( meningitis ) or whether there is evidence of either 
generalized or focal involvement of brain tissue in the 
cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, or brainstem. When 
brain tissue is directly injured by a viral infection, the 
disease is referred to as  encephalitis , whereas focal infec-
tions involving brain tissue are classifi ed as either  cerebritis 
or  abscess , depending on the presence or absence of a 
capsule. 
 Nuchal rigidity (“stiff  neck”) is the pathognomonic 
sign of meningeal irritation and is present when the 
neck resists passive fl exion. Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s 
signs are also classic signs of meningeal irritation. 
 Kernig’s sign is elicited with the patient in the supine 
 MENINGITIS, ENCEPHALITIS, BRAIN ABSCESS, 
AND EMPYEMA 
 CHAPTER 40 
position. The thigh is fl exed on the abdomen, with the 
knee fl exed; attempts to passively extend the knee elicit 
pain when meningeal irritation is present.  Brudzinski’s sign 
is elicited with the patient in the supine position and 
is positive when passive fl exion of the neck results in 
spontaneous fl exion of the hips and knees. Although 
commonly tested on physical examinations, the sensi-
tivity and specifi city of Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs 
are uncertain. Both may be absent or reduced in very 
young or elderly patients, immunocompromised indi-
viduals, or patients with a severely depressed mental 
status. The high prevalence of cervical spine disease in 
older individuals may result in false-positive tests for 
nuchal rigidity. 
 Initial management can be guided by several con-
siderations: (1) Empirical therapy should be initiated 
promptly whenever bacterial meningitis is a signifi cant 
diagnostic consideration. (2) All patients who have had 
recent head trauma, are immunocompromised, have 
known malignant lesions or central nervous system 
(CNS) neoplasms, or have focal neurologic fi ndings, 
papilledema, or a depressed level of consciousness 
should undergo CT or MRI of the brain prior to lumbar 
puncture (LP). In these cases empirical antibiotic therapy 
should not be delayed pending test results but should 
be administered prior to neuroimaging and LP. (3) A 
signifi cantly depressed level of consciousness (e.g., 
somnolence, coma), seizures, or focal neurologic defi cits 
do not occur in viral meningitis; patients with these 
symptoms should be hospitalized for further evaluation 
and treated empirically for bacterial and viral menin-
goencephalitis. (4) Immunocompetent patients with 
a normal level of consciousness, no prior antimicrobial 
treatment, and a cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) profi le consis-
tent with viral meningitis (lymphocytic pleocytosis and 
a normal glucose concentration) can often be treated 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
494
as outpatients if appropriate contact and monitoring  
can be ensured. Failure of a patient with suspected viral 
meningitis to improve within 48 h should prompt a 
reevaluation including follow-up neurologic and general 
medical examination and repeat imaging and labora-
tory studies, often including a second LP.
ACUTE BACTERIAL MENINGITIS
DEFINITION
Bacterial meningitis is an acute purulent infection within 
the subarachnoid space. It is associated with a CNS 
inﬂammatory reaction that may result in decreased 
FIGURE 40-1 
The management of patients with suspected CNS infection. 
ADEM, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; AFB, acid-fast 
bacillus; Ag, antigen; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; CT, computed 
tomography; CTFV, Colorado tick fever virus; CXR, chest 
x-ray; DFA, direct ﬂuorescent antibody; EBV, Epstein-Barr 
virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; 
LCMV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus; MNCs, mononuclear 
cells; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase 
chain reaction; PMNs, polymorphonuclear leukocytes; PPD, 
puriﬁed protein derivative; TB, tuberculosis; VDRL, Venereal 
Disease Research Laboratory; VZV, varicella-zoster virus; WNV, 
West Nile virus.
ADEM
Encephalitis
Bacterial process
Appropriate medical
and/or surgical
interventions
Pleocytosis with PMNs
  Elevated protein
  Decreased glucose
  Gram’s stain positive
Tier 1 Eval (no unusual historic points or exposures):
Viral: CSF PCR for enterovirus, HSV, VZV
         CSF IgM for WNV
         Viral culture: CSF, throat, stool
          If skin lesions DFA for HSV, VZV
          HIV serology
          Serology for enteroviruses and arthropod-borne 
          viruses
Fungal: CSF cryptococcal Ag, fungal cultures
Bacterial: VDRL and bacterial culture, PCR
Mycobacterial: CSF AFB stain and TB PCR, TB 
culture, CXR, PPD
Pleocytosis with MNCs
Normal or increased protein
Normal or decreased glucose
Gram’s stain negative
Abscess
or tumor
White matter
abnormalities
Focal or
  generalized
  gray matter
  abnormalities
  or normal
No mass lesion
Yes
Yes
No
No
Headache, Fever, éNuchal Rigidity
Altered mental status?
Immediate blood culture
and lumbar puncture
Meningoencephalitis, ADEM, 
encephalopathy, or mass lesion
Imaging: Head CT or MRI (preferred)
Mass lesion
Obtain blood culture and start
empirical antimicrobial therapy
Meningitis
Papilledema and/or focal neurologic deficit?
Immunocompromised?
History of recent head trauma, known
  cancer, sinusitis?
A
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
495
consciousness, seizures, raised intracranial pressure (ICP), 
and stroke. The meninges, the subarachnoid space, and 
the brain parenchyma are all frequently involved in the 
inﬂammatory reaction (meningoencephalitis).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Bacterial meningitis is the most common form of sup-
purative CNS infection, with an annual incidence in 
the United States of >2.5 cases/100,000 population. 
The organisms most often responsible for community-
acquired bacterial meningitis are Streptococcus pneumoniae 
(∼50%), Neisseria meningitidis (∼25%), group B streptococci 
(∼15%), and Listeria monocytogenes (∼10%). Haemophilus 
inﬂuenzae type b accounts for <10% of cases of bacterial 
meningitis in most series. N. meningitidis is the causative 
organism of recurring epidemics of meningitis every 
8 to 12 years.
ETIOLOGY
S. pneumoniae is the most common cause of meningi-
tis in adults >20 years of age, accounting for nearly 
half the reported cases (1.1 per 100,000 persons per 
year). There are a number of predisposing conditions 
that increase the risk of pneumococcal meningitis, the 
most important of which is pneumococcal pneumonia. 
Additional risk factors include coexisting acute or 
chronic pneumococcal sinusitis or otitis media, alcoholism, 
diabetes, splenectomy, hypogammaglobulinemia, com-
plement deﬁciency, and head trauma with basilar skull 
fracture and CSF rhinorrhea. The mortality rate remains 
∼20% despite antibiotic therapy.
The incidence of meningitis due to N. menin-
gitidis has decreased with the routine immunization of 
11- to 18-year-olds with the tetravalent (serogroups 
A, C, W-135, and Y) meningococcal glycoconjugate 
vaccine. The vaccine does not contain serogroup B, 
Hepatitis C
Rotavirus
Rabies
Tier 2 Evaluation (if above negative):
EBV: Serum serology, CSF PCR
Mycoplasma: Serum serology, CSF PCR
Influenza A, B: Serology, respiratory culture, CSF PCR
Adenovirus: Serology, throat swab. CSF PCR
Fungal: CSF & serum coccidioidal antibody, Histoplasma
antigen & antibody
Tier 3 Evaluation
(based on epidemiology)
Diarrhea
(infant/child)
Recent
exanthemal
illness
Measles
Rubella
HHV-6
Raccoon
exposure or
Hx of pica
Baylisascaris
procyonis
Pet bird
(Psittacine)
exposure
Chlamydia psittaci
(Psittacosis)
Exposure to
cattle or
unpasteurized
dairy products
Brucella spp. (Brucellosis)
Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)
Wild rodent
or hamster
exposure
Bat exposure
Animal bite
Cat
exposure
Mosquito or
tick exposure
CTFV
Arbovirus
Rickettsial
Borrelia
Ehrlichia
LCMV
Swimming in
lakes or ponds
or nonchlorinated
water
Acanthamoeba or
Naegleria fowleri
(amebic
meningoencephalitis)
Bartonella spp.
(cat scratch fever)
B
Hepatitis
FIGURE 40-1 (continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
496
which is responsible for one-third of cases of menin-
gococcal disease. The presence of petechial or purpuric 
skin lesions can provide an important clue to the diagnosis 
of meningococcal infection. In some patients the disease 
is fulminant, progressing to death within hours of symp-
tom onset. Infection may be initiated by nasopharyngeal 
colonization, which can result in either an asymptom-
atic carrier state or invasive meningococcal disease. 
The risk of invasive disease following nasopharyngeal 
colonization depends on both bacterial virulence factors 
and host immune defense mechanisms, including the 
host’s capacity to produce antimeningococcal antibod-
ies and to lyse meningococci by both classic and alterna-
tive complement pathways. Individuals with deﬁciencies 
of any of the complement components, including proper-
din, are highly susceptible to meningococcal infections.
Enteric gram-negative bacilli cause meningitis in 
individuals with chronic and debilitating diseases such 
as diabetes, cirrhosis, or alcoholism and in those with 
chronic urinary tract infections. Gram-negative meningitis 
can also complicate neurosurgical procedures, particu-
larly craniotomy.
Otitis, mastoiditis, and sinusitis are predisposing and 
associated conditions for meningitis due to Streptococci 
sp., gram-negative anaerobes, S. aureus, Haemophilus sp., 
and Enterobacteriaceae. Meningitis complicating endo-
carditis may be due to viridans streptococci, S. aureus, S. 
bovis, the HACEK group (Haemophilus sp., Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella 
corrodens, Kingella kingae), or enterococci.
Group B streptococcus, or S. agalactiae, was previously 
responsible for meningitis predominantly in neonates, 
but it has been reported with increasing frequency in 
individuals >50 years of age, particularly those with 
underlying diseases.
L. monocytogenes is an increasingly important cause 
of meningitis in neonates (<1 month of age), pregnant 
women, individuals >60 years, and immunocompro-
mised individuals of all ages. Infection is acquired by 
ingesting foods contaminated by Listeria. Foodborne 
human listerial infection has been reported from con-
taminated coleslaw, milk, soft cheeses, and several types 
of “ready-to-eat” foods, including delicatessen meat and 
uncooked hotdogs.
The frequency of H. inﬂuenzae type b meningitis in 
children has declined dramatically since the introduc-
tion of the Hib conjugate vaccine, although rare cases 
of Hib meningitis in vaccinated children have been 
reported. More frequently, H. inﬂuenzae causes meningitis 
in unvaccinated children and older adults, and non-b 
H. influenzae is an emerging pathogen.
Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative staph-
ylococci are important causes of meningitis that 
occurs following invasive neurosurgical procedures, 
particularly shunting procedures for hydrocephalus, or 
as a complication of the use of subcutaneous Ommaya 
reservoirs for administration of intrathecal chemotherapy.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The most common bacteria that cause meningitis, 
S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis, initially colonize the 
nasopharynx by attaching to nasopharyngeal epithelial 
cells. Bacteria are transported across epithelial cells in 
membrane-bound vacuoles to the intravascular space or 
invade the intravascular space by creating separations in the 
apical tight junctions of columnar epithelial cells. Once in 
the bloodstream, bacteria are able to avoid phagocytosis by 
neutrophils and classic complement-mediated bactericidal 
activity because of the presence of a polysaccharide cap-
sule. Bloodborne bacteria can reach the intraventricular 
choroid plexus, directly infect choroid plexus epithelial 
cells, and gain access to the CSF. Some bacteria, such as 
S. pneumoniae, can adhere to cerebral capillary endothe-
lial cells and subsequently migrate through or between 
these cells to reach the CSF. Bacteria are able to multiply 
rapidly within CSF because of the absence of effective 
host immune defenses. Normal CSF contains few white 
blood cells (WBCs) and relatively small amounts of 
complement proteins and immunoglobulins. The pau-
city of the latter two prevents effective opsonization of 
bacteria, an essential prerequisite for bacterial phagocy-
tosis by neutrophils. Phagocytosis of bacteria is further 
impaired by the ﬂuid nature of CSF, which is less con-
ducive to phagocytosis than a solid tissue substrate.
A critical event in the pathogenesis of bacterial men-
ingitis is the inﬂammatory reaction induced by the 
invading bacteria. Many of the neurologic manifestations 
and complications of bacterial meningitis result from the 
immune response to the invading pathogen rather than 
from direct bacteria-induced tissue injury. As a result, 
neurologic injury can progress even after the CSF has 
been sterilized by antibiotic therapy.
The lysis of bacteria with the subsequent release of 
cell-wall components into the subarachnoid space is 
the initial step in the induction of the inﬂammatory 
response and the formation of a purulent exudate in 
the subarachnoid space (Fig. 40-2). Bacterial cell-wall 
components, such as the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) mol-
ecules of gram-negative bacteria and teichoic acid 
and peptidoglycans of S. pneumoniae, induce menin-
geal inﬂammation by stimulating the production of 
inﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines by microg-
lia, astrocytes, monocytes, microvascular endothelial 
cells, and CSF leukocytes. In experimental models of 
meningitis, cytokines including tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 1 β (IL-1β) are pres-
ent in CSF within 1–2 h of intracisternal inoculation of 
LPS. This cytokine response is quickly followed by an 
increase in CSF protein concentration and leukocytosis. 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
497
Chemokines (cytokines that induce chemotactic migra-
tion in leukocytes) and a variety of other proinﬂammatory 
cytokines are also produced and secreted by leukocytes 
and tissue cells that are stimulated by IL-1β and TNF-α. 
In addition, bacteremia and the inﬂammatory cytokines 
induce the production of excitatory amino acids, reactive 
oxygen and nitrogen species (free oxygen radicals, nitric 
oxide, and peroxynitrite), and other mediators that can 
induce death of brain cells, especially in the dentate 
gyrus of the hippocampus.
Much of the pathophysiology of bacterial meningi-
tis is a direct consequence of elevated levels of CSF 
cytokines and chemokines. TNF-α and IL-1β act syn-
ergistically to increase the permeability of the blood-
brain barrier, resulting in induction of vasogenic edema 
and the leakage of serum proteins into the subarachnoid 
space (Fig. 40-2). The subarachnoid exudate of pro-
teinaceous material and leukocytes obstructs the ﬂow of 
CSF through the ventricular system and diminishes the 
resorptive capacity of the arachnoid granulations in the 
dural sinuses, leading to obstructive and communicating 
hydrocephalus and concomitant interstitial edema.
Inﬂammatory cytokines upregulate the expression of 
selectins on cerebral capillary endothelial cells and leuko-
cytes, promoting leukocyte adherence to vascular endo-
thelial cells and subsequent migration into the CSF. The 
adherence of leukocytes to capillary endothelial cells 
increases the permeability of blood vessels, allowing for 
the leakage of plasma proteins into the CSF, which adds 
to the inﬂammatory exudate. Neutrophil degranulation 
results in the release of toxic metabolites that contribute 
to cytotoxic edema, cell injury, and death. Contrary to 
previous beliefs, CSF leukocytes probably do little to 
contribute to the clearance of CSF bacterial infection.
During the very early stages of meningitis, there is 
an increase in cerebral blood ﬂow, soon followed by a 
Invasion of SAS by meningeal pathogens
Multiplication of organisms and lysis of organisms by bactericidal antibiotics
Release of bacterial cell-wall components (endotoxin, teichoic acid)
Production of inflammatory cytokines
Altered blood-brain
  barrier permeability
Adherence of leukocytes
  to cerebral capillary
  endothelial cells
  Permeability of
    blood vessels with
    leakage of plasma
    proteins into CSF
Leukocytes migrate into
  CSF, degranulate, and
  release toxic metabolites
Alterations
  in cerebral
  blood flow
Production of
  excitatory amino
  acids and reactive
  oxygen and
  nitrogen species
Cell injury
  and death
  blood flow
Cerebral
  ischemia
Vasogenic
  edema
Exudate in SAS obstructs
  outflow and resorption of
  CSF and surrounds
  and infiltrates
  cerebral vasculature
Obstructive
  and communicating
  hydrocephalus and
  interstitial edema
Cytotoxic edema,
  stroke, seizures
  blood flow
  Intracranial pressure
Coma
FIGURE 40-2
The pathophysiology of the neurologic complications of bacterial meningitis. CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; SAS, subarachnoid 
space.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
498
decrease in cerebral blood ﬂow and a loss of cerebro-
vascular autoregulation (Chap. 28). Narrowing of the 
large arteries at the base of the brain due to encroachment 
by the purulent exudate in the subarachnoid space 
and inﬁltration of the arterial wall by inﬂammatory 
cells with intimal thickening (vasculitis) also occur and 
may result in ischemia and infarction, obstruction of 
branches of the middle cerebral artery by thrombosis, 
thrombosis of the major cerebral venous sinuses, and 
thrombophlebitis of the cerebral cortical veins. The 
combination of interstitial, vasogenic, and cytotoxic 
edema leads to raised ICP and coma. Cerebral herniation 
usually results from the effects of cerebral edema, either 
focal or generalized; hydrocephalus and dural sinus or 
cortical vein thrombosis may also play a role.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Meningitis can present as either an acute fulminant illness 
that progresses rapidly in a few hours or as a subacute 
infection that progressively worsens over several days. 
The classic clinical triad of meningitis is fever, headache, 
and nuchal rigidity, but the classic triad may not be 
present. A decreased level of consciousness occurs in 
>75% of patients and can vary from lethargy to coma. 
Fever and either headache, stiff neck, or an altered level 
of consciousness will be present in nearly every patient 
with bacterial meningitis. Nausea, vomiting, and photo-
phobia are also common complaints.
Seizures occur as part of the initial presentation of 
bacterial meningitis or during the course of the illness 
in 20–40% of patients. Focal seizures are usually due 
to focal arterial ischemia or infarction, cortical venous 
thrombosis with hemorrhage, or focal edema. General-
ized seizure activity and status epilepticus may be due to 
hyponatremia, cerebral anoxia, or, less commonly, the 
toxic effects of antimicrobial agents such as high-dose 
penicillin.
Raised ICP is an expected complication of bacterial 
meningitis and the major cause of obtundation and 
coma in this disease. More than 90% of patients will 
have a CSF opening pressure >180 mmH2O, and 
20% have opening pressures >400 mmH2O. Signs of 
increased ICP include a deteriorating or reduced level 
of consciousness, papilledema, dilated poorly reactive 
pupils, sixth nerve palsies, decerebrate posturing, and 
the Cushing reﬂex (bradycardia, hypertension, and 
irregular respirations). The most disastrous complication 
of increased ICP is cerebral herniation. The incidence 
of herniation in patients with bacterial meningitis has 
been reported to occur in as few as 1% to as many as 8% 
of cases.
Attention to clinical features that are hallmarks of 
infection with certain pathogens may provide invalu-
able clues to the diagnosis of individual organisms. The 
most important of these clues is the rash of menin-
gococcemia, which begins as a diffuse erythematous 
maculopapular rash resembling a viral exanthem; how-
ever, the skin lesions of meningococcemia rapidly 
become petechial. Petechiae are found on the trunk 
and lower extremities, in the mucous membranes and 
conjunctiva, and occasionally on the palms and soles.
DIAGNOSIS
When bacterial meningitis is suspected, blood cultures 
should be immediately obtained and empirical antimi-
crobial and adjunctive dexamethasone therapy initiated 
without delay (Table 40-1). The diagnosis of bacte-
rial meningitis is made by examination of the CSF 
(Table 40-2). The need to obtain neuroimaging stud-
ies (CT or MRI) prior to LP requires clinical judg-
ment. In an immunocompetent patient with no known 
history of recent head trauma, a normal level of con-
sciousness, and no evidence of papilledema or focal 
neurologic deﬁcits, it is considered safe to perform 
LP without prior neuroimaging studies. If LP is delayed 
in order to obtain neuroimaging studies, empirical anti-
biotic therapy should be initiated after blood cultures are 
obtained. Antibiotic therapy initiated a few hours prior to 
LP will not signiﬁcantly alter the CSF WBC count or 
glucose concentration, nor is it likely to prevent visu-
alization of organisms by Gram’s stain or detection of 
bacterial nucleic acid by polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) assay.
The classic CSF abnormalities in bacterial meningitis 
(Table 40-2) are (1) polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocy-
tosis (>100 cells/μL in 90%), (2) decreased glucose con-
centration (<2.2 mmol/L [<40 mg/dL] and/or CSF/
serum glucose ratio of <0.4 in ∼60%), (3) increased pro-
tein concentration (>0.45 g/L [>45 mg/dL] in 90%), 
and (4) increased opening pressure (>180 mmH2O in 
90%). CSF bacterial cultures are positive in >80% of 
patients, and CSF Gram’s stain demonstrates organisms 
in >60%.
CSF glucose concentrations <2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL) 
are abnormal, and a CSF glucose concentration of zero 
can be seen in bacterial meningitis. Use of the CSF/
serum glucose ratio corrects for hyperglycemia that may 
mask a relative decrease in the CSF glucose concentra-
tion. The CSF glucose concentration is low when the 
CSF/serum glucose ratio is <0.6. A CSF/serum glucose 
ratio <0.4 is highly suggestive of bacterial meningitis 
but may also be seen in other conditions, including fungal, 
tuberculous, and carcinomatous meningitis. It takes 
from 30 min to several hours for the concentration of 
CSF glucose to reach equilibrium with blood glucose 
levels; therefore, administration of 50 mL of 50% glucose 
(D50) prior to LP, as commonly occurs in emer-
gency room settings, is unlikely to alter CSF glucose 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
499
concentration signiﬁcantly unless more than a few hours 
have elapsed between glucose administration and LP.
A 16S rRNA conserved sequence broad-based bacte-
rial PCR can detect small numbers of viable and nonvi-
able organisms in CSF and is expected to be useful for 
TABLE 40-1 
ANTIBIOTICS USED IN EMPIRICAL THERAPY 
OF BACTERIAL MENINGITIS AND FOCAL CNS 
INFECTIONSa
INDICATION
ANTIBIOTIC
Preterm infants to infants  
<1 mon
Ampicillin + 
cefotaxime
Infants 1–3 mo
Ampicillin + cefotaxime 
or ceftriaxone
Immunocompetent children >3 
mo and adults <55
Cefotaxime, ceftriax-
one or cefepime + 
vancomycin
Adults >55 and adults of any 
age with alcoholism or other  
debilitating illnesses
Ampicillin + cefotax-
ime, ceftriaxone  
or cefepime +  
vancomycin
Hospital-acquired meningitis, post-
traumatic or postneurosurgery 
meningitis, neutropenic patients, 
or patients with impaired  
cell-mediated immunity
Ampicillin + ceftazi-
dime or meropenem + 
vancomycin
ANTIMICROBIAL  
AGENT
TOTAL DAILY DOSE AND DOSING INTERVAL
CHILD  
(>1 MONTH)
ADULT
Ampicillin
200 (mg/kg)/d, 
q4h
12 g/d, q4h
Cefepime
150 (mg/kg)/d, 
q8h
6 g/d, q8h
Cefotaxime
200 (mg/kg)/d, 
q6h
12 g/d, q4h
Ceftriaxone
100 (mg/kg)/d, 
q12h
4 g/d, q12h
Ceftazidime
150 (mg/kg)/d, 
q8h
6 g/d, q8h
Gentamicin
7.5 (mg/kg)/d, 
q8hb
7.5 (mg/kg)/d, q8h
Meropenem
120 (mg/kg)/d, 
q8h
3 g/d, q8h
Metronidazole
30 (mg/kg)/d, 
q6h
1500–2000 mg/d, q6h
Nafcillin
100–200 (mg/
kg)/d, q6h
9–12 g/d, q4h
Penicillin G
400,000  
(U/kg)/d, q4h
20–24 million U/d, q4h
Vancomycin
60 (mg/kg)/d, 
q6h
2 g/d, q12hb
aAll antibiotics are administered intravenously; doses indicated 
assume normal renal and hepatic function.
bDoses should be adjusted based on serum peak and trough levels: 
gentamicin therapeutic level: peak: 5–8 μg/mL; trough: <2 μg/mL; 
vancomycin therapeutic level: peak: 25–40 μg/mL; trough: 5–15 μg/mL.
TABLE 40-2 
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID (CSF) ABNORMALITIES IN 
BACTERIAL MENINGITIS
Opening pressure
>180 mmH2O
White blood cells
10/μL to 10,000/μL; 
neutrophils predominate
Red blood cells
Absent in nontraumatic tap
Glucose
<2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL)
CSF/serum glucose
<0.4
Protein
>0.45 g/L (>45 mg/dL)
Gram’s stain
Positive in >60%
Culture
Positive in >80%
Latex agglutination
May be positive in patients with 
meningitis due to S. pneumoniae, 
N. meningitidis, H. inﬂuenzae type 
b, E. coli, group B streptococci
Limulus lysate
Positive in cases of  
gram-negative meningitis
PCR
Detects bacterial DNA
Abbreviation: PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
making a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis in patients 
who have been pretreated with oral or parenteral anti-
biotics and in whom Gram’s stain and CSF culture are 
negative. When the broad-range PCR is positive, a 
PCR that uses speciﬁc bacterial primers to detect the 
nucleic acid of S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, Escherichia 
coli, L. monocytogenes, H. inﬂuenzae, and S. agalactiae can 
be obtained based on the clinical suspicion of the men-
ingeal pathogen. The latex agglutination (LA) test for 
the detection of bacterial antigens of S. pneumoniae, N. 
meningitidis, H. inﬂuenzae type b, group B streptococ-
cus, and E. coli K1 strains in the CSF has been useful for 
making a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis but is being 
replaced by the CSF bacterial PCR assay. The CSF LA 
test has a speciﬁcity of 95–100% for S. pneumoniae and 
N. meningitidis, so a positive test is virtually diagnostic 
of bacterial meningitis caused by these organisms. How-
ever, the sensitivity of the CSF LA test is only 70–100% 
for detection of S. pneumoniae and 33–70% for detec-
tion of N. meningitidis antigens, so a negative test does 
not exclude infection by these organisms. The Limu-
lus amebocyte lysate assay is a rapid diagnostic test for 
the detection of gram-negative endotoxin in CSF and 
thus for making a diagnosis of gram-negative bacterial 
meningitis. The test has a speciﬁcity of 85–100% and a 
sensitivity approaching 100%. Thus, a positive Limu-
lus amebocyte lysate assay occurs in virtually all patients 
with gram-negative bacterial meningitis, but false posi-
tives may occur.
Almost all patients with bacterial meningitis will have 
neuroimaging studies performed during the course of 
their illness. MRI is preferred over CT because of its 
superiority in demonstrating areas of cerebral edema 
and ischemia. In patients with bacterial meningitis, 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
500
diffuse meningeal enhancement is often seen after the 
administration of gadolinium. Meningeal enhancement 
is not diagnostic of meningitis but occurs in any CNS 
disease associated with increased blood-brain barrier 
permeability.
Petechial skin lesions, if present, should be biopsied. 
The rash of meningococcemia results from the dermal 
seeding of organisms with vascular endothelial damage, 
and biopsy may reveal the organism on Gram’s stain.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Viral meningoencephalitis, and particularly herpes simplex 
virus (HSV) encephalitis, can mimic the clinical presenta-
tion of bacterial meningitis (see “Viral Encephalitis,” later 
in the chapter). HSV encephalitis typically presents with 
headache, fever, altered consciousness, focal neurologic def-
icits (e.g., dysphasia, hemiparesis), and focal or generalized 
seizures. The ﬁndings on CSF studies, neuroimag-
ing, and electroencephalogram (EEG) distinguish 
HSV encephalitis from bacterial meningitis. The typi-
cal CSF proﬁle with viral CNS infections is a lympho-
cytic pleocytosis with a normal glucose concentration, 
in contrast to PMN pleocytosis and hypoglycorrhachia 
characteristic of bacterial meningitis. MRI abnormali-
ties (other than meningeal enhancement) are not seen 
in uncomplicated bacterial meningitis. By contrast, in 
HSV encephalitis, on T2-weighted and ﬂuid-attenuated 
inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI images, high signal 
intensity lesions are seen in the orbitofrontal, anterior, 
and medial temporal lobes in the majority of patients 
within 48 h of symptom onset. Some patients with HSV 
encephalitis have a distinctive periodic pattern on EEG 
(discussed later).
Rickettsial disease can resemble bacterial meningi-
tis. Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is trans-
mitted by a tick bite and caused by the bacteria Rick-
ettsia rickettsii. The disease may present acutely with 
high fever, prostration, myalgia, headache, nausea, 
and vomiting. Most patients develop a characteristic rash 
within 96 h of the onset of symptoms. The rash is ini-
tially a diffuse erythematous maculopapular rash that 
may be difﬁcult to distinguish from that of meningo-
coccemia. It progresses to a petechial rash, then to a 
purpuric rash and, if untreated, to skin necrosis or gan-
grene. The color of the lesions changes from bright 
red to very dark red, then yellowish-green to black. 
The rash typically begins in the wrist and ankles and 
then spreads distally and proximally within a matter 
of a few hours, involving the palms and soles. Diag-
nosis is made by immunoﬂuorescent staining of skin 
biopsy specimens. Ehrlichioses are also transmitted by 
a tick bite. These are small gram-negative coccobacilli 
of which two species cause human disease. Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum causes human granulocytic ehrlichiosis 
(anaplasmosis), and Ehrlichia chaffeensis causes human 
monocytic ehrlichiosis. The clinical and laboratory man-
ifestations of the infections are similar. Patients present 
with fever, headache, nausea, and vomiting. Twenty 
percent of patients have a maculopapular or petechial 
rash. There is laboratory evidence of leukopenia, throm-
bocytopenia, and anemia, and mild to moderate elevations 
in alanine aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, and 
lactate dehydrogenase. Patients with RMSF and those 
with ehrlichial infections may have an altered level of 
consciousness ranging from mild lethargy to coma, confu-
sion, focal neurologic signs, cranial nerve palsies, hyperre-
ﬂexia, and seizures.
Focal suppurative CNS infections (discussed later), 
including subdural and epidural empyema and brain 
abscess, should also be considered, especially when focal 
neurologic ﬁndings are present. MRI should be performed 
promptly in all patients with suspected meningitis who 
have focal features, both to detect the intracranial infection 
and to search for associated areas of infection in the sinuses 
or mastoid bones.
A number of noninfectious CNS disorders can mimic 
bacterial meningitis. Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH; 
Chap. 28) is generally the major consideration. Other 
possibilities include chemical meningitis due to rupture 
of tumor contents into the CSF (e.g., from a cystic 
glioma or craniopharyngioma epidermoid or dermoid 
cyst); drug-induced hypersensitivity meningitis; carcino-
matous or lymphomatous meningitis; meningitis associ-
ated with inﬂammatory disorders such as sarcoid, systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE), and Behçet’s syndrome; pituitary 
apoplexy; and uveomeningitic syndromes (Vogt-Koyanagi-
Harada syndrome).
On occasion, subacutely evolving meningitis (Chap. 41) 
may be considered in the differential diagnosis of acute 
meningitis. The principal causes include Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsulatum, 
Coccidioides immitis, and Treponema pallidum.
TREATMENT 
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
EMPIRICAL ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
(Table 40-1) Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency. 
The goal is to begin antibiotic therapy within 60 min 
of a patient’s arrival in the emergency room. Empirical 
antimicrobial therapy is initiated in patients with sus-
pected bacterial meningitis before the results of CSF 
Gram’s stain and culture are known. S. pneumoniae and 
N. meningitidis are the most common etiologic organ-
isms of community-acquired bacterial meningitis. Due to 
the emergence of penicillin- and cephalosporin-resistant 
S. pneumoniae, empirical therapy of community-acquired 
suspected bacterial meningitis in children and adults 
should include a combination of dexamethasone, a 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
501
third- or fourth-generation cephalosporin (e.g., cef-
triaxone, cefotaxime, or cefepime), and vancomycin, 
plus acyclovir, as HSV encephalitis is the leading dis-
ease in the differential diagnosis, and doxycycline dur-
ing tick season to treat tick-borne bacterial infections. 
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime provide good coverage for 
susceptible S. pneumoniae, group B streptococci, and 
H. influenzae and adequate coverage for N. meningiti-
dis. Cefepime is a broad-spectrum fourth-generation 
cephalosporin with in vitro activity similar to that of 
cefotaxime or ceftriaxone against S. pneumoniae and N. 
meningitidis and greater activity against Enterobacter spe-
cies and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In clinical trials, 
cefepime has been demonstrated to be equivalent to 
cefotaxime in the treatment of penicillin-sensitive pneu-
mococcal and meningococcal meningitis, and it has 
been used successfully in some patients with meningi-
tis due to Enterobacter species and P. aeruginosa. Ampicillin 
should be added to the empirical regimen for coverage  
of L. monocytogenes in individuals <3 months of age, 
those >55, or those with suspected impaired cell-mediated 
immunity because of chronic illness, organ transplan-
tation, pregnancy, malignancy, or immunosuppres-
sive therapy. Metronidazole is added to the empirical 
regimen to cover gram-negative anaerobes in patients 
with otitis, sinusitis, or mastoiditis. In hospital-acquired 
meningitis, and particularly meningitis following neuro-
surgical procedures, staphylococci and gram-negative 
organisms including P. aeruginosa are the most common 
etiologic organisms. In these patients, empirical therapy  
should include a combination of vancomycin and cef-
tazidime, cefepime, or meropenem. Ceftazidime, cefepime, 
or meropenem should be substituted for ceftriaxone or 
cefotaxime in neurosurgical patients and in neutropenic 
patients, as ceftriaxone and cefotaxime do not provide 
adequate activity against CNS infection with P. aeruginosa. 
Meropenem is a carbapenem antibiotic that is highly 
active in vitro against L. monocytogenes, has been dem-
onstrated to be effective in cases of meningitis caused 
by P. aeruginosa, and shows good activity against pen-
icillin-resistant pneumococci. In experimental pneu-
mococcal meningitis, meropenem was comparable 
to ceftriaxone and inferior to vancomycin in sterilizing  
CSF cultures. The number of patients with bacterial 
meningitis enrolled in clinical trials of meropenem has 
not been sufficient to definitively assess the efficacy of 
this antibiotic.
SPECIFIC ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
Meningococcal Meningitis (Table 40-3) Although 
ceftriaxone and cefotaxime provide adequate empiri-
cal coverage for N. meningitidis, penicillin G remains the 
antibiotic of choice for meningococcal meningitis caused 
by susceptible strains. Isolates of N. meningitidis with 
moderate resistance to penicillin have been identified,  
but patients infected with these strains have still been 
successfully treated with penicillin. CSF isolates of  
N. meningitidis should be tested for penicillin and ampicil-
lin susceptibility, and if resistance is found, cefotaxime or 
ceftriaxone should be substituted for penicillin. A 7-day 
course of intravenous antibiotic therapy is adequate for 
uncomplicated meningococcal meningitis. The index 
case and all close contacts should receive chemopro-
phylaxis with a 2-day regimen of rifampin (600 mg every 
12 h for 2 days in adults and 10 mg/kg every 12 h for  
2 days in children >1 year). Rifampin is not recommended in 
pregnant women. Alternatively, adults can be treated with 
one dose of azithromycin (500 mg), or one intramuscular 
dose of ceftriaxone (250 mg). Close contacts are defined as 
those individuals who have had contact with oropharyngeal 
secretions, either through kissing or by sharing toys, bever-
ages, or cigarettes.
Pneumococcal Meningitis Antimicrobial therapy 
of pneumococcal meningitis is initiated with a cepha-
losporin (ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, or cefepime) and 
vancomycin. All CSF isolates of S. pneumoniae should 
be tested for sensitivity to penicillin and the cephalo-
sporins. Once the results of antimicrobial susceptibility 
tests are known, therapy can be modified accordingly 
(Table 40-3). For S. pneumoniae meningitis, an isolate 
of S. pneumoniae is considered to be susceptible to 
TABLE 40-3 
ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY OF CNS BACTERIAL 
INFECTIONS BASED ON PATHOGENa
ORGANISM
ANTIBIOTIC
Neisseria meningitides
 Penicillin-sensitive
Penicillin G or ampicillin
 Penicillin-resistant
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 Penicillin-sensitive
Penicillin G
 Penicillin-intermediate
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime 
or cefepime
 Penicillin-resistant
(Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime 
or cefepime) + vancomycin
Gram-negative bacilli 
(except Pseudomonas 
spp.)
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Ceftazidime or cefepime or 
meropenem
Staphylococci spp.
 Methicillin-sensitive
Nafcillin
 Methicillin-resistant
Vancomycin
Listeria monocytogenes
Ampicillin + gentamicin
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime 
or cefepime
Streptococcus agalactiae
Penicillin G or ampicillin
Bacteroides fragilis
Metronidazole
Fusobacterium spp.
Metronidazole
aDoses are as indicated in Table 40-1.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
502
penicillin with a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) 
<0.06 μg/mL, to have intermediate resistance when 
the MIC is 0.1–1.0 μg/mL, and to be highly resistant 
when the MIC >1.0 μg/mL. Isolates of S. pneumoniae 
that have cephalosporin MICs ≤0.5 μg/mL are considered 
sensitive to the cephalosporins (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, 
cefepime). Those with MICs of 1 μg/mL are considered 
to have intermediate resistance, and those with MICs 
≥2 μg/mL are considered resistant. For meningitis due 
to pneumococci, with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone MICs 
≤0.5 μg/mL, treatment with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone is 
usually adequate. For MIC >1 μg/mL, vancomycin is the 
antibiotic of choice. Rifampin can be added to vancomycin 
for its synergistic effect but is inadequate as monother-
apy because resistance develops rapidly when it is used 
alone.
A 2-week course of intravenous antimicrobial therapy 
is recommended for pneumococcal meningitis.
Patients with S. pneumoniae meningitis should have a 
repeat LP performed 24–36 h after the initiation of anti-
microbial therapy to document sterilization of the CSF. 
Failure to sterilize the CSF after 24–36 h of antibiotic 
therapy should be considered presumptive evidence of 
antibiotic resistance. Patients with penicillin- and ceph-
alosporin-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae who do not 
respond to intravenous vancomycin alone may benefit 
from the addition of intraventricular vancomycin. The 
intraventricular route of administration is preferred over 
the intrathecal route because adequate concentrations 
of vancomycin in the cerebral ventricles are not always 
achieved with intrathecal administration.
Listeria Meningitis Meningitis due to L. mono-
cytogenes is treated with ampicillin for at least 3 weeks 
(Table 40-3). Gentamicin is added in critically ill patients 
(2 mg/kg loading dose, then 7.5 mg/kg per day given 
every 8 h and adjusted for serum levels and renal func-
tion). The combination of trimethoprim (10–20 mg/kg 
per day) and sulfamethoxazole (50–100 mg/kg per day) 
given every 6 h may provide an alternative in penicillin-
allergic patients.
Staphylococcal Meningitis Meningitis due to 
susceptible strains of S. aureus or coagulase-negative 
staphylococci is treated with nafcillin (Table 40-3). Van-
comycin is the drug of choice for methicillin-resistant 
staphylococci and for patients allergic to penicillin. In 
these patients, the CSF should be monitored during 
therapy. If the CSF is not sterilized after 48 h of intravenous  
vancomycin therapy, then either intraventricular or 
intrathecal vancomycin, 20 mg once daily, can be added.
Gram-Negative Bacillary Meningitis The 
third-generation cephalosporins—cefotaxime, ceftri-
axone, and ceftazidime—are equally efficacious for 
the treatment of gram-negative bacillary meningitis, 
with the exception of meningitis due to P. aeruginosa, 
which should be treated with ceftazidime, cefepime, or 
meropenem (Table 40-3). A 3-week course of intrave-
nous antibiotic therapy is recommended for meningitis 
due to gram-negative bacilli.
ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY The release of bacterial 
cell-wall components by bactericidal antibiotics leads 
to the production of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β 
and TNF-α in the subarachnoid space. Dexamethasone 
exerts its beneficial effect by inhibiting the synthesis of 
IL-1β and TNF-α at the level of mRNA, decreasing CSF 
outflow resistance, and stabilizing the blood-brain barrier. 
The rationale for giving dexamethasone 20 min before 
antibiotic therapy is that dexamethasone inhibits the 
production of TNF-α by macrophages and microglia 
only if it is administered before these cells are activated 
by endotoxin. Dexamethasone does not alter TNF-α 
production once it has been induced. The results of 
clinical trials of dexamethasone therapy in children,  
predominantly with meningitis due to H. influenzae 
and S. pneumoniae, have demonstrated its efficacy in 
decreasing meningeal inflammation and neurologic 
sequelae such as the incidence of sensorineural hearing 
loss.
A prospective European trial of adjunctive therapy 
for acute bacterial meningitis in 301 adults found that 
dexamethasone reduced the number of unfavorable 
outcomes (15 vs. 25%, p = .03) including death (7 vs. 
15%, p = .04). The benefits were most striking in patients 
with pneumococcal meningitis. Dexamethasone (10 mg 
intravenously) was administered 15–20 min before the 
first dose of an antimicrobial agent, and the same dose was 
repeated every 6 h for 4 days. These results were con-
firmed in a second trial of dexamethasone in adults with 
pneumococcal meningitis. Therapy with dexametha-
sone should ideally be started 20 min before, or not 
later than concurrent with, the first dose of antibiotics. It 
is unlikely to be of significant benefit if started >6 h after 
antimicrobial therapy has been initiated. Dexametha-
sone may decrease the penetration of vancomycin into 
CSF, and it delays the sterilization of CSF in experimen-
tal models of S. pneumoniae meningitis. As a result, its 
potential benefit should be carefully weighed when 
vancomycin is the antibiotic of choice. Alternatively, 
vancomycin can be administered by the intraventricular 
route.
One of the concerns for using dexamethasone in 
adults with bacterial meningitis is that in experimental 
models of meningitis, dexamethasone therapy increased 
hippocampal cell injury and reduced learning capacity. 
This has not been the case in clinical series. The efficacy 
of dexamethasone therapy in preventing neurologic 
sequelae is different between high- and low-income 
countries. Three large randomized trials in low-income 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
503
countries (sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia) failed to 
show benefit in subgroups of patients. The lack of efficacy 
of dexamethasone in these trials has been attributed to 
late presentation to the hospital with more advanced 
disease, antibiotic pretreatment, malnutrition, infection 
with HIV, and treatment of patients with probable, but 
not microbiologically proven, bacterial meningitis. The 
results of these clinical trials suggest that patients in 
sub-Saharan Africa and those in low-income countries 
with negative CSF Gram’s stain and culture should not 
be treated with dexamethasone.
INCREASED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
Emergency treatment of increased ICP includes elevation 
of the patient’s head to 30–45°, intubation and hyper-
ventilation (Paco2 25–30 mmHg), and mannitol. Patients 
with increased ICP should be managed in an intensive 
care unit; accurate ICP measurements are best obtained 
with an ICP monitoring device.
Treatment of increased intracranial pressure is discussed 
in detail in Chap. 28.
PROGNOSIS
Mortality rate is 3–7% for meningitis caused by H. 
inﬂuenzae, N. meningitidis, or group B streptococci; 
15% for that due to L. monocytogenes; and 20% for 
S. pneumoniae. In general, the risk of death from bacterial 
meningitis increases with (1) decreased level of con-
sciousness on admission, (2) onset of seizures within 
24 h of admission, (3) signs of increased ICP, (4) young 
age (infancy) and age >50, (5) the presence of comorbid 
conditions including shock and/or the need for 
mechanical ventilation, and (6) delay in the initia-
tion of treatment. Decreased CSF glucose concentratio 
(<2.2 mmol/L [<40 mg/dL]) and markedly increased 
CSF protein concentration (>3 g/L [>300 mg/dL]) 
have been predictive of increased mortality and poorer 
outcomes in some series. Moderate or severe sequelae 
occur in ∼25% of survivors, although the exact inci-
dence varies with the infecting organism. Common 
sequelae include decreased intellectual function, mem-
ory impairment, seizures, hearing loss and dizziness, and 
gait disturbances.
ACUTE VIRAL MENINGITIS
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Immunocompetent adult patients with viral menin-
gitis usually present with headache, fever, and signs of 
meningeal irritation coupled with an inﬂammatory CSF 
proﬁle (discussed later). Headache is almost invariably 
present and often characterized as frontal or retroorbital 
and frequently associated with photophobia and pain 
on moving the eyes. Nuchal rigidity is present in most 
cases but may be mild and present only near the limit of 
neck anteﬂexion. Constitutional signs can include malaise, 
myalgia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, 
and/or diarrhea. Patients often have mild lethargy or 
drowsiness; however, profound alterations in conscious-
ness, such as stupor, coma, or marked confusion do not 
occur in viral meningitis and suggest the presence of 
encephalitis or other alternative diagnoses. Similarly, 
seizures or focal neurologic signs or symptoms or neu-
roimaging abnormalities indicative of brain parenchymal 
involvement are not typical of viral meningitis and suggest 
the presence of encephalitis or another CNS infectious or 
inﬂammatory process.
ETIOLOGY
Using a variety of diagnostic techniques, including CSF 
PCR, culture, and serology, a speciﬁc viral cause can 
be found in 75–90% of cases of viral meningitis. The 
most important agents are enteroviruses (including 
echoviruses and coxsackieviruses in addition to num-
bered enteroviruses), HSV type 2 (HSV-2), HIV, and 
arboviruses (Table 40-4). CSF cultures are positive in 
30–70% of patients, the frequency of isolation depending 
on the speciﬁc viral agent. Approximately two-thirds 
of culture-negative cases of “aseptic” meningitis have 
a speciﬁc viral etiology identiﬁed by CSF PCR testing 
(discussed later).
TABLE 40-4 
VIRUSES CAUSING ACUTE MENINGITIS AND 
ENCEPHALITIS IN NORTH AMERICA
ACUTE MENINGITIS
Common
Less Common
Enteroviruses (coxsackie-
viruses, echoviruses, and 
human enteroviruses 68–71)
Varicella-zoster virus
Epstein-Barr virus
Herpes simplex virus 2
Lymphocytic  
choriomeningitis virus
Arthropod-borne viruses
HIV
ACUTE ENCEPHALITIS
Common
Less Common
Herpesviruses
Rabies
 Herpes simplex virus 1
Eastern equine  
encephalitis virus
 Varicella-zoster virus
Western equine  
encephalitis virus
 Epstein-Barr virus
Powassan virus
Arthropod-borne viruses
Cytomegalovirusa
 La Crosse virus
Enterovirusesa
 West Nile virus
Colorado tick fever
 St. Louis encephalitis virus
Mumps
aImmunocompromised host.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
504
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Viral meningitis is not a nationally reportable disease; 
however, it has been estimated that the incidence is 
∼75,000 cases per year. In temperate climates, there is 
a substantial increase in cases during the summer and 
early fall months, reﬂecting the seasonal predominance 
of enterovirus and arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) 
infections, with a peak monthly incidence of about 1 
reported case per 100,000 population.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
CSF examination
The most important laboratory test in the diagnosis of 
viral meningitis is examination of the CSF. The typical 
proﬁle is a lymphocytic pleocytosis (25–500 cells/μL), 
a normal or slightly elevated protein concentration 
(0.2–0.8 g/L [20–80 mg/dL]), a normal glucose con-
centration, and a normal or mildly elevated opening 
pressure (100–350 mmH2O). Organisms are not seen on 
Gram’s stain of CSF. Rarely, PMNs may predominate 
in the ﬁrst 48 h of illness, especially with infections due to 
echovirus 9, West Nile virus, eastern equine encephalitis 
(EEE) virus, or mumps. A pleocytosis of polymorpho-
nuclear neutrophils occurs in 45% of patients with West 
Nile virus (WNV) meningitis and can persist for a week 
or longer before shifting to a lymphocytic pleocytosis. 
Despite these exceptions, the presence of a CSF PMN 
pleocytosis in a patient with suspected viral meningitis in 
whom a speciﬁc diagnosis has not been established should 
prompt consideration of alternative diagnoses, including 
bacterial meningitis or parameningeal infections. The 
total CSF cell count in viral meningitis is typically 
25–500/μL, although cell counts of several thousand/μL 
are occasionally seen, especially with infections due 
to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) and 
mumps virus. The CSF glucose concentration is typi-
cally normal in viral infections, although it may be 
decreased in 10–30% of cases due to mumps or LCMV. 
Rare instances of decreased CSF glucose concentra-
tion occur in cases of meningitis due to echoviruses and 
other enteroviruses, HSV-2, and varicella-zoster virus 
(VZV). As a rule, a lymphocytic pleocytosis with a low 
glucose concentration should suggest fungal or tuberculous 
meningitis, Listeria meningoencephalitis, or noninfec-
tious disorders (e.g., sarcoid, neoplastic meningitis).
A number of tests measuring levels of various CSF pro-
teins, enzymes, and mediators—including C-reactive protein, 
lactic acid, lactate dehydrogenase, neopterin, quinolinate, 
IL-1β, IL-6, soluble IL-2 receptor, β2-microglobulin, and 
TNF—have been proposed as potential discriminators 
between viral and bacterial meningitis or as markers of spe-
ciﬁc types of viral infection (e.g., infection with HIV), but 
they remain of uncertain sensitivity and speciﬁcity and are 
not widely used for diagnostic purposes.
Polymerase chain reaction ampliﬁcation  
of viral nucleic acid
Ampliﬁcation of viral-speciﬁc DNA or RNA from 
CSF using PCR ampliﬁcation has become the single 
most important method for diagnosing CNS viral infec-
tions. In both enteroviral and HSV infections of the 
CNS, PCR has become the diagnostic procedure of 
choice and is substantially more sensitive than viral cul-
tures. HSV PCR is also an important diagnostic test 
in patients with recurrent episodes of “aseptic” men-
ingitis, many of whom have ampliﬁable HSV DNA in 
CSF despite negative viral cultures. CSF PCR is also 
used routinely to diagnose CNS viral infections caused 
by cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 
VZV, and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6). CSF PCR 
tests are available for WNV but are not as sensitive as 
detection of WNV-speciﬁc CSF IgM. PCR is also useful 
in the diagnosis of CNS infection caused by Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae, which can mimic viral meningitis and 
encephalitis.
Viral culture
The sensitivity of CSF cultures for the diagnosis of viral 
meningitis and encephalitis, in contrast to its utility in 
bacterial infections, is generally poor. In addition to CSF, 
speciﬁc viruses may also be isolated from throat swabs, 
stool, blood, and urine. Enteroviruses and adenoviruses 
may be found in feces; arboviruses, some enterovi-
ruses, and LCMV in blood; mumps and CMV in urine; 
and enteroviruses, mumps, and adenoviruses in throat 
washings. During enteroviral infections, viral shedding 
in stool may persist for several weeks. The presence 
of enterovirus in stool is not diagnostic and may result 
from residual shedding from a previous enteroviral 
infection; it also occurs in some asymptomatic individuals 
during enteroviral epidemics.
Serologic studies
For some viruses, including many arboviruses such as 
WNV, serologic studies remain a crucial diagnostic tool. 
Serum antibody determination is less useful for viruses 
with high seroprevalence rates in the general popula-
tion such as HSV, VZV, CMV, and EBV. For viruses 
with low seroprevalence rates, diagnosis of acute viral 
infection can be made by documenting seroconversion 
between acute-phase and convalescent sera (typically 
obtained after 2–4 weeks) or by demonstrating the 
presence of virus-speciﬁc IgM antibodies. Documen-
tation of synthesis of virus-speciﬁc antibodies in CSF, 
as shown by an increased IgG index or the presence of 
CSF IgM antibodies, is more useful than serum serol-
ogy alone and can provide presumptive evidence 
of CNS infection. Although serum and CSF IgM 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
505
antibodies generally persist for only a few months after 
acute infection, there are exceptions to this rule. For 
example, WNV IgM has been shown to persist in some 
patients for >1 year following acute infection. Unfor-
tunately, the delay between onset of infection and the 
host’s generation of a virus-speciﬁc antibody response 
often means that serologic data are useful mainly for the 
retrospective establishment of a speciﬁc diagnosis, rather 
than in aiding acute diagnosis or management.
CSF oligoclonal gamma globulin bands occur in 
association with a number of viral infections. The asso-
ciated antibodies are often directed against viral proteins. 
Oligoclonal bands also occur commonly in certain non-
infectious neurologic diseases (e.g., multiple sclerosis) and 
may be found in nonviral infections (e.g., neurosyphilis, 
Lyme neuroborreliosis).
Other laboratory studies
All patients with suspected viral meningitis should have 
a complete blood count and differential, liver and renal 
function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 
and C-reactive protein, electrolytes, glucose, creatine 
kinase, aldolase, amylase, and lipase. Neuroimaging 
studies (MRI, CT) are not necessary in patients with 
uncomplicated viral meningitis but should be performed 
in patients with altered consciousness, seizures, focal 
neurologic signs or symptoms, or atypical CSF proﬁles.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The most important issue in the differential diagnosis of 
viral meningitis is to consider diseases that can mimic 
viral meningitis, including (1) untreated or partially 
treated bacterial meningitis; (2) early stages of meningi-
tis caused by fungi, mycobacteria, or Treponema pallidum 
(neurosyphilis), in which a lymphocytic pleocytosis is 
common, cultures may be slow growing or negative, 
and hypoglycorrhachia may not be present early; (3) 
meningitis caused by agents such as Mycoplasma, Listeria 
spp., Brucella spp., Coxiella spp., Leptospira spp., and 
Rickettsia spp.; (4) parameningeal infections; (5) neoplastic 
meningitis; and (6) meningitis secondary to noninfec-
tious inﬂammatory diseases, including hypersensitivity 
meningitis, SLE and other rheumatologic diseases, 
sarcoidosis, Behçet’s syndrome, and the uveomeningitic 
syndromes. Studies in children >28 days of age sug-
gest that the presence of CSF protein >0.5 g/L (sensi-
tivity 89%, speciﬁcity 78%), and elevated serum procal-
citonin levels >0.5 ng/mL (sensitivity 89%, speciﬁcity 
89%) were clues to the presence of bacterial as opposed 
to “aseptic” meningitis. A variety of clinical algorithms 
for differentiating bacterial from aseptic meningitis have 
been promulgated, although none have been widely 
validated. One such prospectively validated system, the 
bacterial meningitis score, suggests that the probability of 
bacterial meningitis is 0.1% or less (negative predictive 
value 99.9%, 95% CI 99.6–100%) in children with CSF 
pleocytosis who have: (1) a negative CSF Gram’s stain, 
(2) CSF neutrophil count <1000 cells/μL, (3) CSF 
protein <80 mg/dL, (4) peripheral absolute neutrophil 
count of <10,000 cells/μL, and (5) no prior history or 
current presence of seizures.
SPECIFIC VIRAL ETIOLOGIES
Enteroviruses (EV) are the most common cause of viral 
meningitis, accounting for >85% of cases in which a 
speciﬁc etiology can be identiﬁed. Cases may either be 
sporadic or occur in clusters. Recent outbreaks of EV 
meningitis in the United States have been associated 
with coxsackievirus B5 and echovirus strains 6, 9, and 
30. Coxsackievirus strains A9, B3, and B4 are more 
commonly associated with individual cases. EV71 has 
produced large epidemics of neurologic disease out-
side the United States, especially in Southeast Asia, but 
most recently reported cases in the United States have 
been sporadic. Enteroviruses are the most likely cause 
of viral meningitis in the summer and fall months, espe-
cially in children (<15 years), although cases occur at 
reduced frequency year round. Although the incidence 
of enteroviral meningitis declines with increasing age, 
some outbreaks have preferentially affected older chil-
dren and adults. Meningitis outside the neonatal period 
is usually benign. Patients present with sudden onset 
of fever; headache; nuchal rigidity; and often consti-
tutional signs, including vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, 
cough, pharyngitis, and myalgias. The physical exami-
nation should include a careful search for stigmata of 
enterovirus infection, including exanthems, hand-foot-
mouth disease, herpangina, pleurodynia, myopericar-
ditis, and hemorrhagic conjunctivitis. The CSF proﬁle 
is typically a lymphocytic pleocytosis (100–1000 cells/
μL) with normal glucose and normal or mildly elevated 
protein concentration. However, up to 15% of patients, 
most commonly young infants rather than older chil-
dren or adults, have a normal CSF leukocyte count. In 
rare cases, PMNs may predominate during the ﬁrst 48 h 
of illness. CSF reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) 
is the diagnostic procedure of choice and is both sen-
sitive (>95%) and speciﬁc (>100%). CSF PCR has the 
highest sensitivity if performed within 48 h of symptom 
onset, with sensitivity declining rapidly after day 5 of 
symptoms. Treatment is supportive, and patients usually 
recover without sequelae. Chronic and severe infections 
can occur in neonates and in individuals with hypo- or 
agammaglobulinemia.
Arbovirus infections occur predominantly in the sum-
mer and early fall. Arboviral meningitis should be con-
sidered when clusters of meningitis and encephalitis 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
506
cases occur in a restricted geographic region during 
the summer or early fall. In the United States the most 
important causes of arboviral meningitis and encepha-
litis are West Nile virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus, 
and the California encephalitis group of viruses. In 
WNV epidemics, avian deaths may serve as sentinel 
infections for subsequent human disease. A history of 
tick exposure or travel or residence in the appropri-
ate geographic area should suggest the possibility of 
Colorado tick fever virus or Powassan virus infec-
tion, although nonviral tick-borne diseases, including 
RMSF and Lyme neuroborreliosis, may present simi-
larly. Arbovirus meningoencephalitis is typically asso-
ciated with a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal 
glucose concentration, and normal or mildly elevated 
protein concentration. However, 40–45% of patients 
with WNV meningoencephalitis have CSF neutro-
philia, which can persist for a week or more. The rarity 
of hypoglycorrhachia in WNV infection as well as 
the absence of positive Gram’s stains and the negative 
cultures helps distinguish these patients from those with 
bacterial meningitis. The presence of increased numbers 
of plasmacytoid cells or Mollaret-like large mononuclear 
cells in the CSF may be a clue to the diagnosis of WNV 
infection. Deﬁnitive diagnosis of arboviral meningo-
encephalitis is based on demonstration of viral-speciﬁc 
IgM in CSF or seroconversion. CSF PCR tests are 
available for some viruses in selected diagnostic labora-
tories and at the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention (CDC), but in the case of WNV, sensitivity 
(∼70%) of CSF PCR is less than that of CSF serology.
HSV-2 meningitis has been increasingly recognized 
as a major cause of viral meningitis in adults, and over-
all it is probably second in importance to enterovi-
ruses as a cause of viral meningitis, accounting for 5% 
of total cases overall and undoubtedly a higher fre-
quency of those cases occurring in adults and/or out-
side of the summer-fall period when enterovirus infec-
tions are increasingly common. HSV meningitis occurs 
in ∼25-35% of women and ∼10-15% of men at the 
time of an initial (primary) episode of genital herpes. 
Of these patients, 20% go on to have recurrent attacks 
of meningitis. Diagnosis of HSV meningitis is usually 
by HSV CSF PCR as cultures may be negative, espe-
cially in patients with recurrent meningitis. Demonstra-
tion of intrathecal synthesis of HSV-speciﬁc antibody 
may also be useful in diagnosis, although antibody tests 
are less sensitive and less speciﬁc than PCR and may 
not become positive until after the ﬁrst week of infec-
tion. In contrast to HSV encephalitis in adults in which 
>90% of cases are due to HSV-1, the overwhelming 
majority of HSV meningitis is due to HSV-2. Although 
a history of or the presence of HSV genital lesions is an 
important diagnostic clue, many patients with HSV 
meningitis give no history and have no evidence of 
active genital herpes at the time of presentation. Most 
cases of recurrent viral or “aseptic” meningitis, including 
cases previously diagnosed as Mollaret’s meningitis, are 
likely due to HSV.
VZV meningitis should be suspected in the presence 
of concurrent chickenpox or shingles. However, it is 
important to recognize that in some series, up to 40% 
of VZV meningitis cases have been reported to occur 
in the absence of rash. The frequency of VZV as a cause 
of meningitis is extremely variable, ranging from as low 
as 3% to as high as 20% in different series. Diagnosis is 
usually based on CSF PCR, although the sensitivity of 
this test may not be as high as for the other herpesvi-
ruses. In patients with negative CSF PCR results, the 
diagnosis of VZV CNS infection can be made by the 
demonstration of VZV-speciﬁc intrathecal antibody 
synthesis and/or the presence of VZV CSF IgM anti-
bodies, or by positive CSF cultures.
EBV infections may also produce aseptic meningitis, 
with or without associated infectious mononucleosis. 
The presence of atypical lymphocytes in the CSF or 
peripheral blood is suggestive of EBV infection but may 
occasionally be seen with other viral infections. EBV is 
almost never cultured from CSF. Serum and CSF serology 
can help establish the presence of acute infection, which 
is characterized by IgM viral capsid antibodies (VCAs), 
antibodies to early antigens (EAs), and the absence of 
antibodies to EBV-associated nuclear antigen (EBNA). 
CSF PCR is another important diagnostic test, although 
positive results may reﬂect viral reactivation associated 
with other infectious or inﬂammatory processes.
HIV meningitis should be suspected in any patient 
presenting with a viral meningitis with known or sus-
pected risk factors for HIV infection. Meningitis may 
occur following primary infection with HIV in 5–10% 
of cases and less commonly at later stages of illness. 
Cranial nerve palsies, most commonly involving cranial 
nerves V, VII, or VIII, are more common in HIV men-
ingitis than in other viral infections. Diagnosis can be 
conﬁrmed by detection of HIV genome in blood or 
CSF. Seroconversion may be delayed, and patients with 
negative HIV serologies who are suspected of having 
HIV meningitis should be monitored for delayed sero-
conversion. For further discussion of HIV infection, see 
Chap. 42.
Mumps should be considered when meningitis 
occurs in the late winter or early spring, especially in 
males (male/female ratio 3:1). With the widespread 
use of the live attenuated mumps vaccine in the United 
States since 1967, the incidence of mumps meningitis 
has fallen by >95%; however, mumps remains a poten-
tial source of infection in nonimmunized individuals and 
populations. Rare cases (10–100:100,000 vaccinated 
individuals) of vaccine-associated mumps meningitis 
have been described, with onset typically 2–4 weeks 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
507
after vaccination. The presence of parotitis, orchitis, 
oophoritis, pancreatitis, or elevations in serum lipase 
and amylase is suggestive of mumps meningitis; how-
ever, their absence does not exclude the diagnosis. 
Clinical meningitis was previously estimated to occur in 
10–30% of patients with mumps parotitis; however, in 
a recent U.S. outbreak of nearly 2600 cases of mumps, 
only 11 cases of meningitis were identiﬁed, suggesting 
the incidence may be lower than previously suspected. 
Mumps infection confers lifelong immunity, so a doc-
umented history of previous infection excludes this 
diagnosis. Patients with meningitis have a CSF pleocy-
tosis that can exceed 1000 cells/μL in 25%. Lympho-
cytes predominate in 75%, although CSF neutrophilia 
occurs in 25%. Hypoglycorrhachia occurs in 10–30% of 
patients and may be a clue to the diagnosis when present. 
Diagnosis is typically made by culture of virus from 
CSF or by detecting IgM antibodies or seroconversion. 
CSF PCR is available in some diagnostic and research 
laboratories.
LCMV infection should be considered when asep-
tic meningitis occurs in the late fall or winter and in 
individuals with a history of exposure to house mice 
(Mus musculus), pet or laboratory rodents (e.g., ham-
sters, rats, mice), or their excreta. Some patients have 
an associated rash, pulmonary inﬁltrates, alopecia, par-
otitis, orchitis, or myopericarditis. Laboratory clues 
to the diagnosis of LCMV, in addition to the clinical 
ﬁndings noted earlier, may include the presence of 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or abnormal liver func-
tion tests. Some cases present with a marked CSF pleo-
cytosis (>1000 cells/μL) and hypoglycorrhachia (<30%). 
Diagnosis is based on serology and/or culture of virus 
from CSF.
TREATMENT 
Acute Viral Meningitis
Treatment of almost all cases of viral meningitis is pri-
marily symptomatic and includes use of analgesics, anti-
pyretics, and antiemetics. Fluid and electrolyte status 
should be monitored. Patients with suspected bacterial 
meningitis should receive appropriate empirical therapy 
pending culture results (discussed earlier). Hospitaliza-
tion may not be required in immunocompetent patients 
with presumed viral meningitis and no focal signs or 
symptoms, no significant alteration in consciousness, 
and a classic CSF profile (lymphocytic pleocytosis, nor-
mal glucose, negative Gram’s stain) if adequate provision 
for monitoring at home and medical follow-up can be 
ensured. Immunocompromised patients; patients with 
significant alteration in consciousness, seizures, or the 
presence of focal signs and symptoms suggesting the 
possibility of encephalitis or parenchymal brain involve-
ment; and those patients who have an atypical CSF pro-
file should be hospitalized. Oral or intravenous acyclovir 
may be of benefit in patients with meningitis caused by 
HSV-1 or -2 and in cases of severe EBV or VZV infection. 
Data concerning treatment of HSV, EBV, and VZV menin-
gitis are extremely limited. Seriously ill patients should 
probably receive intravenous acyclovir (15–30 mg/kg 
per day in three divided doses), which can be followed 
by an oral drug such as acyclovir (800 mg, five times 
daily), famciclovir (500 mg tid), or valacyclovir (1000 mg 
tid) for a total course of 7–14 days. Patients who are less 
ill can be treated with oral drugs alone. Patients with HIV  
meningitis should receive highly active antiretroviral ther-
apy (Chap. 42).
Patients with viral meningitis who are known to have 
deficient humoral immunity (e.g., X-linked agamma-
globulinemia) and who are not already receiving either 
intramuscular gamma globulin or intravenous immu-
noglobulin (IVIg) should be treated with these agents. 
Intraventricular administration of immunoglobulin 
through an Ommaya reservoir has been tried in some 
patients with chronic enteroviral meningitis who have 
not responded to intramuscular or intravenous immu-
noglobulin.
An investigational drug, pleconaril, has shown effi-
cacy against a variety of enteroviral infections and has 
good oral bioavailability and excellent CNS penetration. 
Clinical trials in patients with enteroviral meningitis 
indicated that pleconaril decreased the duration of 
symptoms compared to placebo; however, the drug 
is not likely to be marketed and is not generally avail-
able, due to its modest benefit in trials of non-CNS EV  
infections.
Vaccination is an effective method of preventing the 
development of meningitis and other neurologic com-
plications associated with poliovirus, mumps, and mea-
sles infection. A live attenuated VZV vaccine (Varivax) is 
available in the United States. Clinical studies indicate 
an effectiveness rate of 70–90% for this vaccine, but 
a booster may be required to maintain immunity. An 
inactivated varicella vaccine is available for transplant  
recipients.
PROGNOSIS
In adults, the prognosis for full recovery from viral 
meningitis is excellent. Rare patients complain of per-
sisting headache, mild mental impairment, incoordi-
nation, or generalized asthenia for weeks to months. 
The outcome in infants and neonates (<1 year) is less 
certain; intellectual impairment, learning disabilities, 
hearing loss, and other lasting sequelae have been 
reported in some studies.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
508
VIRAL ENCEPHALITIS
DEFINITION
In contrast to viral meningitis, where the infectious process 
and associated inﬂammatory response are limited largely to 
the meninges, in encephalitis the brain parenchyma is also 
involved. Many patients with encephalitis also have evi-
dence of associated meningitis (meningoencephalitis) and, 
in some cases, involvement of the spinal cord or nerve 
roots (encephalomyelitis, encephalomyeloradiculitis).
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
In addition to the acute febrile illness with evidence of 
meningeal involvement characteristic of meningitis, the 
patient with encephalitis commonly has an altered level 
of consciousness (confusion, behavioral abnormalities), 
or a depressed level of consciousness ranging from mild 
lethargy to coma, and evidence of either focal or diffuse 
neurologic signs and symptoms. Patients with encephali-
tis may have hallucinations, agitation, personality change, 
behavioral disorders, and, at times, a frankly psychotic 
state. Focal or generalized seizures occur in many patients 
with encephalitis. Virtually every possible type of focal 
neurologic disturbance has been reported in viral enceph-
alitis; the signs and symptoms reﬂect the sites of infection 
and inﬂammation. The most commonly encountered 
focal ﬁndings are aphasia, ataxia, upper or lower motor 
neuron patterns of weakness, involuntary movements 
(e.g., myoclonic jerks, tremor), and cranial nerve deﬁ-
cits (e.g., ocular palsies, facial weakness). Involvement of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis may result in temperature 
dysregulation, diabetes insipidus, or the development of 
the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic 
hormone (SIADH). Even though neurotropic viruses 
typically cause pathologic injury in distinct regions of the 
CNS, variations in clinical presentations make it impos-
sible to reliably establish the etiology of a speciﬁc case of 
encephalitis on clinical grounds alone (see “Differential 
Diagnosis,” later in the chapter).
ETIOLOGY
In the United States, there are ∼20,000 reported cases 
of encephalitis per year, although the actual number 
of cases is likely to be signiﬁcantly larger. Despite com-
prehensive diagnostic efforts, the majority of cases of 
acute encephalitis of suspected viral etiology remain 
of unknown cause. Hundreds of viruses are capable of 
causing encephalitis, although only a limited subset is 
responsible for most cases in which a speciﬁc cause is 
identiﬁed (Table 40-4). The most commonly identi-
ﬁed viruses causing sporadic cases of acute encephalitis 
in immunocompetent adults are herpesviruses (HSV, 
VZV, EBV). Epidemics of encephalitis are caused by 
arboviruses, which belong to several different viral tax-
onomic groups including Alphaviruses (e.g., EEE virus, 
western equine encephalitis virus), Flaviviruses (e.g., 
WNV, St. Louis encephalitis virus, Japanese encephalitis 
virus, Powassan virus), and Bunyaviruses (e.g., Cali-
fornia encephalitis virus serogroup, LaCrosse virus). 
Historically, the largest number of cases of arbovirus 
encephalitis in the United States has been due to St. 
Louis encephalitis virus and the California encephalitis 
virus serogroup. However, since 2002, WNV has been 
responsible for the majority of arbovirus meningitis and 
encephalitis cases in the United States. The 2003 epi-
demic was the largest epidemic of arboviral neuroinva-
sive disease (encephalitis + meningitis) ever recorded in 
the United States, with 2866 cases and 264 deaths. In 
2004–2007, WNV has accounted for between 1142 and 
1459 conﬁrmed cases of neuroinvasive disease per year 
in the United States and 100–177 deaths. In 2008 and 
2009 there was an unexpected and dramatic decline in 
both the number of WNV neuroinvasive cases (2008 
= 687, 2009 = 335) and the number of deaths (2008 = 
44, 2009 = 30). New causes of viral CNS infections are 
constantly appearing, as evidenced by the recent out-
break of cases of encephalitis in Southeast Asia caused 
by Nipah virus, a newly identiﬁed member of the Para-
myxoviridae family; of meningitis in Europe caused by 
Toscana virus, an arbovirus belonging to the Bunyavi-
rus family; and of neurologic disorders associated with 
major epidemics of Chikungunya virus, a togavirus, in 
Africa, India, and Southeast Asia.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
CSF examination
CSF examination should be performed in all patients 
with suspected viral encephalitis unless contraindicated 
by the presence of severely increased ICP. The char-
acteristic CSF proﬁle is indistinguishable from that of 
viral meningitis and typically consists of a lymphocytic 
pleocytosis, a mildly elevated protein concentration, 
and a normal glucose concentration. A CSF pleocyto-
sis (>5 cells/μL) occurs in >95% of immunocompetent 
patients with documented viral encephalitis. In rare 
cases, a pleocytosis may be absent on the initial LP but 
present on subsequent LPs. Patients who are severely 
immunocompromised by HIV infection, glucocorti-
coid or other immunosuppressant drugs, chemother-
apy, or lymphoreticular malignancies may fail to mount 
a CSF inﬂammatory response. CSF cell counts exceed 
500/μL in only about 10% of patients with encephali-
tis. Infections with certain arboviruses (e.g., EEE virus 
or California encephalitis virus), mumps, and LCMV 
may occasionally result in cell counts >1000/μL, but 
this degree of pleocytosis should suggest the possibility 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
509
of nonviral infections or other inﬂammatory processes. 
Atypical lymphocytes in the CSF may be seen in EBV 
infection and less commonly with other viruses, includ-
ing CMV, HSV, and enteroviruses. Increased numbers 
of plasmacytoid or Mollaret-like large mononuclear 
cells have been reported in WNV encephalitis. Poly-
morphonuclear pleocytosis occurs in ∼45% of patients 
with WNV encephalitis and is also a common feature in 
CMV myeloradiculitis in immunocompromised patients. 
Large numbers of CSF PMNs may be present in patients 
with encephalitis due to EEE virus, echovirus 9, and, 
more rarely, other enteroviruses. However, persist-
ing CSF neutrophilia should prompt consideration 
of bacterial infection, leptospirosis, amebic infection, 
and noninfectious processes such as acute hemorrhagic 
leukoencephalitis. About 20% of patients with enceph-
alitis will have a signiﬁcant number of red blood cells 
(>500/μL) in the CSF in a nontraumatic tap. The patho-
logic correlate of this ﬁnding may be a hemorrhagic 
encephalitis of the type seen with HSV; however, CSF 
red blood cells occur with similar frequency and in simi-
lar numbers in patients with nonherpetic focal encepha-
litides. A decreased CSF glucose concentration is distinctly 
unusual in viral encephalitis and should suggest the possi-
bility of bacterial, fungal, tuberculous, parasitic, leptospiral, 
syphilitic, sarcoid, or neoplastic meningitis. Rare patients 
with mumps, LCMV, or advanced HSV encephalitis and 
many patients with CMV myeloradiculitis have low CSF 
glucose concentrations.
CSF PCR
CSF PCR has become the primary diagnostic test for 
CNS infections caused by CMV, EBV, HHV-6, and 
enteroviruses (see “Viral Meningitis,” earlier in the chap-
ter). In the case of VZV CNS infection, CSF PCR and 
detection of virus-speciﬁc IgM or intrathecal antibody 
synthesis both provide important aids to diagnosis. The 
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of CSF PCRs varies with the 
virus being tested. The sensitivity (∼96%) and speciﬁc-
ity (∼99%) of HSV CSF PCR is equivalent to or exceeds 
that of brain biopsy. It is important to recognize that 
HSV CSF PCR results need to be interpreted after con-
sidering the likelihood of disease in the patient being 
tested, the timing of the test in relationship to onset of 
symptoms, and the prior use of antiviral therapy. A nega-
tive HSV CSF PCR test performed by a qualiﬁed labo-
ratory at the appropriate time during illness in a patient 
with a high likelihood of HSV encephalitis based on 
clinical and laboratory abnormalities signiﬁcantly reduces 
the likelihood of HSV encephalitis but does not exclude 
it. For example, in a patient with a pretest probabil-
ity of 35% of having HSV encephalitis, a negative HSV 
CSF PCR reduces the posttest probability to ∼2%, and 
for a patient with a pretest probability of 60%, a nega-
tive test reduces the posttest probability to ∼6%. In both 
situations a positive test makes the diagnosis almost cer-
tain (98–99%). There have been several recent reports of 
initially negative HSV CSF PCR tests that were obtained 
early (≤72 h) following symptom onset and that became 
positive when repeated 1–3 days later. The frequency of 
positive HSV CSF PCRs in patients with herpes enceph-
alitis also decreases as a function of the duration of illness, 
with only ∼20% of cases remaining positive after ≥14 
days. PCR results are generally not affected by ≤1 week 
of antiviral therapy. In one study, 98% of CSF specimens 
remained PCR-positive during the ﬁrst week of initia-
tion of antiviral therapy, but the numbers fell to ∼50% 
by 8–14 days and to ∼21% by >15 days after initiation of 
antiviral therapy.
The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of CSF PCR tests for 
viruses other than herpes simplex have not been deﬁni-
tively characterized. Enteroviral CSF PCR appears to 
have a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of >95%. The speciﬁcity 
of EBV CSF PCR has not been established. Positive 
EBV CSF PCRs associated with positive tests for other 
pathogens have been reported and may reﬂect reactiva-
tion of EBV latent in lymphocytes that enter the CNS 
as a result of an unrelated infectious or inﬂammatory 
process. In patients with CNS infection due to VZV, 
CSF antibody and PCR studies should be considered 
complementary, as patients may have evidence of intra-
thecal synthesis of VZV-speciﬁc antibodies and nega-
tive CSF PCRs. In the case of WNV infection, CSF 
PCR appears to be less sensitive (∼70% sensitivity) than 
detection of WNV-speciﬁc CSF IgM, although PCR 
testing remains useful in immunocompromised patients 
who may not mount an effective anti-WNV antibody 
response.
CSF culture
CSF culture is generally of limited utility in the diagnosis of 
acute viral encephalitis. Culture may be insensitive (e.g., 
>95% of patients with HSV encephalitis have negative CSF 
cultures as do virtually all patients with EBV-associated 
CNS disease) and often takes too long to signiﬁcantly 
affect immediate therapy.
Serologic studies and antigen detection
The basic approach to the serodiagnosis of viral encepha-
litis is identical to that discussed earlier for viral meningitis. 
Demonstration of WNV IgM antibodies is diagnostic of 
WNV encephalitis as IgM antibodies do not cross the 
blood-brain barrier, and their presence in CSF is there-
fore indicative of intrathecal synthesis. Timing of antibody 
collection may be important as the rate of CSF WNV 
IgM seropositivity increases by ∼10% per day during 
the ﬁrst week after illness onset, reaching 80% or higher 
on day 7 after symptom onset. In patients with HSV 
encephalitis, both antibodies to HSV-1 glycoproteins 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
510
FIGURE 40-3
Coronal FLAIR magnetic resonance image from a 
patient with herpes simplex encephalitis. Note the area of 
increased signal in the right temporal lobe (left side of image) 
conﬁned predominantly to the gray matter. This patient had 
predominantly unilateral disease; bilateral lesions are more 
common but may be quite asymmetric in their intensity.
and glycoprotein antigens have been detected in the 
CSF. Optimal detection of both HSV antibodies and 
antigen typically occurs after the ﬁrst week of illness, 
limiting the utility of these tests in acute diagnosis. 
Nonetheless, HSV CSF antibody testing is of value in 
selected patients whose illness is >1 week in duration 
and who are CSF PCR–negative for HSV. In the case 
of VZV infection, CSF antibody tests may be posi-
tive when PCR fails to detect viral DNA, and both tests 
should be considered complementary rather than mutually 
exclusive.
MRI, CT, EEG
Patients with suspected encephalitis almost invariably 
undergo neuroimaging studies and often EEG. These 
tests help identify or exclude alternative diagnoses and 
assist in the differentiation between a focal, as opposed 
to a diffuse, encephalitic process. Focal ﬁndings in a 
patient with encephalitis should always raise the pos-
sibility of HSV encephalitis. Examples of focal ﬁnd-
ings include: (1) areas of increased signal intensity in 
the frontotemporal, cingulate, or insular regions of the 
brain on T2-weighted, FLAIR, or diffusion-weighted 
MRI (Fig. 40-3); (2) focal areas of low absorption, 
mass effect, and contrast enhancement on CT; or (3) 
periodic focal temporal lobe spikes on a background of 
slow or low-amplitude (“ﬂattened”) activity on EEG. 
Approximately 10% of patients with PCR-documented 
HSV encephalitis will have a normal MRI, although 
nearly 80% will have abnormalities in the temporal 
lobe, and an additional 10% in extratemporal regions. 
The lesions are typically hyperintense on T2-weighted 
images. The addition of FLAIR and diffusion-weighted 
images to the standard MRI sequences enhances sensitivity. 
Children with HSV encephalitis may have atypical 
patterns of MRI lesions and often show involvement 
of brain regions outside the frontotemporal areas. CT is 
less sensitive than MRI and is normal in up to 20–35% 
of patients. EEG abnormalities occur in >75% of PCR-
documented cases of HSV encephalitis; they typically 
involve the temporal lobes but are often nonspeciﬁc. 
Some patients with HSV encephalitis have a distinctive 
EEG pattern consisting of periodic, stereotyped, sharp-
and-slow complexes originating in one or both temporal 
lobes and repeating at regular intervals of 2–3 s. The 
periodic complexes are typically noted between days 
2 and 15 of the illness and are present in two-thirds of 
pathologically proven cases of HSV encephalitis.
Signiﬁcant MRI abnormalities are found in only 
∼two-thirds of patients with WNV encephalitis, a fre-
quency less than that with HSV encephalitis. When 
present, abnormalities often involve deep brain structures, 
including the thalamus, basal ganglia, and brainstem, 
rather than the cortex and may only be apparent on 
FLAIR images. EEGs in patients with WNV encepha-
litis typically show generalized slowing that may be 
more anteriorly prominent rather than the temporally 
predominant pattern of sharp or periodic discharges 
more characteristic of HSV encephalitis. Patients with 
VZV encephalitis may show multifocal areas of hemor-
rhagic and ischemic infarction, reﬂecting the tendency 
of this virus to produce a CNS vasculopathy rather than 
a true encephalitis. Immunocompromised adult patients 
with CMV often have enlarged ventricles with areas of 
increased T2 signal on MRI outlining the ventricles and 
subependymal enhancement on T1-weighted post-con-
trast images. Table 40-5 highlights speciﬁc diagnostic 
test results in encephalitis that can be useful in clinical 
decision-making.
Brain biopsy
Brain biopsy is now generally reserved for patients in 
whom CSF PCR studies fail to lead to a speciﬁc diag-
nosis, who have focal abnormalities on MRI, and who 
continue to show progressive clinical deterioration 
despite treatment with acyclovir and supportive therapy.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Infection by a variety of other organisms can mimic 
viral encephalitis. In studies of biopsy-proven HSV 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
511
encephalitis, common infectious mimics of focal viral 
encephalitis included mycobacteria, fungi, rickettsia, Listeria, 
Mycoplasma, and other bacteria (including Bartonella sp.).
Infection caused by the ameba Naegleria fowleri can 
also cause acute meningoencephalitis (primary amebic 
meningoencephalitis), whereas that caused by Acantham-
oeba and Balamuthia more typically produces subacute 
or chronic granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis. 
Naegleria thrive in warm, iron-rich pools of water, 
including those found in drains, canals, and both natural 
and human-made outdoor pools. Infection has typically 
occurred in immunocompetent children with a history 
of swimming in potentially infected water. The CSF, 
in contrast to the typical proﬁle seen in viral encepha-
litis, often resembles that of bacterial meningitis with a 
neutrophilic pleocytosis and hypoglycorrhachia. Motile 
trophozoites can be seen in a wet mount of warm, fresh 
CSF. There have been an increasing number of cases of 
Balamuthia mandrillaris amebic encephalitis mimicking 
acute viral encephalitis in children and immunocompe-
tent adults. This organism has also been associated with 
encephalitis in recipients of transplanted organs from a 
donor with unrecognized infection. No effective treat-
ment has been identiﬁed, and mortality approaches 
100%.
Encephalitis can be caused by the raccoon pinworm 
Baylisascaris procyonis. Clues to the diagnosis include a 
history of raccoon exposure, especially of playing in or 
eating dirt potentially contaminated with raccoon feces. 
Most patients are children, and many have an associated 
eosinophilia.
Once nonviral causes of encephalitis have been 
excluded, the major diagnostic challenge is to distin-
guish HSV from other viruses that cause encephali-
tis. This distinction is particularly important because in 
virtually every other instance the therapy is supportive, 
whereas speciﬁc and effective antiviral therapy is avail-
able for HSV, and its efﬁcacy is enhanced when it is 
instituted early in the course of infection. HSV enceph-
alitis should be considered when clinical features sug-
gesting involvement of the inferomedial frontotemporal 
regions of the brain are present, including prominent 
olfactory or gustatory hallucinations, anosmia, unusual 
or bizarre behavior or personality alterations, or memory 
disturbance. HSV encephalitis should always be suspected 
in patients with signs and symptoms consistent with 
acute encephalitis with focal ﬁndings on clinical exami-
nation, neuroimaging studies, or EEG. The diagnostic 
procedure of choice in these patients is CSF PCR analysis 
for HSV. A positive CSF PCR establishes the diagnosis, 
and a negative test dramatically reduces the likelihood 
of HSV encephalitis (discussed earlier).
The anatomic distribution of lesions may provide 
an additional clue to diagnosis. Patients with 
rapidly progressive encephalitis and prominent 
brainstem signs, symptoms, or neuroimaging abnormali-
ties may be infected by ﬂaviviruses (WNV, St. Louis 
encephalitis virus, Japanese encephalitis virus), HSV, 
rabies, or L. monocytogenes. Signiﬁcant involvement of 
deep gray matter structures, including the basal ganglia 
and thalamus, should also suggest possible ﬂavivirus 
infection. These patients may present clinically with 
prominent movement disorders (tremor, myoclonus) or 
TABLE 40-5 
USE OF DIAGNOSTIC TESTS IN ENCEPHALITIS
The best test for WNV encephalitis is the CSF IgM antibody 
test. The prevalence of positive CSF IgM tests increases 
by about 10% per day after illness onset and reaches 
70–80% by the end of the ﬁrst week. Serum WNV IgM 
can provide evidence for recent WNV infection, but in the 
absence of other ﬁndings does not establish the diagnosis 
of neuroinvasive disease (meningitis, encephalitis, acute 
ﬂaccid paralysis).
Approximately 80% of patients with proven HSV encephalitis 
have MRI abnormalities involving the temporal lobes. This 
percentage likely increases to >90% when FLAIR and DWI 
MR sequences are also utilized. The absence of temporal 
lobe lesions on MR reduces the likelihood of HSV encepha-
litis and should prompt consideration of other diagnostic 
possibilities.
The CSF HSV PCR test may be negative in the ﬁrst 72 h 
of symptoms of HSV encephalitis. A repeat study should 
be considered in patients with an initial early negative 
PCR in whom diagnostic suspicion of HSV encephalitis 
remains high and no alternative diagnosis has yet been 
established.
Detection of intrathecal synthesis (increased CSF/serum HSV 
antibody ratio corrected for breakdown of the blood-brain 
barrier) of HSV-speciﬁc antibody may be useful in diagnosis 
of HSV encephalitis in patients in whom only late (>1 week 
post-onset) CSF specimens are available and PCR studies 
are negative. Serum serology alone is of no value in diag-
nosis of HSV encephalitis due to the high seroprevalence 
rate in the general population.
Negative CSF viral cultures are of no value in excluding the 
diagnosis of HSV or EBV encephalitis.
VZV CSF IgM antibodies may be present in patients with a 
negative VZV CSF PCR. Both tests should be performed 
in patients with suspected VZV CNS disease.
The speciﬁcity of EBV CSF PCR for diagnosis of CNS 
infection is unknown. Positive tests may occur in patients 
with a CSF pleocytosis due to other causes. Detection of 
EBV CSF IgM or intrathecal synthesis of antibody to VCA 
supports the diagnosis of EBV encephalitis. Serological 
studies consistent with acute EBV infection (e.g., IgM 
VCA, presence of antibodies against EA but not against 
EBNA) can help support the diagnosis.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; 
DWI, diffusion-weighted imaging; EA, early antigen; EBNA, EBV-asso-
ciated nuclear antigen; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; FLAIR, ﬂuid-attenuated 
inversion recovery; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IgM, immunoglobulin M; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; 
VCA, viral capsid antibody; VZV, varicella-zoster virus; WNV, West Nile 
virus.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
512
parkinsonian features. Patients with WNV infection can 
also present with a poliomyelitis-like acute ﬂaccid paralysis, 
as can patients infected with enterovirus 71 and, less 
commonly, other enteroviruses. Acute ﬂaccid paralysis is 
characterized by the acute onset of a lower motor neuron 
type of weakness with ﬂaccid tone, reduced or absent 
reﬂexes, and relatively preserved sensation. Despite an 
aggressive World Health Organization poliovirus eradi-
cation initiative, 1733 cases of wild-type poliovirus-
induced poliomyelitis were reported worldwide in 2009, 
with 73% occurring in India and Nigeria. There have 
been recent small outbreaks of poliomyelitis associated 
with vaccine strains of virus that have reverted to viru-
lence through mutation or recombination with circulating 
wild-type enteroviruses in Hispaniola, China, the Philip-
pines, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Madagascar.
Epidemiologic factors may provide important clues 
to the diagnosis of viral meningitis or encephalitis. 
Particular attention should be paid to the season of the 
year; the geographic location and travel history; and 
possible exposure to animal bites or scratches, rodents, 
and ticks. Although transmission from the bite of 
an infected dog remains the most common cause of 
rabies worldwide, in the United States very few cases 
of dog rabies occur, and the most common risk factor 
is exposure to bats—although a clear history of a bite 
or scratch is often lacking. The classic clinical presenta-
tion of encephalitic (furious) rabies is of fever, ﬂuctuat-
ing consciousness, and autonomic hyperactivity. Phobic 
spasms of the larynx, pharynx, neck muscles, and dia-
phragm can be triggered by attempts to swallow water 
(hydrophobia) or by inspiration (aerophobia). Patients may 
also present with paralytic (dumb) rabies characterized 
by acute ascending paralysis. Rabies due to the bite of 
a bat has a different clinical presentation than classic 
rabies due to a dog or wolf bite. Patients present with 
focal neurologic deﬁcits, myoclonus, seizures, and hal-
lucinations; phobic spasms are not a typical feature. 
Patients with rabies have a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis 
and may show areas of increased T2 signal abnormality 
in the brainstem, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. 
Diagnosis can be made by ﬁnding rabies virus anti-
gen in brain tissue or in the neural innervation of hair 
follicles at the nape of the neck. PCR ampliﬁcation 
of viral nucleic acid from CSF and saliva or tears may 
also enable diagnosis. Serology is frequently negative 
in both serum and CSF in the ﬁrst week after onset of 
infection, which limits its acute diagnostic utility. No 
speciﬁc therapy is available, and cases are almost invari-
ably fatal, with isolated survivors having devastating 
neurologic sequelae.
State public health authorities provide a valuable 
resource concerning isolation of particular agents in 
individual regions. Regular updates concerning the 
number, type, and distribution of cases of arboviral 
encephalitis can be found on the CDC and U.S. Geo-
logical Survey (USGS) websites (http://www.cdc.gov and 
http://diseasemaps.usgs.gov).
The major noninfectious etiologies that should be 
included in the differential diagnosis of acute encepha-
litis are nonvasculitic autoimmune inﬂammatory menin-
goencephalitis, which is frequently associated with 
serum antithyroid microsomal and antithyroglobulin 
antibodies (Hashimoto’s encephalopathy); paraneoplastic 
and non-paraneoplastic encephalitis associated with antineu-
ronal antibodies (Chap. 44); acute disseminated encephalo-
myelitis and related fulminant demyelinating disorders 
(Chap. 39); and lymphoma. Finally, Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease (Chap. 43) can rarely present in an explosive 
fashion mimicking viral encephalitis.
TREATMENT 
Viral Encephalitis
Specific antiviral therapy should be initiated when 
appropriate. Vital functions, including respiration and 
blood pressure, should be monitored continuously and 
supported as required. In the initial stages of encepha-
litis, many patients will require care in an intensive care 
unit. Basic management and supportive therapy should 
include careful monitoring of ICP, fluid restriction, avoid-
ance of hypotonic intravenous solutions, and suppression 
of fever. Seizures should be treated with standard anti-
convulsant regimens, and prophylactic therapy should 
be considered in view of the high frequency of seizures 
in severe cases of encephalitis. As with all seriously ill, 
immobilized patients with altered levels of conscious-
ness, encephalitis patients are at risk for aspiration 
pneumonia, stasis ulcers and decubiti, contractures, 
deep venous thrombosis and its complications, and 
infections of indwelling lines and catheters.
Acyclovir is of benefit in the treatment of HSV and 
should be started empirically in patients with sus-
pected viral encephalitis, especially if focal features are 
present, while awaiting viral diagnostic studies. Treat-
ment should be discontinued in patients found not to 
have HSV encephalitis, with the possible exception of 
patients with severe encephalitis due to VZV or EBV. 
HSV, VZV, and EBV all encode an enzyme, deoxypyrimi-
dine (thymidine) kinase, that phosphorylates acyclo-
vir to produce acyclovir-5′-monophosphate. Host cell 
enzymes then phosphorylate this compound to form a 
triphosphate derivative. It is the triphosphate that acts 
as an antiviral agent by inhibiting viral DNA polymerase 
and by causing premature termination of nascent viral 
DNA chains. The specificity of action depends on the fact 
that uninfected cells do not phosphorylate significant 
amounts of acyclovir to acyclovir-5′-monophosphate. 
A second level of specificity is provided by the fact that 
the acyclovir triphosphate is a more potent inhibitor of 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
513
viral DNA polymerase than of the analogous host cell 
enzymes.
Adults should receive a dose of 10 mg/kg of acyclovir 
intravenously every 8 h (30 mg/kg per day total dose) 
for 14–21 days. CSF PCR can be repeated at the comple-
tion of this course, with PCR-positive patients receiving 
additional treatment, followed by a repeat CSF PCR test. 
Neonatal HSV CNS infection is less responsive to acyclovir  
therapy than HSV encephalitis in adults; it is recom-
mended that neonates with HSV encephalitis receive 
20 mg/kg of acyclovir every 8 h (60 mg/kg per day total 
dose) for a minimum of 21 days.
Prior to intravenous administration, acyclovir should 
be diluted to a concentration ≤7 mg/mL. (A 70-kg person 
would receive a dose of 700 mg, which would be diluted 
in a volume of 100 mL.) Each dose should be infused 
slowly over 1 h, rather than by rapid or bolus infusion, 
to minimize the risk of renal dysfunction. Care should 
be taken to avoid extravasation or intramuscular or sub-
cutaneous administration. The alkaline pH of acyclovir 
can cause local inflammation and phlebitis (9%). Dose 
adjustment is required in patients with impaired renal 
glomerular filtration. Penetration into CSF is excellent, 
with average drug levels ∼50% of serum levels. Com-
plications of therapy include elevations in blood urea 
nitrogen and creatinine levels (5%), thrombocytopenia 
(6%), gastrointestinal toxicity (nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhea) (7%), and neurotoxicity (lethargy or obtundation, 
disorientation, confusion, agitation, hallucinations, trem-
ors, seizures) (1%). Acyclovir resistance may be medi-
ated by changes in either the viral deoxypyrimidine 
kinase or DNA polymerase. To date, acyclovir-resistant 
isolates have not been a significant clinical problem in 
immunocompetent individuals. However, there have 
been reports of clinically virulent acyclovir-resistant HSV 
isolates from sites outside the CNS in immunocompro-
mised individuals, including those with AIDS.
Oral antiviral drugs with efficacy against HSV, VZV, 
and EBV, including acyclovir, famciclovir, and valacy-
clovir, have not been evaluated in the treatment of 
encephalitis either as primary therapy or as supple-
mental therapy following completion of a course of 
parenteral acyclovir. A National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Disease (NIAID)/National Institute of Neu-
rological Disorders and Stroke–sponsored phase III trial 
of supplemental oral valacyclovir therapy (2 g tid for  
3 months) following the initial 14- to 21-day course of 
therapy with parenteral acyclovir is ongoing in patients 
with HSV encephalitis (www.clinicaltrials.gov, identi-
fier NCT00031486); this may help clarify the role of 
extended oral antiviral therapy.
Ganciclovir and foscarnet, either alone or in combi-
nation, are often utilized in the treatment of CMV-related  
CNS infections, although their efficacy remains unproven. 
Cidofovir (see later) may provide an alternative in 
patients who fail to respond to ganciclovir and foscarnet, 
although data concerning its use in CMV CNS infections 
are extremely limited.
Ganciclovir is a synthetic nucleoside analogue of 
2′-deoxyguanosine. The drug is preferentially phos-
phorylated by virus-induced cellular kinases. Ganciclovir 
triphosphate acts as a competitive inhibitor of the CMV 
DNA polymerase, and its incorporation into nascent 
viral DNA results in premature chain termination. Fol-
lowing intravenous administration, CSF concentrations 
of ganciclovir are 25–70% of coincident plasma levels. 
The usual dose for treatment of severe neurologic ill-
nesses is 5 mg/kg every 12 h given intravenously at 
a constant rate over 1 h. Induction therapy is followed 
by maintenance therapy of 5 mg/kg every day for an 
indefinite period. Induction therapy should be contin-
ued until patients show a decline in CSF pleocytosis and 
a reduction in CSF CMV DNA copy number on quanti-
tative PCR testing (where available). Doses should be 
adjusted in patients with renal insufficiency. Treatment is 
often limited by the development of granulocytopenia 
and thrombocytopenia (20–25%), which may require 
reduction in or discontinuation of therapy. Gastrointes-
tinal side effects, including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
and abdominal pain, occur in ∼20% of patients. Some 
patients treated with ganciclovir for CMV retinitis have 
developed retinal detachment, but the causal relation-
ship to ganciclovir treatment is unclear. Valganciclo-
vir is an orally bioavailable prodrug that can generate 
high serum levels of ganciclovir, although studies of its  
efficacy in treating CMV CNS infections are limited.
Foscarnet is a pyrophosphate analogue that inhibits 
viral DNA polymerases by binding to the pyrophos-
phate-binding site. Following intravenous infusion, CSF 
concentrations range from 15 to 100% of coincident 
plasma levels. The usual dose for serious CMV-related 
neurologic illness is 60 mg/kg every 8 h adminis-
tered by constant infusion over 1 h. Induction therapy 
for 14–21 days is followed by maintenance therapy  
(60–120 mg/kg per day). Induction therapy may need 
to be extended in patients who fail to show a decline 
in CSF pleocytosis and a reduction in CSF CMV DNA 
copy number on quantitative PCR tests (where avail-
able). Approximately one-third of patients develop 
renal impairment during treatment, which is revers-
ible following discontinuation of therapy in most, but 
not all, cases. This is often associated with elevations in 
serum creatinine and proteinuria and is less frequent in 
patients who are adequately hydrated. Many patients 
experience fatigue and nausea. Reduction in serum 
calcium, magnesium, and potassium occur in ∼15% 
of patients and may be associated with tetany, cardiac 
rhythm disturbances, or seizures.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
514
Cidofovir is a nucleotide analogue that is effective in 
treating CMV retinitis and equivalent to or better than 
ganciclovir in some experimental models of murine 
CMV encephalitis, although data concerning its efficacy 
in human CMV CNS disease are limited. The usual dose 
is 5 mg/kg intravenously once weekly for 2 weeks, then 
biweekly for two or more additional doses, depending 
on clinical response. Patients must be prehydrated with 
normal saline (e.g., 1 L over 1–2 h) prior to each dose 
and treated with probenecid (e.g., 1 g 3 h before cido-
fovir and 1 g 2 and 8 h after cidofovir). Nephrotoxicity is 
common; the dose should be reduced if renal function 
deteriorates.
Intravenous ribavirin (15–25 mg/kg per day in 
divided doses given every 8 h) has been reported to be 
of benefit in isolated cases of severe encephalitis due to 
California encephalitis (LaCrosse) virus. Ribavirin might 
be of benefit for the rare patients, typically infants or 
young children, with severe adenovirus or rotavirus 
encephalitis and in patients with encephalitis due to 
LCMV or other arenaviruses. However, clinical trials are 
lacking. Hemolysis, with resulting anemia, has been the 
major side effect limiting therapy.
No specific antiviral therapy of proven efficacy is 
currently available for treatment of WNV encephalitis. 
Patients have been treated with α-interferon, ribavirin, 
WNV-specific antisense oligonucleotides (ClinicalTrials.
gov, identifier NCT0091845), an Israeli IVIg prepara-
tion that contains high-titer anti-WNV antibody (Omr-
IgG-am) (ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT00069316 and 
0068055), and humanized monoclonal antibodies 
directed against the viral envelope glycoprotein (Clini-
calTrials.gov, identifier NCT00927953 and 00515385). 
WNV chimeric vaccines, in which WNV envelope and 
premembrane proteins are inserted into the back-
ground of another flavivirus, are already undergo-
ing human clinical testing for safety and immunoge-
nicity (ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT00746798 and 
00442169). Both chimeric and killed inactivated WNV 
vaccines have been found to be safe and effective in 
preventing equine WNV infection, and several effective 
flavivirus vaccines are already in human use, creating 
optimism that a safe and effective human WNV vaccine 
can also be developed.
SEQUELAE
There is considerable variation in the incidence and 
severity of sequelae in patients surviving viral encepha-
litis. In the case of EEE virus infection, nearly 80% of 
survivors have severe neurologic sequelae. At the other 
extreme are infections due to EBV, California enceph-
alitis virus, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, 
where severe sequelae are unusual. For example, approx-
imately 5–15% of children infected with LaCrosse virus 
have a residual seizure disorder, and 1% have persistent 
hemiparesis. Detailed information about sequelae in 
patients with HSV encephalitis treated with acyclovir is 
available from the NIAID-Collaborative Antiviral Study 
Group (CASG) trials. Of 32 acyclovir-treated patients, 
26 survived (81%). Of the 26 survivors, 12 (46%) had 
no or only minor sequelae, 3 (12%) were moderately 
impaired (gainfully employed but not functioning at their 
previous level), and 11 (42%) were severely impaired 
(requiring continuous supportive care). The inci-
dence and severity of sequelae were directly related to 
the age of the patient and the level of consciousness at 
the time of initiation of therapy. Patients with severe 
neurologic impairment (Glasgow coma score 6) at ini-
tiation of therapy either died or survived with severe 
sequelae. Young patients (<30 years) with good neuro-
logic function at initiation of therapy did substantially 
better (100% survival, 62% with no or mild sequelae) 
compared with their older counterparts (>30 years; 64% 
survival, 57% no or mild sequelae). Some recent studies 
using quantitative HSV CSF PCR tests indicate that 
clinical outcome following treatment also correlates 
with the amount of HSV DNA present in CSF at the 
time of presentation. Many patients with WNV infection 
have sequelae, including cognitive impairment; weak-
ness; and hyper- or hypokinetic movement disorders, 
including tremor, myoclonus, and parkinsonism. In a 
large longitudinal study of prognosis in 156 patients 
with WNV infection, the mean time to achieve recovery 
(deﬁned as 95% of maximal predicted score on speciﬁc 
validated tests) was 112–148 days for fatigue, 121–175 
days for physical function, 131–139 days for mood, and 
302–455 days for mental function (the longer interval 
in each case representing patients with neuroinvasive 
disease).
SUBACUTE MENINGITIS
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Patients with subacute meningitis typically have an 
unrelenting headache, stiff neck, low-grade fever, and 
lethargy for days to several weeks before they present 
for evaluation. Cranial nerve abnormalities and night 
sweats may be present. This syndrome overlaps that of 
chronic meningitis, discussed in detail in Chap. 41.
ETIOLOGY
Common causative organisms include M. tuberculosis, 
C. neoformans, H. capsulatum, C. immitis, and T. pallidum. 
Initial infection with M. tuberculosis is acquired by 
inhalation of aerosolized droplet nuclei. Tuberculous 
meningitis in adults does not develop acutely from 
hematogenous spread of tubercle bacilli to the meninges. 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
515
Rather, millet seed–sized (miliary) tubercles form in the 
parenchyma of the brain during hematogenous dissemi-
nation of tubercle bacilli in the course of primary infec-
tion. These tubercles enlarge and are usually caseating. 
The propensity for a caseous lesion to produce menin-
gitis is determined by its proximity to the subarachnoid 
space (SAS) and the rate at which ﬁbrous encapsulation 
develops. Subependymal caseous foci cause meningitis 
via discharge of bacilli and tuberculous antigens into the 
SAS. Mycobacterial antigens produce an intense inﬂam-
matory reaction that leads to the production of a thick 
exudate that ﬁlls the basilar cisterns and surrounds the 
cranial nerves and major blood vessels at the base of the 
brain.
Fungal infections are typically acquired by the 
inhalation of airborne fungal spores. The initial 
pulmonary infection may be asymptomatic or 
present with fever, cough, sputum production, and 
chest pain. The pulmonary infection is often self-limited. 
A localized pulmonary fungal infection can then remain 
dormant in the lungs until there is an abnormality in 
cell-mediated immunity that allows the fungus to reacti-
vate and disseminate to the CNS. The most common 
pathogen causing fungal meningitis is C. neoformans. 
This fungus is found worldwide in soil and bird excreta. 
H. capsulatum is endemic to the Ohio and Mississippi 
River valleys of the central United States and to parts of 
Central and South America. C. immitis is endemic to the 
desert areas of the southwest United States, northern 
Mexico, and Argentina.
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease that is mani-
fest by the appearance of a painless chancre at the site of 
inoculation. T. pallidum invades the CNS early in the 
course of syphilis. Cranial nerves VII and VIII are most 
frequently involved.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
The classic CSF abnormalities in tuberculous meningitis 
are as follows: (1) elevated opening pressure, (2) lym-
phocytic pleocytosis (10–500 cells/μL), (3) elevated 
protein concentration in the range of 1–5 g/L, and (4) 
decreased glucose concentration in the range of 1.1–2.2 
mmol/L (20–40 mg/dL). The combination of unrelenting 
headache, stiff neck, fatigue, night sweats, and fever with a 
CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and a mildly decreased glucose 
concentration is highly suspicious for tuberculous meningitis. 
The last tube of ﬂuid collected at LP is the best tube to 
send for a smear for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). If there is a 
pellicle in the CSF or a cobweb-like clot on the surface 
of the ﬂuid, AFB can best be demonstrated in a smear 
of the clot or pellicle. Positive smears are typically 
reported in only 10–40% of cases of tuberculous men-
ingitis in adults. Cultures of CSF take 4–8 weeks to 
identify the organism and are positive in ∼50% of adults. 
Culture remains the gold standard to make the diagnosis 
of tuberculous meningitis. PCR for the detection of 
M. tuberculosis DNA should be sent on CSF if available, 
but the sensitivity and speciﬁcity on CSF have not been 
deﬁned. The Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion recommend the use of nucleic acid ampliﬁcation 
tests for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis.
The characteristic CSF abnormalities in fungal men-
ingitis are a mononuclear or lymphocytic pleocytosis, an 
increased protein concentration, and a decreased glucose 
concentration. There may be eosinophils in the CSF in 
C. immitis meningitis. Large volumes of CSF are often 
required to demonstrate the organism on india ink 
smear or grow the organism in culture. If spinal ﬂuid 
examined by LP on two separate occasions fails to yield 
an organism, CSF should be obtained by high-cervical 
or cisternal puncture.
The cryptococcal polysaccharide antigen test is a 
highly sensitive and speciﬁc test for cryptococcal menin-
gitis. A reactive CSF cryptococcal antigen test establishes 
the diagnosis. The detection of the histoplasma poly-
saccharide antigen in CSF establishes the diagnosis of a 
fungal meningitis but is not speciﬁc for meningitis due 
to H. capsulatum. It may be falsely positive in coccidioidal 
meningitis. The CSF complement ﬁxation antibody test 
is reported to have a speciﬁcity of 100% and a sensitivity 
of 75% for coccidioidal meningitis.
The diagnosis of syphilitic meningitis is made when a 
reactive serum treponemal test (ﬂuorescent treponemal 
antibody absorption test [FTA-ABS] or microhemag-
glutination assay–T. pallidum [MHA-TP]) is associ-
ated with a CSF lymphocytic or mononuclear pleocytosis 
and an elevated protein concentration, or when the 
CSF Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) is 
positive. A reactive CSF FTA-ABS is not deﬁnitive evi-
dence of neurosyphilis. The CSF FTA-ABS can be falsely 
positive from blood contamination. A negative CSF VDRL 
does not rule out neurosyphilis. A negative CSF FTA-
ABS or MHA-TP rules out neurosyphilis.
TREATMENT 
Subacute Meningitis
Empirical therapy of tuberculous meningitis is often ini-
tiated on the basis of a high index of suspicion without 
adequate laboratory support. Initial therapy is a combi-
nation of isoniazid (300 mg/d), rifampin (10 mg/kg per 
day), pyrazinamide (30 mg/kg per day in divided doses), 
ethambutol (15–25 mg/kg per day in divided doses), 
and pyridoxine (50 mg/d). When the antimicrobial  
sensitivity of the M. tuberculosis isolate is known, eth-
ambutol can be discontinued. If the clinical response is 
good, pyrazinamide can be discontinued after 8 weeks 
and isoniazid and rifampin continued alone for the next 
6–12 months. A 6-month course of therapy is acceptable, 
but therapy should be prolonged for 9–12 months in 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
516
patients who have an inadequate resolution of symptoms 
of meningitis or who have positive mycobacterial cul-
tures of CSF during the course of therapy. Dexametha-
sone therapy is recommended for HIV-negative patients 
with tuberculous meningitis. The dose is 12–16 mg per 
day for 3 weeks, then tapered over 3 weeks.
Meningitis due to C. neoformans in non-HIV, non-
transplant patients is treated with induction therapy 
with amphotericin B (AmB) (0.7 mg/kg IV per day) plus 
flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day in four divided doses) 
for at least 4 weeks if CSF culture results are negative 
after 2 weeks of treatment. Therapy should be extended 
for a total of 6 weeks in the patient with neurologic 
complications. Induction therapy is followed by con-
solidation therapy with fluconazole 400 mg per day for 
8 weeks. Organ transplant recipients are treated with 
liposomal AmB (3–4 mg/kg per day) or AmB lipid com-
plex (ABLC) 5 mg/kg per day plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg  
per day in four divided doses) for at least 2 weeks or 
until CSF culture is sterile. Follow CSF yeast cultures  
for sterilization rather than the cryptococcal antigen 
titer. This treatment is followed by an 8- to 10-week 
course of fluconazole (400–800 mg/d [6–12 mg/kg] 
PO). If the CSF culture is sterile after 10 weeks of acute 
therapy, the dose of fluconazole is decreased to  
200 mg/d for 6 months to a year. Patients with HIV infec-
tion are treated with AmB or a lipid formulation plus 
flucytosine for at least 2 weeks, followed by fluconazole 
for a minimum of 8 weeks. HIV-infected patients may 
require indefinite maintenance therapy with fluconazole  
200 mg/d. Meningitis due to H. capsulatum is treated 
with AmB (0.7–1.0 mg/kg per day) for 4–12 weeks. A 
total dose of 30 mg/kg is recommended. Therapy with 
AmB is not discontinued until fungal cultures are sterile. 
After completing a course of AmB, maintenance therapy 
with itraconazole 200 mg twice daily is initiated and 
continued for at least 6 months to a year. C. immitis 
meningitis is treated with either high-dose fluconazole 
(1000 mg daily) as monotherapy or intravenous AmB 
(0.5–0.7 mg/kg per day) for >4 weeks. Intrathecal AmB 
(0.25–0.75 mg/d three times weekly) may be required 
to eradicate the infection. Lifelong therapy with fluco-
nazole (200–400 mg daily) is recommended to prevent 
relapse. AmBisome (5 mg/kg per day) or AmB lipid 
complex (5 mg/kg per day) can be substituted for AmB 
in patients who have or who develop significant renal 
dysfunction. The most common complication of fungal 
meningitis is hydrocephalus. Patients who develop 
hydrocephalus should receive a CSF diversion device. A 
ventriculostomy can be used until CSF fungal cultures 
are sterile, at which time the ventriculostomy is replaced 
by a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
Syphilitic meningitis is treated with aqueous penicil-
lin G in a dose of 3–4 million units intravenously every 
4 h for 10–14 days. An alternative regimen is 2.4 million 
units of procaine penicillin G intramuscularly daily with 
500 mg of oral probenecid four times daily for 10–14 
days. Either regimen is followed with 2.4 million units 
of benzathine penicillin G intramuscularly once a week 
for 3 weeks. The standard criterion for treatment success 
is reexamination of the CSF. The CSF should be reexam-
ined at 6-month intervals for 2 years. The cell count is 
expected to normalize within 12 months, and the VDRL 
titer to decrease by two dilutions or revert to nonreac-
tive within 2 years of completion of therapy. Failure of 
the CSF pleocytosis to resolve or an increase in the CSF 
VDRL titer by two or more dilutions requires retreatment.
CHRONIC ENCEPHALITIS
PROGRESSIVE MULTIFOCAL 
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY
Clinical features and pathology
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is 
characterized pathologically by multifocal areas of 
demyelination of varying size distributed throughout 
the brain but sparing the spinal cord and optic nerves. 
In addition to demyelination, there are characteristic 
cytologic alterations in both astrocytes and oligoden-
drocytes. Astrocytes are enlarged and contain hyperchro-
matic, deformed, and bizarre nuclei and frequent mitotic 
ﬁgures. Oligodendrocytes have enlarged, densely stain-
ing nuclei that contain viral inclusions formed by crystal-
line arrays of JC virus (JCV) particles. Patients often present 
with visual deﬁcits (45%), typically a homonymous 
hemianopia; mental impairment (38%) (dementia, con-
fusion, personality change); weakness, including hemi- 
or monoparesis; and ataxia. Seizures occur in ∼20% of 
patients, predominantly in those with lesions abutting the 
cortex.
Almost all patients have an underlying immunosup-
pressive disorder. In recent series, the most common 
associated conditions were AIDS (80%), hematologic 
malignancies (13%), transplant recipients (5%), and 
chronic inﬂammatory diseases (2%). It has been esti-
mated that up to 5% of AIDS patients will develop 
PML. There have been more than 30 reported cases 
of PML occurring in patients being treated for mul-
tiple sclerosis and inﬂammatory bowel disease with 
natalizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that 
inhibits lymphocyte trafﬁcking into CNS and bowel 
mucosa by binding to α4 integrins. Risk in these 
patients has been estimated at 1 PML case per 1000 
treated patients after a mean of 18 months of therapy. 
Additional cases have been reported in patients receiv-
ing other humanized monoclonal antibodies with immu-
nomodulatory activity including efalizumab and rituximab. 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
517
The basic clinical and diagnostic features appear to be 
similar to those seen in PML related to HIV and other 
forms of immunosuppression.
Diagnostic studies
The diagnosis of PML is frequently suggested by MRI. 
MRI reveals multifocal asymmetric, coalescing white 
matter lesions located periventricularly, in the centrum 
semiovale, in the parietal-occipital region, and in 
the cerebellum. These lesions have increased signal 
on T2 and FLAIR images and decreased signal on 
T1-weighted images. PML lesions are classically nonen-
hancing (90%) but may rarely show ring enhancement, 
especially in more immunocompetent patients. PML 
lesions are not typically associated with edema or mass 
effect. CT scans, which are less sensitive than MRI for 
the diagnosis of PML, often show hypodense nonen-
hancing white matter lesions.
The CSF is typically normal, although mild elevation 
in protein and/or IgG may be found. Pleocytosis occurs 
in <25% of cases, is predominantly mononuclear, and 
rarely exceeds 25 cells/μL. PCR ampliﬁcation of JCV 
DNA from CSF has become an important diagnostic 
tool. The presence of a positive CSF PCR for JCV 
DNA in association with typical MRI lesions in the 
appropriate clinical setting is diagnostic of PML, reﬂecting 
the assay’s relatively high speciﬁcity (92–100%); how-
ever, sensitivity is variable and a negative CSF PCR 
does not exclude the diagnosis. In HIV-negative patients 
and HIV-positive patients not receiving highly active 
antiviral therapy (HAART), sensitivity is likely 
70–90%. In HAART-treated patients, sensitivity may 
be closer to 60%, reﬂecting the lower JCV CSF viral 
load in this relatively more immunocompetent group. 
Studies with quantitative JCV CSF PCR indicate that 
patients with low JCV loads (<100 copies/μL) have a gen-
erally better prognosis than those with higher viral loads. 
Patients with negative CSF PCR studies may require 
brain biopsy for deﬁnitive diagnosis. In biopsy or necropsy 
specimens of brain, JCV antigen and nucleic acid can be 
detected by immunocytochemistry, in situ hybridiza-
tion, or PCR ampliﬁcation. Detection of JCV antigen 
or genomic material should only be considered diagnostic 
of PML if accompanied by characteristic pathologic 
changes, since both antigen and genomic material have 
been found in the brains of normal patients.
Serologic studies are of no utility in diagnosis due to 
high basal seroprevalence level (>80%).
TREATMENT 
 Progressive Multifocal 
Leukoencephalopathy
No effective therapy for PML is available. There are case 
reports of potential beneficial effects of the 5-HT2a 
receptor antagonist mirtazapine, which may inhibit 
binding of JCV to its receptor on oligodendrocytes. Ret-
rospective noncontrolled studies have also suggested 
a possible beneficial effect of treatment with interferon-
alpha. Neither of these agents has been tested in random-
ized controlled clinical trials. A clinical trial to evaluate 
the efficacy of the antimalarial drug mefloquine, which 
inhibits JCV replication in cell culture, is underway 
(www.clinicaltrials.gov, identifier NCT00746941). Intra-
venous and/or intrathecal cytarabine were not shown 
to be of benefit in a randomized controlled trial in HIV-
associated PML, although some experts suggest that 
cytarabine may have therapeutic efficacy in situations 
where breakdown of the blood-brain barrier allows suf-
ficient CSF penetration. A randomized controlled trial 
of cidofovir in HIV-associated PML also failed to show 
significant benefit. Since PML almost invariably occurs 
in immunocompromised individuals, any therapeutic 
interventions designed to enhance or restore immuno-
competence should be considered. Perhaps the most 
dramatic demonstration of this is disease stabiliza-
tion and, in rare cases, improvement associated with 
the improvement in the immune status of HIV-positive 
patients with AIDS following institution of HAART. In 
HIV-positive PML patients treated with HAART, 1-year 
survival is ∼50%, although up to 80% of survivors may 
have significant neurologic sequelae. HIV-positive PML 
patients with higher CD4 counts (>300/μL3) and low 
or nondetectable HIV viral loads have a better prog-
nosis than those with lower CD4 counts and higher 
viral loads. Although institution of HAART enhances 
survival in HIV + PML patients, the associated immune 
reconstitution in patients with an underlying opportu-
nistic infection such as PML may also result in a severe 
CNS inflammatory syndrome (immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome [IRIS]) associated with clinical 
worsening, CSF pleocytosis, and the appearance of new 
enhancing MRI lesions. Patients receiving natalizumab 
or other immunomodulatory antibodies, who are sus-
pected of having PML, should have therapy halted and 
circulating antibodies removed by plasma exchange.
SUBACUTE SCLEROSING 
PANENCEPHALITIS (SSPE)
SSPE is a rare chronic, progressive demyelinating disease 
of the CNS associated with a chronic nonpermissive infec-
tion of brain tissue with measles virus. The frequency 
has been estimated at 1 in 100,000–500,000 measles 
cases. An average of ﬁve cases per year are reported in 
the United States. The incidence has declined dramati-
cally since the introduction of a measles vaccine. Most 
patients give a history of primary measles infection at an 
early age (2 years), which is followed after a latent inter-
val of 6–8 years by the development of a progressive 
neurologic disorder. Some 85% of patients are between 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
518
5 and 15 years old at diagnosis. Initial manifestations 
include poor school performance and mood and person-
ality changes. Typical signs of a CNS viral infection, 
including fever and headache, do not occur. As the 
disease progresses, patients develop progressive intel-
lectual deterioration, focal and/or generalized seizures, 
myoclonus, ataxia, and visual disturbances. In the late 
stage of the illness, patients are unresponsive, quadriparetic, 
and spastic, with hyperactive tendon reﬂexes and extensor 
plantar responses.
Diagnostic studies
MRI is often normal early, although areas of increased 
T2 signal develop in the white matter of the brain and 
brainstem as disease progresses. The EEG may initially 
show only nonspeciﬁc slowing, but with disease progres-
sion, patients develop a characteristic periodic pattern 
with bursts of high-voltage, sharp, slow waves every 
3–8 s, followed by periods of attenuated (“ﬂat”) back-
ground. The CSF is acellular with a normal or mildly 
elevated protein concentration and a markedly elevated 
gamma globulin level (>20% of total CSF protein). CSF 
antimeasles antibody levels are invariably elevated, and 
oligoclonal antimeasles antibodies are often present. 
Measles virus can be cultured from brain tissue using 
special cocultivation techniques. Viral antigen can be 
identiﬁed immunocytochemically, and viral genome 
can be detected by in situ hybridization or PCR 
ampliﬁcation.
TREATMENT 
Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis
No definitive therapy for SSPE is available. Treatment 
with isoprinosine (Inosiplex, 100 mg/kg per day), alone 
or in combination with intrathecal or intraventricular 
alpha interferon, has been reported to prolong survival 
and produce clinical improvement in some patients but 
has never been subjected to a controlled clinical trial.
PROGRESSIVE RUBELLA 
PANENCEPHALITIS
This is an extremely rare disorder that primarily affects 
males with congenital rubella syndrome, although isolated 
cases have been reported following childhood rubella. 
After a latent period of 8–19 years, patients develop 
progressive neurologic deterioration. The manifesta-
tions are similar to those seen in SSPE. CSF shows a 
mild lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly elevated protein 
concentration, markedly increased gamma globulin, and 
rubella virus–speciﬁc oligoclonal bands. No therapy is 
available. Universal prevention of both congenital and 
childhood rubella through the use of the available live 
attenuated rubella vaccine would be expected to eliminate 
the disease.
BRAIN ABSCESS
DEFINITION
A brain abscess is a focal, suppurative infection within the 
brain parenchyma, typically surrounded by a vascularized 
capsule. The term cerebritis is often employed to describe 
a nonencapsulated brain abscess.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
A bacterial brain abscess is a relatively uncom-
mon intracranial infection, with an incidence of 
∼0.3–1.3:100,000 persons per year. Predisposing 
conditions include otitis media and mastoiditis, paranasal 
sinusitis, pyogenic infections in the chest or other body 
sites, penetrating head trauma or neurosurgical procedures, 
and dental infections. In immunocompetent individuals 
the most important pathogens are Streptococcus spp. 
(anaerobic, aerobic, and viridans [40%]), Enterobacteria-
ceae (Proteus spp., E. coli sp., Klebsiella spp. [25%]), 
anaerobes (e.g., Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp. [30%]), 
and staphylococci (10%). In immunocompromised hosts 
with underlying HIV infection, organ transplantation, 
cancer, or immunosuppressive therapy, most brain 
abscesses are caused by Nocardia spp., Toxoplasma gondii, 
Aspergillus spp., Candida spp., and C. neoformans. In Latin 
America and in immigrants from Latin America, the most 
common cause of brain abscess is Taenia solium 
(neurocysticercosis). In India and the Far East, mycobacterial 
infection (tuberculoma) remains a major cause of focal 
CNS mass lesions.
ETIOLOGY
A brain abscess may develop (1) by direct spread from 
a contiguous cranial site of infection, such as paranasal 
sinusitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, or dental infection; (2) 
following head trauma or a neurosurgical procedure; or 
(3) as a result of hematogenous spread from a remote site of 
infection. In up to 25% of cases, no obvious primary source 
of infection is apparent (cryptogenic brain abscess).
Approximately one-third of brain abscesses are asso-
ciated with otitis media and mastoiditis, often with an 
associated cholesteatoma. Otogenic abscesses occur pre-
dominantly in the temporal lobe (55–75%) and cerebellum 
(20–30%). In some series, up to 90% of cerebellar abscesses 
are otogenic. Common organisms include streptococci, 
Bacteroides spp., Pseudomonas spp., Haemophilus spp., and 
Enterobacteriaceae. Abscesses that develop as a result of 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
519
direct spread of infection from the frontal, ethmoidal, 
or sphenoidal sinuses and those that occur due to den-
tal infections are usually located in the frontal lobes. 
Approximately 10% of brain abscesses are associated 
with paranasal sinusitis, and this association is particularly 
strong in young males in their second and third decades 
of life. The most common pathogens in brain abscesses 
associated with paranasal sinusitis are streptococci (especially 
S. milleri), Haemophilus spp., Bacteroides spp., Pseudomonas 
spp., and S. aureus. Dental infections are associated with 
∼2% of brain abscesses, although it is often suggested 
that many “cryptogenic” abscesses are in fact due to 
dental infections. The most common pathogens in this 
setting are streptococci, staphylococci, Bacteroides spp., 
and Fusobacterium spp.
Hematogenous abscesses account for ∼25% of brain 
abscesses. Hematogenous abscesses are often multiple, 
and multiple abscesses often (50%) have a hematogenous 
origin. These abscesses show a predilection for the ter-
ritory of the middle cerebral artery (i.e., posterior frontal 
or parietal lobes). Hematogenous abscesses are often 
located at the junction of the gray and white matter 
and are often poorly encapsulated. The microbiology 
of hematogenous abscesses is dependent on the primary 
source of infection. For example, brain abscesses that 
develop as a complication of infective endocarditis are 
often due to viridans streptococci or S. aureus. Abscesses 
associated with pyogenic lung infections such as lung 
abscess or bronchiectasis are often due to streptococci, 
staphylococci, Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp., or 
Enterobacteriaceae. Abscesses that follow penetrating 
head trauma or neurosurgical procedures are frequently 
due to methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), S. epidermidis, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas spp., and Clostridium 
spp. Enterobacteriaceae and P. aeruginosa are impor-
tant causes of abscesses associated with urinary sepsis. 
Congenital cardiac malformations that produce a right-
to-left shunt, such as tetralogy of Fallot, patent ductus 
arteriosus, and atrial and ventricular septal defects, allow 
bloodborne bacteria to bypass the pulmonary capil-
lary bed and reach the brain. Similar phenomena can 
occur with pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. The 
decreased arterial oxygenation and saturation from the 
right-to-left shunt and polycythemia may cause focal areas 
of cerebral ischemia, thus providing a nidus for micro-
organisms that bypassed the pulmonary circulation to 
multiply and form an abscess. Streptococci are the most 
common pathogens in this setting.
PATHOGENESIS AND HISTOPATHOLOGY
Results of experimental models of brain abscess formation 
suggest that for bacterial invasion of brain parenchyma to 
occur, there must be preexisting or concomitant areas of 
ischemia, necrosis, or hypoxemia in brain tissue. The 
intact brain parenchyma is relatively resistant to infec-
tion. Once bacteria have established infection, brain 
abscess frequently evolves through a series of stages, 
inﬂuenced by the nature of the infecting organism 
and by the immunocompetence of the host. The early 
cerebritis stage (days 1–3) is characterized by a perivas-
cular inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells, which surround 
a central core of coagulative necrosis. Marked edema 
surrounds the lesion at this stage. In the late cerebritis 
stage (days 4–9), pus formation leads to enlargement of 
the necrotic center, which is surrounded at its border 
by an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate of macrophages and ﬁbro-
blasts. A thin capsule of ﬁbroblasts and reticular ﬁbers 
gradually develops, and the surrounding area of cerebral 
edema becomes more distinct than in the previous stage. 
The third stage, early capsule formation (days 10–13), is 
characterized by the formation of a capsule that is better 
developed on the cortical than on the ventricular side of 
the lesion. This stage correlates with the appearance of 
a ring-enhancing capsule on neuroimaging studies. The 
ﬁnal stage, late capsule formation (day 14 and beyond), 
is deﬁned by a well-formed necrotic center surrounded 
by a dense collagenous capsule. The surrounding area 
of cerebral edema has regressed, but marked gliosis with 
large numbers of reactive astrocytes has developed outside 
the capsule. This gliotic process may contribute to the 
development of seizures as a sequelae of brain abscess.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
A brain abscess typically presents as an expanding intra-
cranial mass lesion rather than as an infectious process. 
Although the evolution of signs and symptoms is 
extremely variable, ranging from hours to weeks or 
even months, most patients present to the hospital 
11–12 days following onset of symptoms. The classic 
clinical triad of headache, fever, and a focal neurologic 
deﬁcit is present in <50% of cases. The most common 
symptom in patients with a brain abscess is headache, 
occurring in >75% of patients. The headache is often 
characterized as a constant, dull, aching sensation, either 
hemicranial or generalized, and it becomes progressively 
more severe and refractory to therapy. Fever is present 
in only 50% of patients at the time of diagnosis, and 
its absence should not exclude the diagnosis. The new 
onset of focal or generalized seizure activity is a presenting 
sign in 15–35% of patients. Focal neurologic deﬁcits 
including hemiparesis, aphasia, or visual ﬁeld defects are 
part of the initial presentation in >60% of patients.
The clinical presentation of a brain abscess depends 
on its location, the nature of the primary infection if 
present, and the level of the ICP. Hemiparesis is the 
most common localizing sign of a frontal lobe abscess. 
A temporal lobe abscess may present with a disturbance 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
520
of language (dysphasia) or an upper homonymous qua-
drantanopia. Nystagmus and ataxia are signs of a cerebellar 
abscess. Signs of raised ICP—papilledema, nausea and 
vomiting, and drowsiness or confusion—can be the 
dominant presentation of some abscesses, particularly 
those in the cerebellum. Meningismus is not present 
unless the abscess has ruptured into the ventricle or the 
infection has spread to the subarachnoid space.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is made by neuroimaging studies. MRI 
(Fig. 40-4) is better than CT for demonstrating 
abscesses in the early (cerebritis) stages and is superior to 
CT for identifying abscesses in the posterior fossa. Cere-
britis appears on MRI as an area of low-signal intensity 
on T1-weighted images with irregular postgadolinium 
enhancement and as an area of increased signal inten-
sity on T2-weighted images. Cerebritis is often not 
visualized by CT scan but, when present, appears as 
an area of hypodensity. On a contrast-enhanced CT 
scan, a mature brain abscess appears as a focal area of 
hypodensity surrounded by ring enhancement with sur-
rounding edema (hypodensity). On contrast-enhanced 
T1-weighted MRI, a mature brain abscess has a cap-
sule that enhances surrounding a hypodense center 
and surrounded by a hypodense area of edema. On 
T2-weighted MRI, there is a hyperintense central area 
of pus surrounded by a well-deﬁned hypointense cap-
sule and a hyperintense surrounding area of edema. It 
is important to recognize that the CT and MR appear-
ance, particularly of the capsule, may be altered by treat-
ment with glucocorticoids. The distinction between 
a brain abscess and other focal CNS lesions such as 
primary or metastatic tumors may be facilitated by the 
use of diffusion-weighted imaging sequences on which 
brain abscesses typically show increased signal due to 
restricted diffusion.
Microbiologic diagnosis of the etiologic agent is most 
accurately determined by Gram’s stain and culture of 
abscess material obtained by CT-guided stereotactic needle 
aspiration. Aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures and 
mycobacterial and fungal cultures should be obtained. Up 
to 10% of patients will also have positive blood cultures. 
LP should not be performed in patients with known or 
suspected focal intracranial infections such as abscess or 
empyema; CSF analysis contributes nothing to diagnosis 
or therapy, and LP increases the risk of herniation.
Additional laboratory studies may provide clues to 
the diagnosis of brain abscess in patients with a CNS 
mass lesion. About 50% of patients have a peripheral 
leukocytosis, 60% an elevated ESR, and 80% an ele-
vated C-reactive protein. Blood cultures are positive in 
∼10% of cases overall but may be positive in >85% of 
patients with abscesses due to Listeria.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Conditions that can cause headache, fever, focal neurologic 
signs, and seizure activity include brain abscess, subdural 
empyema, bacterial meningitis, viral meningoencephalitis, 
superior sagittal sinus thrombosis, and acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis. When fever is absent, primary and 
metastatic brain tumors become the major differential 
diagnosis. Less commonly, cerebral infarction or hema-
toma can have an MRI or CT appearance resembling 
brain abscess.
FIGURE 40-4
Pneumococcal brain abscess. Note that the abscess wall 
has hyperintense signal on the axial T1-weighted MRI (A, 
black arrow), hypointense signal on the axial proton density 
images (B, black arrow), and enhances prominently after 
gadolinium administration on the coronal T1-weighted image 
(C). The abscess is surrounded by a large amount of vaso-
genic edema and has a small “daughter” abscess (C, white 
arrow). (Courtesy of Joseph Lurito, MD; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
521
TREATMENT 
Brain Abscess
Optimal therapy of brain abscesses involves a combina-
tion of high-dose parenteral antibiotics and neurosurgical  
drainage. Empirical therapy of community-acquired 
brain abscess in an immunocompetent patient typically 
includes a third- or fourth-generation cephalosporin 
(e.g., cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or cefepime) and metroni-
dazole (see Table 40-1 for antibiotic dosages). In patients 
with penetrating head trauma or recent neurosurgical 
procedures, treatment should include ceftazidime as 
the third-generation cephalosporin to enhance cover-
age of Pseudomonas spp. and vancomycin for coverage of 
staphylococci. Meropenem plus vancomycin also provides 
good coverage in this setting.
Aspiration and drainage of the abscess under stereo-
tactic guidance are beneficial for both diagnosis and 
therapy. Empirical antibiotic coverage should be modi-
fied based on the results of Gram’s stain and culture of the 
abscess contents. Complete excision of a bacterial abscess 
via craniotomy or craniectomy is generally reserved for 
multiloculated abscesses or those in which stereotactic 
aspiration is unsuccessful.
Medical therapy alone is not optimal for treatment 
of brain abscess and should be reserved for patients 
whose abscesses are neurosurgically inaccessible, for 
patients with small (<2–3 cm) or nonencapsulated 
abscesses (cerebritis), and patients whose condition 
is too tenuous to allow performance of a neurosurgical  
procedure. All patients should receive a minimum of 
6–8 weeks of parenteral antibiotic therapy. The role, if 
any, of supplemental oral antibiotic therapy following 
completion of a standard course of parenteral therapy 
has never been adequately studied.
In addition to surgical drainage and antibiotic therapy, 
patients should receive prophylactic anticonvulsant 
therapy because of the high risk (∼35%) of focal or gen-
eralized seizures. Anticonvulsant therapy is continued 
for at least 3 months after resolution of the abscess, 
and decisions regarding withdrawal are then based on 
the EEG. If the EEG is abnormal, anticonvulsant therapy 
should be continued. If the EEG is normal, anticonvulsant 
therapy can be slowly withdrawn, with close follow-up 
and repeat EEG after the medication has been discontinued.
Glucocorticoids should not be given routinely to 
patients with brain abscesses. Intravenous dexamethasone 
therapy (10 mg every 6 h) is usually reserved for patients 
with substantial periabscess edema and associated 
mass effect and increased ICP. Dexamethasone should 
be tapered as rapidly as possible to avoid delaying the 
natural process of encapsulation of the abscess.
Serial MRI or CT scans should be obtained on a 
monthly or twice-monthly basis to document resolution 
of the abscess. More frequent studies (e.g., weekly) are 
probably warranted in the subset of patients who are 
receiving antibiotic therapy alone. A small amount of 
enhancement may remain for months after the abscess 
has been successfully treated.
PROGNOSIS
The mortality rate of brain abscess has declined in parallel 
with the development of enhanced neuroimaging tech-
niques, improved neurosurgical procedures for stereotactic 
aspiration, and improved antibiotics. In modern series, 
the mortality rate is typically <15%. Signiﬁcant sequelae, 
including seizures, persisting weakness, aphasia, or mental 
impairment, occur in ≥20% of survivors.
NONBACTERIAL CAUSES OF 
INFECTIOUS FOCAL CNS LESIONS
ETIOLOGY
Neurocysticercosis is the most common parasitic disease 
of the CNS worldwide. Humans acquire cysticercosis 
by the ingestion of food contaminated with the eggs of 
the parasite T. solium. Toxoplasmosis is a parasitic disease 
caused by T. gondii and acquired from the ingestion of 
undercooked meat and from handling cat feces.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The most common manifestation of neurocysticercosis 
is new-onset partial seizures with or without secondary 
generalization. Cysticerci may develop in the brain 
parenchyma and cause seizures or focal neurologic deﬁ-
cits. When present in the subarachnoid or ventricular 
spaces, cysticerci can produce increased ICP by inter-
ference with CSF ﬂow. Spinal cysticerci can mimic the 
presentation of intraspinal tumors. When the cysticerci 
ﬁrst lodge in the brain, they frequently cause little in the 
way of an inﬂammatory response. As the cysticercal cyst 
degenerates, it elicits an inﬂammatory response that may 
present clinically as a seizure. Eventually the cyst dies, 
a process that may take several years and is typically 
associated with resolution of the inﬂammatory response 
and, often, abatement of seizures.
Primary Toxoplasma infection is often asymptomatic. 
However, during this phase parasites may spread to the 
CNS, where they become latent. Reactivation of CNS 
infection is almost exclusively associated with immuno-
compromised hosts, particularly those with HIV infection. 
During this phase patients present with headache, fever, 
seizures, and focal neurologic deﬁcits.
DIAGNOSIS
The lesions of neurocysticercosis are readily visual-
ized by MRI or CT scans. Lesions with viable parasites 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
522
appear as cystic lesions. The scolex can often be visualized 
on MRI. Lesions may appear as contrast-enhancing lesions 
surrounded by edema. A very early sign of cyst death 
is hypointensity of the vesicular ﬂuid on T2-weighted 
images when compared with CSF. Parenchymal brain 
calciﬁcations are the most common ﬁnding and evidence 
that the parasite is no longer viable. MRI ﬁndings of toxo-
plasmosis consist of multiple lesions in the deep white 
matter, the thalamus, and basal ganglia and at the gray-
white junction in the cerebral hemispheres. With contrast 
administration, the majority of the lesions enhance in a 
ringed, nodular, or homogeneous pattern and are sur-
rounded by edema. In the presence of the characteristic 
neuroimaging abnormalities of T. gondii infection, 
serum IgG antibody to T. gondii should be obtained 
and, when positive, the patient should be treated.
TREATMENT 
Infectious Focal CNS Lesions
Anticonvulsant therapy is initiated when the patient 
with neurocysticercosis presents with a seizure. There is 
controversy about whether or not anthelmintic therapy 
should be given to all patients, and recommendations 
are based on the stage of the lesion. Cysticerci appearing 
as cystic lesions in the brain parenchyma with or without 
pericystic edema or in the subarachnoid space at the 
convexity of the cerebral hemispheres should be treated 
with anticysticidal therapy. Cysticidal drugs accelerate 
the destruction of the parasites, resulting in a faster 
resolution of the infection. Albendazole and prazi-
quantel are used in the treatment of neurocysticercosis. 
Approximately 85% of parenchymal cysts are destroyed 
by a single course of albendazole, and ∼75% are 
destroyed by a single course of praziquantel. The dose 
of albendazole is 15 mg/kg per day in two doses for  
8 days. The dose of praziquantel is 50 mg/kg per day for 
15 days, although a number of other dosage regimens 
are also frequently cited. Prednisone or dexamethasone 
is given with anticysticidal therapy to reduce the host 
inflammatory response to degenerating parasites. Many, 
but not all, experts recommend anticysticidal therapy 
for lesions that are surrounded by a contrast-enhancing 
ring. There is universal agreement that calcified lesions 
do not need to be treated with anticysticidal therapy. 
Antiepileptic therapy can be stopped once the follow-up 
CT scan shows resolution of the lesion. Long-term anti-
epileptic therapy is recommended when seizures occur 
after resolution of edema and resorption or calcification 
of the degenerating cyst.
CNS toxoplasmosis is treated with a combination of 
sulfadiazine, 1.5–2.0 g orally qid, plus pyrimethamine, 
100 mg orally to load, then 75–100 mg orally qd, plus 
folinic acid, 10–15 mg orally qd. Folinic acid is added to 
the regimen to prevent megaloblastic anemia. Therapy 
is continued until there is no evidence of active disease 
on neuroimaging studies, which typically takes at least 
6 weeks, and then the dose of sulfadiazine is reduced to 
2–4 g/d and pyrimethamine to 50 mg/d. Clindamycin plus 
pyrimethamine is an alternative therapy for patients 
who cannot tolerate sulfadiazine, but the combination 
of pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine is more effective.
SUBDURAL EMPYEMA
A subdural empyema (SDE) is a collection of pus between 
the dura and arachnoid membranes (Fig. 40-5).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
SDE is a rare disorder that accounts for 15–25% of focal 
suppurative CNS infections. Sinusitis is the most com-
mon predisposing condition and typically involves the 
frontal sinuses, either alone or in combination with 
the ethmoid and maxillary sinuses. Sinusitis-associated 
empyema has a striking predilection for young males, 
possibly reﬂecting sex-related differences in sinus anat-
omy and development. It has been suggested that SDE 
may complicate 1–2% of cases of frontal sinusitis severe 
enough to require hospitalization. As a consequence of 
this epidemiology, SDE shows an ∼3:1 male/female 
predominance, with 70% of cases occurring in the second 
and third decades of life. SDE may also develop as a 
complication of head trauma or neurosurgery. Secondary 
infection of a subdural effusion may also result in empy-
ema, although secondary infection of hematomas, in the 
absence of a prior neurosurgical procedure, is rare.
Subdural
empyema
Thrombosed
veins
Arachnoid
Dura mater
FIGURE 40-5
Subdural empyema.
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
523
ETIOLOGY
Aerobic and anaerobic streptococci, staphylococci, Entero-
bacteriaceae, and anaerobic bacteria are the most common 
causative organisms of sinusitis-associated SDE. Staphy-
lococci and gram-negative bacilli are often the etiologic 
organisms when SDE follows neurosurgical procedures 
or head trauma. Up to one-third of cases are culture- 
negative, possibly reﬂecting difﬁculty in obtaining adequate 
anaerobic cultures.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Sinusitis-associated SDE develops as a result of either 
retrograde spread of infection from septic thrombo-
phlebitis of the mucosal veins draining the sinuses or 
contiguous spread of infection to the brain from osteo-
myelitis in the posterior wall of the frontal or other 
sinuses. SDE may also develop from direct introduction 
of bacteria into the subdural space as a complication of 
a neurosurgical procedure. The evolution of SDE can 
be extremely rapid because the subdural space is a large 
compartment that offers few mechanical barriers to the 
spread of infection. In patients with sinusitis-associated 
SDE, suppuration typically begins in the upper and 
anterior portions of one cerebral hemisphere and then 
extends posteriorly. SDE is often associated with other 
intracranial infections, including epidural empyema 
(40%), cortical thrombophlebitis (35%), and intracranial 
abscess or cerebritis (>25%). Cortical venous infarction 
produces necrosis of underlying cerebral cortex and 
subcortical white matter, with focal neurologic deﬁcits 
and seizures (discussed later).
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
A patient with SDE typically presents with fever and a 
progressively worsening headache. The diagnosis of SDE 
should always be suspected in a patient with known 
sinusitis who presents with new CNS signs or symp-
toms. Patients with underlying sinusitis frequently have 
symptoms related to this infection. As the infection 
progresses, focal neurologic deﬁcits, seizures, nuchal 
rigidity, and signs of increased ICP commonly occur. 
Headache is the most common complaint at the time of 
presentation; initially it is localized to the side of the 
subdural infection, but then it becomes more severe 
and generalized. Contralateral hemiparesis or hemiplegia 
is the most common focal neurologic deﬁcit and can 
occur from the direct effects of the SDE on the cortex 
or as a consequence of venous infarction. Seizures begin 
as partial motor seizures that then become secondarily 
generalized. Seizures may be due to the direct irritative 
effect of the SDE on the underlying cortex or result 
from cortical venous infarction (discussed earlier). In 
untreated SDE, the increasing mass effect and increase 
in ICP cause progressive deterioration in consciousness, 
leading ultimately to coma.
DIAGNOSIS
MRI (Fig. 40-6) is superior to CT in identifying SDE 
and any associated intracranial infections. The admin-
istration of gadolinium greatly improves diagnosis by 
enhancing the rim of the empyema and allowing the 
empyema to be clearly delineated from the underlying 
brain parenchyma. Cranial MRI is also extremely valuable 
in identifying sinusitis, other focal CNS infections, cortical 
venous infarction, cerebral edema, and cerebritis. CT 
may show a crescent-shaped hypodense lesion over one 
or both hemispheres or in the interhemispheric ﬁssure. 
Frequently the degree of mass effect, exempliﬁed by 
midline shift, ventricular compression, and sulcal efface-
ment, is far out of proportion to the mass of the SDE.
FIGURE 40-6
Subdural empyema. There is marked enhancement of the 
dura and leptomeninges (A, B, straight arrows) along the left 
medial hemisphere. The pus is hypointense on T1-weighted 
images (A, B) but markedly hyperintense on the proton 
density–weighted (C, curved arrow) image. (Courtesy of 
Joseph Lurito, MD; with permission.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
524
Epidural abscess
FIGURE 40-7
Cranial epidural abscess is a collection of pus between the 
dura and the inner table of the skull.
CSF examination should be avoided in patients with 
known or suspected SDE as it adds no useful informa-
tion and is associated with the risk of cerebral herniation.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of the combination of headache, 
fever, focal neurologic signs, and seizure activity that 
progresses rapidly to an altered level of consciousness 
includes subdural hematoma, bacterial meningitis, viral 
encephalitis, brain abscess, superior sagittal sinus throm-
bosis, and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. The 
presence of nuchal rigidity is unusual with brain abscess 
or epidural empyema and should suggest the possibility 
of SDE when associated with signiﬁcant focal neuro-
logic signs and fever. Patients with bacterial meningitis 
also have nuchal rigidity but do not typically have focal 
deﬁcits of the severity seen with SDE.
TREATMENT 
Subdural Empyema
SDE is a medical emergency. Emergent neurosurgical 
evacuation of the empyema, either through craniotomy, 
craniectomy, or burr-hole drainage, is the definitive step 
in the management of this infection. Empirical antimicro-
bial therapy for community-acquired SDE should include 
a combination of a third-generation cephalosporin (e.g., 
cefotaxime or ceftriaxone), vancomycin, and metronida-
zole (see Table 40-1 for dosages). Patients with hospital-
acquired SDE may have infections due to Pseudomonas 
spp. or MRSA and should receive coverage with a carba-
penem (e.g., meropenem) and vancomycin. Metronidazole 
is not necessary for anti-anaerobic therapy when merope-
nem is being used. Parenteral antibiotic therapy should be 
continued for a minimum of 3–4 weeks after SDE drainage. 
Patients with associated cranial osteomyelitis may require 
longer therapy. Specific diagnosis of the etiologic organ-
isms is made based on Gram’s stain and culture of fluid 
obtained via either burr holes or craniotomy; the initial 
empirical antibiotic coverage can be modified accordingly.
PROGNOSIS
Prognosis is inﬂuenced by the level of consciousness of the 
patient at the time of hospital presentation, the size of the 
empyema, and the speed with which therapy is instituted. 
Long-term neurologic sequelae, which include seizures 
and hemiparesis, occur in up to 50% of cases.
CRANIAL EPIDURAL ABSCESS
Cranial epidural abscess is a suppurative infection occurring 
in the potential space between the inner skull table and 
dura (Fig. 40-7).
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Cranial epidural abscess is less common than either brain 
abscess or SDE and accounts for <2% of focal suppura-
tive CNS infections. A cranial epidural abscess develops 
as a complication of a craniotomy or compound skull 
fracture or as a result of spread of infection from the 
frontal sinuses, middle ear, mastoid, or orbit. An epidural 
abscess may develop contiguous to an area of osteomy-
elitis, when craniotomy is complicated by infection of 
the wound or bone ﬂap, or as a result of direct infec-
tion of the epidural space. Infection in the frontal sinus, 
middle ear, mastoid, or orbit can reach the epidural 
space through retrograde spread of infection from septic 
thrombophlebitis in the emissary veins that drain these 
areas or by way of direct spread of infection through 
areas of osteomyelitis. Unlike the subdural space, the 
epidural space is really a potential rather than an actual 
compartment. The dura is normally tightly adherent to 
the inner skull table, and infection must dissect the dura 
away from the skull table as it spreads. As a result, epi-
dural abscesses are often smaller than SDEs. Cranial epi-
dural abscesses, unlike brain abscesses, only rarely result 
from hematogenous spread of infection from extracra-
nial primary sites. The bacteriology of a cranial epidural 
abscess is similar to that of SDE (discussed earlier). The 
etiologic organisms of an epidural abscess that arises from 
frontal sinusitis, middle-ear infections, or mastoiditis are 
usually streptococci or anaerobic organisms. Staphy-
lococci or gram-negative organisms are the usual cause 
of an epidural abscess that develops as a complication of 
craniotomy or compound skull fracture.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Patients present with fever (60%), headache (40%), 
nuchal rigidity (35%), seizures (10%), and focal deﬁcits 
(5%). Development of symptoms may be insidious, as 
the empyema usually enlarges slowly in the conﬁned 
anatomic space between the dura and the inner table 
 
CHAPTER 40
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema
525
of the skull. Periorbital edema and Potts puffy tumor, 
reﬂecting underlying associated frontal bone osteomyelitis, 
are present in ∼40%. In patients with a recent neuro-
surgical procedure, wound infection is invariably present, 
but other symptoms may be subtle and can include 
altered mental status (45%), fever (35%), and headache 
(20%). The diagnosis should be considered when fever 
and headache follow recent head trauma or occur in the 
setting of frontal sinusitis, mastoiditis, or otitis media.
DIAGNOSIS
Cranial MRI with gadolinium enhancement is the 
procedure of choice to demonstrate a cranial epidural 
abscess. The sensitivity of CT is limited by the pres-
ence of signal artifacts arising from the bone of the inner 
skull table. The CT appearance of an epidural empyema 
is that of a lens or crescent-shaped hypodense extraaxial 
lesion. On MRI, an epidural empyema appears as a lenti-
form or crescent-shaped ﬂuid collection that is hyper-
intense compared to CSF on T2-weighted images. On 
T1-weighted images, the ﬂuid collection may be either 
isointense or hypointense compared to brain. Follow-
ing the administration of gadolinium, there is linear 
enhancement of the dura on T1-weighted images. In 
distinction to subdural empyema, signs of mass effect or 
other parenchymal abnormalities are uncommon.
TREATMENT 
Epidural Abscess
Immediate neurosurgical drainage is indicated. Empirical 
antimicrobial therapy, pending the results of Gram’s 
stain and culture of the purulent material obtained 
at surgery, should include a combination of a third- 
generation cephalosporin, vancomycin, and metronidazole 
(Table 40-1). Ceftazidime or meropenem should be sub-
stituted for ceftriaxone or cefotaxime in neurosurgical 
patients. Metronidazole is not necessary for anti-anaerobic 
coverage in patients receiving meropenem. When the 
organism has been identified, antimicrobial therapy can 
be modified accordingly. Antibiotics should be contin-
ued for 3–6 weeks after surgical drainage. Patients with 
associated osteomyelitis may require additional therapy.
PROGNOSIS
The mortality rate is <5% in modern series, and full 
recovery is the rule in most survivors.
SUPPURATIVE THROMBOPHLEBITIS
DEFINITION
Suppurative intracranial thrombophlebitis is septic 
venous thrombosis of cortical veins and sinuses. This 
may occur as a complication of bacterial meningitis; 
SDE; epidural abscess; or infection in the skin of the 
face, paranasal sinuses, middle ear, or mastoid.
ANATOMY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The cerebral veins and venous sinuses have no valves; 
therefore, blood within them can ﬂow in either 
direction. The superior sagittal sinus is the largest of 
the venous sinuses (Fig. 40-8). It receives blood from 
the frontal, parietal, and occipital superior cerebral 
veins and the diploic veins, which communicate with 
the meningeal veins. Bacterial meningitis is a common 
predisposing condition for septic thrombosis of the 
superior sagittal sinus. The diploic veins, which drain 
into the superior sagittal sinus, provide a route for the 
spread of infection from the meninges, especially in 
cases where there is purulent exudate near areas of the 
superior sagittal sinus. Infection can also spread to the 
superior sagittal sinus from nearby SDE or epidural 
abscess. Dehydration from vomiting, hypercoagulable 
states, and immunologic abnormalities, including the 
presence of circulating antiphospholipid antibodies, also 
contribute to cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. Throm-
bosis may extend from one sinus to another, and at 
autopsy thrombi of different histologic ages can often be 
detected in several sinuses. Thrombosis of the superior 
sagittal sinus is often associated with thrombosis of superior 
cortical veins and small parenchymal hemorrhages.
The superior sagittal sinus drains into the transverse 
sinuses (Fig. 40-8). The transverse sinuses also receive 
venous drainage from small veins from both the middle ear 
and mastoid cells. The transverse sinus becomes the 
sigmoid sinus before draining into the internal jugular 
vein. Septic transverse/sigmoid sinus thrombosis can 
be a complication of acute and chronic otitis media 
or mastoiditis. Infection spreads from the mastoid air 
Superior
ophthalmic
vein
Inferior
ophthalmic
vein
Cavernous
sinus
Internal
jugular
vein
Sigmoid
sinus
Straight
sinus
Transverse
sinus
Superior
sagittal sinus
FIGURE 40-8
Anatomy of the cerebral venous sinuses.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
526
cells to the transverse sinus via the emissary veins or by 
direct invasion. The cavernous sinuses are inferior to 
the superior sagittal sinus at the base of the skull. The 
cavernous sinuses receive blood from the facial veins via 
the superior and inferior ophthalmic veins. Bacteria in 
the facial veins enter the cavernous sinus via these veins. 
Bacteria in the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses can spread 
to the cavernous sinuses via the small emissary veins. 
The sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses are the most common 
sites of primary infection resulting in septic cavernous 
sinus thrombosis.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Septic thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus presents with 
headache, fever, nausea and vomiting, confusion, and 
focal or generalized seizures. There may be a rapid 
development of stupor and coma. Weakness of the 
lower extremities with bilateral Babinski’s signs or 
hemiparesis is often present. When superior sagittal 
sinus thrombosis occurs as a complication of bacterial 
meningitis, nuchal rigidity and Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s 
signs may be present.
The oculomotor nerve, the trochlear nerve, the 
abducens nerve, the ophthalmic and maxillary branches 
of the trigeminal nerve, and the internal carotid artery 
all pass through the cavernous sinus (see Fig. 34-4). 
The symptoms of septic cavernous sinus thrombosis are 
fever, headache, frontal and retroorbital pain, and dip-
lopia. The classic signs are ptosis, proptosis, chemosis, 
and extraocular dysmotility due to deﬁcits of cranial 
nerves III, IV, and VI; hyperesthesia of the ophthalmic 
and maxillary divisions of the ﬁfth cranial nerve and 
a decreased corneal reﬂex may be detected. There 
may be evidence of dilated, tortuous retinal veins and 
papilledema.
Headache and earache are the most frequent symptoms 
of transverse sinus thrombosis. A transverse sinus thrombosis 
may also present with otitis media, sixth nerve palsy, 
and retroorbital or facial pain (Gradenigo’s syndrome). 
Sigmoid sinus and internal jugular vein thrombosis may 
present with neck pain.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of septic venous sinus thrombosis is sug-
gested by an absent ﬂow void within the affected venous 
sinus on MRI and conﬁrmed by magnetic resonance 
venography, CT angiogram, or the venous phase of 
cerebral angiography. The diagnosis of thrombophlebitis 
of intracerebral and meningeal veins is suggested by the 
presence of intracerebral hemorrhage but requires cerebral 
angiography for deﬁnitive diagnosis.
TREATMENT 
Suppurative Thrombophlebitis
Septic venous sinus thrombosis is treated with antibiotics, 
hydration, and removal of infected tissue and thrombus  
in septic lateral or cavernous sinus thrombosis. The 
choice of antimicrobial therapy is based on the bacteria 
responsible for the predisposing or associated condition. 
Optimal duration of therapy is unknown, but antibiotics 
are usually continued for 6 weeks or until there is radio-
graphic evidence of resolution of thrombosis. Antico-
agulation with dose-adjusted intravenous heparin is 
recommended for aseptic venous sinus thrombosis and 
in the treatment of septic venous sinus thrombosis com-
plicating bacterial meningitis in patients who have pro-
gressive neurologic deterioration despite antimicrobial 
therapy and intravenous fluids. The presence of a small 
intracerebral hemorrhage from septic thrombophlebitis 
is not an absolute contraindication to heparin therapy. 
Successful management of aseptic venous sinus throm-
bosis has been reported with surgical thrombectomy, 
catheter-directed urokinase therapy, and with a combi-
nation of intrathrombus recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator (rtPA) and intravenous heparin, but there is not 
enough data to recommend these therapies in septic 
venous sinus thrombosis.
527
 Walter J. Koroshetz 
■  Morton N. Swartz 
 Chronic inﬂ ammation of the meninges (pia, arachnoid, 
and dura) can produce profound neurologic disability and 
may be fatal if not successfully treated. The condition is 
most commonly diagnosed when a characteristic neuro-
logic syndrome exists for >4 weeks and is associated with 
a persistent inﬂ ammatory response in the cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid (CSF) (white blood cell count >5/μL). The causes 
are varied, and appropriate treatment depends on identi-
ﬁ cation of the etiology. Five categories of disease account 
for most cases of chronic meningitis: (1) meningeal infec-
tions, (2) malignancy, (3) noninfectious inﬂ ammatory 
disorders, (4) chemical meningitis, and (5) parameningeal 
infections. 
 CLINICAL PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 Neurologic manifestations of chronic meningitis 
 ( Table 41-1 ) are determined by the anatomic location 
of the inﬂ ammation and its consequences. Persistent 
headache with or without stiff neck, hydrocephalus, 
cranial neuropathies, radiculopathies, and cognitive or 
personality changes are the cardinal features. These can 
occur alone or in combination. When they appear in 
combination, widespread dissemination of the inﬂ am-
matory process along CSF pathways has occurred. In 
some cases, the presence of an underlying systemic illness 
points to a speciﬁ c agent or class of agents as the prob-
able cause. The diagnosis of chronic meningitis is usually 
made when the clinical presentation prompts the astute 
physician to examine the CSF for signs of inﬂ amma-
tion. CSF is produced by the choroid plexus of the 
cerebral ventricles, exits through narrow foramina into 
the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal 
cord, circulates around the base of the brain and over 
the cerebral hemispheres, and is resorbed by arachnoid 
villi projecting into the superior sagittal sinus. CSF ﬂ ow 
provides a pathway for rapid spread of infectious and 
other inﬁ ltrative processes over the brain, spinal cord, 
and cranial and spinal nerve roots. Spread from the 
subarachnoid space into brain parenchyma may occur 
via the arachnoid cuffs that surround blood vessels that 
penetrate brain tissue (Virchow-Robin spaces). 
 Intracranial meningitis 
 Nociceptive ﬁ bers of the meninges are stimulated by 
the inﬂ ammatory process, resulting in headache or 
neck or back pain. Obstruction of CSF pathways at the 
foramina or arachnoid villi may produce  hydrocephalus
and symptoms of raised intracranial pressure (ICP), 
including headache, vomiting, apathy or drowsiness, 
 CHRONIC AND RECURRENT MENINGITIS 
 CHAPTER 41 
TABLE 41-1 
 SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF CHRONIC MENINGITIS 
SYMPTOM
SIGN
Chronic headache
+/− Papilledema
Neck or back pain
Brudzinski’s or Kernig’s sign 
of meningeal irritation
Change in personality
Altered mental status—
drowsiness, inattention, 
disorientation, memory loss, 
frontal release signs (grasp, 
suck, snout), perseveration
Facial weakness
Peripheral seventh CN palsy
Double vision
Palsy of CNs III, IV, VI
Visual loss
Papilledema, optic atrophy
Hearing loss
Eighth CN palsy
Arm or leg weakness
Myelopathy or 
radiculopathy
Numbness in arms or legs
Myelopathy or radiculopathy
Sphincter dysfunction
Myelopathy or radiculopathy
Frontal lobe dysfunction 
(hydrocephalus)
Clumsiness
Ataxia
Abbreviation: CN, cranial nerve.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
528
gait instability, papilledema, visual loss, impaired upgaze, 
or palsy of the sixth cranial nerve (CN) (Chap. 34). 
Cognitive and behavioral changes during the course 
of chronic meningitis may also result from vascular 
damage, which may similarly produce seizures, stroke, 
or myelopathy. Inﬂammatory deposits seeded via the 
CSF circulation are often prominent around the brain-
stem and cranial nerves and along the undersurface of 
the frontal and temporal lobes. Such cases, termed basal 
meningitis, often present as multiple cranial neuropathies, 
with visual loss (CN II), facial weakness (CN VII), hearing 
loss (CN VIII), diplopia (CNs III, IV, and VI), sensory or 
motor abnormalities of the oropharynx (CNs IX, X, 
and XII), decreased olfaction (CN I), or facial sensory 
loss and masseter weakness (CN V).
Spinal meningitis
Injury may occur to motor and sensory roots as they 
traverse the subarachnoid space and penetrate the 
meninges. These cases present as multiple radiculopathies 
with combinations of radicular pain, sensory loss, motor 
weakness, and sphincter dysfunction. Meningeal inﬂam-
mation can encircle the cord, resulting in myelopathy. 
Patients with slowly progressive involvement of multiple 
cranial nerves and/or spinal nerve roots are likely to have 
chronic meningitis. Electrophysiologic testing (electromy-
ography, nerve conduction studies, and evoked response 
testing) may be helpful in determining whether there is 
involvement of cranial and spinal nerve roots.
Systemic manifestations
In some patients, evidence of systemic disease provides 
clues to the underlying cause of chronic meningitis. 
A careful history and physical examination are essential 
before embarking on a diagnostic workup, which may 
be costly, prolonged, and associated with risk from 
invasive procedures. A complete history of travel, sexual 
practice, and exposure to infectious agents should be 
sought. Infectious causes are often associated with fever, 
malaise, anorexia, and signs of localized or disseminated 
infection outside the nervous system. Infectious causes 
are of major concern in the immunosuppressed patient, 
especially in patients with AIDS, in whom chronic 
meningitis may present without headache or fever. Non-
infectious inﬂammatory disorders often produce systemic 
manifestations, but meningitis may be the initial mani-
festation. Carcinomatous meningitis may or may not be 
accompanied by clinical evidence of the primary neoplasm.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Chronic Meningitis
The occurrence of chronic headache, hydrocephalus, 
cranial neuropathy, radiculopathy, and/or cognitive 
decline in a patient should prompt consideration of a 
lumbar puncture for evidence of meningeal inflamma-
tion. On occasion, the diagnosis is made when an imaging 
study (CT or MRI) shows contrast enhancement of the 
meninges, which is always abnormal with the exception 
of dural enhancement after lumbar puncture, neuro-
surgical procedures, or spontaneous CSF leakage. Once 
chronic meningitis is confirmed by CSF examination, 
effort is focused on identifying the cause (Tables 41-2 
and 41-3) by (1) further analysis of the CSF, (2) diagno-
sis of an underlying systemic infection or noninfectious 
inflammatory condition, or (3) pathologic examination 
of meningeal biopsy specimens.
Two clinical forms of chronic meningitis exist. In the 
first, the symptoms are chronic and persistent, whereas 
in the second there are recurrent, discrete episodes of 
illness. In the latter group, all symptoms, signs, and CSF 
parameters of meningeal inflammation resolve com-
pletely between episodes without specific therapy. In 
such patients, the likely etiologies include herpes sim-
plex virus (HSV) type 2; chemical meningitis due to leak-
age into CSF of contents from an epidermoid tumor, 
craniopharyngioma, or cholesteatoma; primary inflam-
matory conditions, including Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada 
syndrome, Behçet’s syndrome, and systemic lupus ery-
thematosus; and drug hypersensitivity with repeated 
administration of the offending agent.
The epidemiologic history is of considerable impor-
tance and may provide direction for selection of laboratory 
studies. Pertinent features include a history of tuber-
culosis or exposure to a likely case; past travel to areas 
endemic for fungal infections (the San Joaquin Valley in 
California and southwestern states for coccidioidomycosis, 
midwestern states for histoplasmosis, southeastern states 
for blastomycosis); travel to the Mediterranean region or 
ingestion of imported unpasteurized dairy products 
(Brucella); time spent in wooded areas endemic for 
Lyme disease; exposure to sexually transmitted disease 
(syphilis); exposure of an immunocompromised host to 
pigeons and their droppings (Cryptococcus); gardening 
(Sporothrix schenkii); ingestion of poorly cooked meat 
or contact with a household cat (Toxoplasma gondii); 
residence in Thailand or Japan (Gnathostoma spinigerum), 
Latin America (Paracoccidioides brasiliiensis), or the South 
Pacific (Angiostrongylus cantonensis); rural residence and 
raccoon exposure (Baylisascaris procyonis); and residence 
in Latin America, the Philippines, or Southeast Asia 
when eosinophilic meningitis is present (Taenia solium).
The presence of focal cerebral signs in a patient with 
chronic meningitis suggests the possibility of a brain 
abscess or other parameningeal infection; identification of 
a potential source of infection (chronic draining ear, sinus-
itis, right-to-left cardiac or pulmonary shunt, chronic 
pleuropulmonary infection) supports this diagnosis. 
 
CHAPTER 41
Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
529
TABLE 41-2 
INFECTIOUS CAUSES OF CHRONIC MENINGITIS
CAUSATIVE AGENT
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC 
MANIFESTATIONS
Common Bacterial Causes
Partially treated suppurative 
meningitis
Mononuclear or 
mixed mononuclear-
polymorphonuclear cells
CSF culture and Gram’s stain
History consistent with acute 
bacterial meningitis and 
incomplete treatment
Parameningeal infection
Mononuclear or mixed 
polymorphonuclear-
mononuclear cells
Contrast-enhanced CT or 
MRI to detect parenchymal, 
subdural, epidural, or sinus 
infection
Otitis media, pleuropulmonary 
infection, right-to-left cardio-
pulmonary shunt for brain 
abscess; focal neurologic 
signs; neck, back, ear, or 
sinus tenderness
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mononuclear cells except 
polymorphonuclear cells in 
early infection (commonly 
<500 WBC/μL); low CSF 
glucose, high protein
Tuberculin skin test may be 
negative; AFB culture of 
CSF (sputum, urine, gastric 
contents if indicated); tuber-
culostearic acid detection in 
CSF; identify tubercle bacil-
lus on acid-fast stain of CSF 
or protein pellicle; PCR
Exposure history; previous 
tuberculous illness; immuno-
suppressed or AIDS; young 
children; fever, meningismus, 
night sweats, miliary TB on 
x-ray or liver biopsy; stroke 
due to arteritis
Lyme disease (Bannwarth’s 
syndrome) 
Borrelia burgdorferi
Mononuclear cells; elevated 
protein
Serum Lyme antibody titer; 
Western blot conﬁrmation; 
(patients with syphilis may 
have false-positive Lyme 
titer)
History of tick bite or  
appropriate exposure  
history; erythema chroni-
cum migrans skin rash; 
arthritis, radiculopathy, 
Bell’s palsy, meningoen-
cephalitis–multiple  
sclerosis-like syndrome
Syphilis (secondary, tertiary) 
Treponema pallidum
Mononuclear cells; elevated 
protein
CSF VDRL; serum VDRL (or 
RPR); ﬂuorescent trepo-
nemal antibody-absorbed 
(FTA) or MHA-TP; serum 
VDRL may be negative in 
tertiary syphilis
Appropriate exposure history; 
HIV-seropositive individuals 
at increased risk of aggres-
sive infection; “dementia”; 
cerebral infarction due to 
endarteritis
Uncommon Bacterial Causes
Actinomyces
Polymorphonuclear cells
Anaerobic culture
Parameningeal abscess or 
sinus tract (oral or dental 
focus); pneumonitis
Nocardia
Polymorphonuclear; occa-
sionally mononuclear cells; 
often low glucose
Isolation may require weeks; 
weakly acid fast
Associated brain abscess 
may be present
Brucella
Mononuclear cells (rarely 
polymorphonuclear); 
elevated protein; often low 
glucose
CSF antibody detection; 
serum antibody detection
Intake of unpasteurized 
dairy products; exposure to 
goats, sheep, cows; fever, 
arthralgia, myalgia, vertebral 
osteomyelitis
Whipple’s disease  
Tropheryma whippelii
Mononuclear cells
Biopsy of small bowel or 
lymph node; CSF PCR for  
T. whippelii; brain and 
meningeal biopsy (with PAS 
stain and EM examination)
Diarrhea, weight loss, 
arthralgias, fever; dementia, 
ataxia, paresis, ophthal-
moplegia, oculomasticatory 
myoclonus
Rare Bacterial Causes
Leptospirosis (occasionally if left untreated may last 3–4 weeks)
(continued)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
530
TABLE 41-2 
INFECTIOUS CAUSES OF CHRONIC MENINGITIS (CONTINUED)
CAUSATIVE AGENT
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC 
MANIFESTATIONS
Fungal Causes
Cryptococcus neoformans
Mononuclear cells; count not 
elevated in some patients 
with AIDS
India ink or fungal wet mount 
of CSF (budding yeast); 
blood and urine cultures; 
antigen detection in CSF
AIDS and immune suppres-
sion; pigeon exposure; skin 
and other organ involvement 
due to disseminated infection
Coccidioides immitis
Mononuclear cells (some-
times 10–20% eosinophils); 
often low glucose
Antibody detection in CSF 
and serum
Exposure history—south-
western US; increased viru-
lence in dark-skinned races
Candida sp.
Polymorphonuclear or 
mononuclear
Fungal stain and culture of 
CSF
IV drug abuse; post surgery; 
prolonged intravenous ther-
apy; disseminated candidiasis
Histoplasma capsulatum
Mononuclear cells; low  
glucose
Fungal stain and culture 
of large volumes of CSF; 
antigen detection in CSF, 
serum, and urine; antibody 
detection in serum, CSF
Exposure history—Ohio and 
central Mississippi River 
Valley; AIDS; mucosal 
lesions
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Mononuclear cells
Fungal stain and culture of 
CSF; biopsy and culture of 
skin, lung lesions; antibody 
detection in serum
Midwestern and southeast-
ern US; usually systemic 
infection; abscesses, drain-
ing sinus, ulcers
Aspergillus sp.
Mononuclear or  
polymorphonuclear
CSF culture
Sinusitis; granulocytopenia or 
immunosuppression
Sporothrix schenckii
Mononuclear cells
Antibody detection in CSF 
and serum; CSF culture
Traumatic inoculation; IV drug 
use; ulcerated skin lesion
Rare Fungal Causes
Xylohypha (formerly Cladosporium) trichoides and other dark-walled (demateaceous) fungi such as Curvularia, Drechslera, 
Mucor, and, after water aspiration, Pseudoallescheria boydii
Protozoal Causes
Toxoplasma gondii
Mononuclear cells
Biopsy or response to 
empirical therapy in clinically 
appropriate context  
(including presence of  
antibody in serum)
Usually with intracerebral 
abscesses; common in  
HIV-seropositive patients
Trypanosomiasis 
Trypanosoma gambiense, 
T. rhodesiense
Mononuclear cells, elevated 
protein
Elevated CSF IgM; identiﬁca-
tion of trypanosomes in CSF 
and blood smear
Endemic in Africa; chancre, 
lymphadenopathy;  
prominent sleep disorder
Rare Protozoal Causes
Acanthamoeba sp. causing granulomatous amebic encephalitis and meningoencephalitis in immunocompromised and 
debilitated individuals. Balamuthia mandrillaris causing chronic meningoencephalitis in immunocompetent hosts.
Helminthic Causes
Cysticercosis (infection with 
cysts of Taenia solium)
Mononuclear cells; may have 
eosinophils; glucose level 
may be low
Indirect hemagglutination 
assay in CSF; ELISA  
immunoblotting in serum
Usually with multiple cysts  
in basal meninges and  
hydrocephalus; cerebral 
cysts, muscle calciﬁcation
Gnathostoma spinigerum
Eosinophils, mononuclear 
cells
Peripheral eosinophilia
History of eating raw ﬁsh; 
common in Thailand and 
Japan; subarachnoid hemor-
rhage; painful radiculopathy
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
Eosinophils, mononuclear 
cells
Recovery of worms from CSF
History of eating raw shellﬁsh; 
common in tropical Paciﬁc 
regions; often benign
 
CHAPTER 41
Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
531
In some cases, diagnosis may be established by recogni-
tion and biopsy of unusual skin lesions (Behçet’s syn-
drome, cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, SLE, Lyme disease, 
IV drug use, sporotrichosis, trypanosomiasis) or enlarged 
lymph nodes (lymphoma, tuberculosis, sarcoid, infec-
tion with HIV, secondary syphilis, or Whipple’s disease). A 
careful ophthalmologic examination may reveal uveitis 
[Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, sarcoid, or central ner-
vous system (CNS) lymphoma], keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
(Sjögren’s syndrome), or iridocyclitis (Behçet’s syndrome) 
and is essential to assess visual loss from papilledema. 
Aphthous oral lesions, genital ulcers, and hypopyon sug-
gest Behçet’s syndrome. Hepatosplenomegaly suggests 
lymphoma, sarcoid, tuberculosis, or brucellosis. Herpetic 
lesions in the genital area or on the thighs suggest HSV-2 
infection. A breast nodule, a suspicious pigmented skin 
lesion, focal bone pain, or an abdominal mass directs 
attention to possible carcinomatous meningitis.
TABLE 41-2 
INFECTIOUS CAUSES OF CHRONIC MENINGITIS (CONTINUED)
CAUSATIVE AGENT
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC 
MANIFESTATIONS
Baylisascaris procyonis 
(raccoon ascarid)
Eosinophils, mononuclear 
cells
Infection follows accidental 
ingestion of B. procyonis 
eggs from raccoon feces; 
fatal meningoencephalitis
Rare Helminthic Causes
Trichinella spiralis (trichinosis); Fasciola hepatica (liver ﬂuke), Echinococcus cysts; Schistosoma sp. The former may produce 
a lymphocytic pleocytosis, whereas the latter two may produce an eosinophilic response in CSF associated with cerebral 
cysts (Echinococcus) or granulomatous lesions of brain or spinal cord
Viral Causes
Mumps
Mononuclear cells
Antibody in serum
No prior mumps or immuni-
zation; may produce menin-
goencephalitis; may persist 
for 3–4 weeks
Lymphocytic  
choriomeningitis
Mononuclear cells
Antibody in serum
Contact with rodents or their 
excreta; may persist for  
3–4 weeks
Echovirus
Mononuclear cells; may have 
low glucose
Virus isolation from CSF
Congenital hypogammaglob-
ulinemia; history of recurrent 
meningitis
HIV (acute retroviral  
syndrome)
Mononuclear cells
p24 antigen in serum and 
CSF; high level of HIV  
viremia
HIV risk factors; rash, fever, 
lymphadenopathy; lympho-
penia in peripheral blood; 
syndrome may persist long 
enough to be considered 
as “chronic meningitis”; 
or chronic meningitis may 
develop in later stages 
(AIDS) due to HIV
Herpes simplex (HSV)
Mononuclear cells
PCR for HSV, CMV DNA; 
CSF antibody for HSV, EBV
Recurrent meningitis due to 
HSV-2 (rarely HSV-1) often 
associated with genital 
recurrences; EBV associ-
ated with myeloradiculopa-
thy, CMV with  
polyradiculopathy
Abbreviations: AFB, acid-fast bacillus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EBV, Epstein-
Barr virus; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EM, electron microscopy; FTA, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption 
test; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MHA-TP, microhemagglutination assay–T. pallidum; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PAS, peri-
odic acid–Schiff; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin test; TB, tuberculosis; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research 
Laboratory test.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
532
TABLE 41-3 
NONINFECTIOUS CAUSES OF CHRONIC MENINGITIS
CAUSATIVE AGENTS
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC 
MANIFESTATIONS
Malignancy
Mononuclear cells, elevated 
protein, low glucose
Repeated cytologic exami-
nation of large volumes of 
CSF; CSF exam by polariz-
ing microscopy; clonal lym-
phocyte markers; deposits 
on nerve roots or meninges 
seen on myelogram or 
contrast-enhanced MRI; 
meningeal biopsy
Metastatic cancer of breast, 
lung, stomach, or pancreas; 
melanoma, lymphoma, leu-
kemia; meningeal glioma-
tosis; meningeal sarcoma; 
cerebral dysgerminoma; 
meningeal melanoma or B 
cell lymphoma
Chemical compounds (may 
cause recurrent meningitis)
Mononuclear or PMNs, low 
glucose, elevated protein; 
xanthochromia from sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage in 
week prior to presentation 
with “meningitis”
Contrast-enhanced CT scan 
or MRI
Cerebral angiogram to detect 
aneurysm
History of recent injection into 
the subarachnoid space; 
history of sudden onset of 
headache; recent resection 
of acoustic neuroma or cra-
niopharyngioma; epidermoid 
tumor of brain or spine, 
sometimes with dermoid 
sinus tract; pituitary apoplexy
Primary Inﬂammation
CNS sarcoidosis
Mononuclear cells; elevated 
protein; often low glucose
Serum and CSF angiotensin-
converting enzyme  
levels; biopsy of extraneural 
affected tissues or brain 
lesion/meningeal biopsy
CN palsy, especially of CN 
VII; hypothalamic dysfunc-
tion, especially diabetes 
insipidus; abnormal chest 
radiograph; peripheral  
neuropathy or myopathy
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syn-
drome (recurrent meningitis)
Mononuclear cells
Recurrent meningoencepha-
litis with uveitis, retinal 
detachment, alopecia,  
lightening of eyebrows and 
lashes, dysacousia,  
cataracts, glaucoma
Isolated granulomatous angi-
itis of the nervous system
Mononuclear cells, elevated 
protein
Angiography or meningeal 
biopsy
Subacute dementia; multiple 
cerebral infarctions; recent 
zoster ophthalmicus
Systemic lupus erythema-
tosus
Mononuclear or PMNs
Anti-DNA antibody, antinu-
clear antibodies
Encephalopathy; seizures; 
stroke; transverse  
myelopathy; rash; arthritis
Behçet’s syndrome (recurrent 
meningitis)
Mononuclear or PMNs,  
elevated protein
Oral and genital aphthous 
ulcers; iridocyclitis; retinal 
hemorrhages; pathergic 
lesions at site of skin puncture
Chronic benign lymphocytic 
meningitis
Mononuclear cells
Recovery in 2–6 months, 
diagnosis by exclusion
Mollaret’s meningitis  
(recurrent meningitis)
Large endothelial cells and 
PMNs in ﬁrst hours,  
followed by mononuclear 
cells
PCR for herpes; MRI/CT to 
rule out epidermoid tumor 
or dural cyst
Recurrent meningitis; exclude 
HSV-2; rare cases due to 
HSV-1; occasional case 
associated with dural cyst
Drug hypersensitivity
PMNs; occasionally mono-
nuclear cells or eosinophils
Complete blood count 
(eosinophilia)
Exposure to nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory agents, sulfon-
amides, isoniazid, tolmetin, 
ciproﬂoxacin, penicillin, car-
bamazaepine, lamotrigine, 
IV immunoglobulin, OKT3 
antibodies, phenazopyridine; 
improvement after discon-
tinuation of drug; recurrence 
with repeat exposure
 
CHAPTER 41
Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
533
IMAGING Once the clinical syndrome is recognized 
as a potential manifestation of chronic meningitis, 
proper analysis of the CSF is essential. However, if the 
possibility of raised ICP exists, a brain imaging study 
should be performed before lumbar puncture. If ICP 
is elevated because of a mass lesion, brain swelling, or 
a block in ventricular CSF outflow (obstructive hydro-
cephalus), then lumbar puncture carries the potential 
risk of brain herniation. Obstructive hydrocephalus 
usually requires direct ventricular drainage of CSF. In 
patients with open CSF flow pathways, elevated ICP can 
still occur due to impaired resorption of CSF by arach-
noid villi. In such patients, lumbar puncture is usually 
safe, but repetitive or continuous lumbar drainage may 
be necessary to prevent abrupt deterioration and death 
from raised ICP. In some patients, especially with cryp-
tococcal meningitis, fatal levels of raised ICP can occur 
without enlarged ventricles.
Contrast-enhanced MRI or CT studies of the brain 
and spinal cord can identify meningeal enhancement, 
parameningeal infections (including brain abscess), 
encasement of the spinal cord (malignancy or inflam-
mation and infection), or nodular deposits on the 
meninges or nerve roots (malignancy or sarcoidosis) 
(Fig. 41-1). Imaging studies are also useful to localize 
areas of meningeal disease prior to meningeal biopsy.
Cerebral angiography may be indicated in patients 
with chronic meningitis and stroke to identify cerebral 
arteritis (granulomatous angiitis, other inflammatory 
arteritides, or infectious arteritis).
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID ANALYSIS The CSF 
pressure should be measured and samples sent for bac-
terial, fungal, and tuberculous culture; Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory (VDRL) test; cell count and differ-
ential; Gram’s stain; and measurement of glucose and 
protein. Wet mount for fungus and parasites, India ink 
preparation and culture, culture for fastidious bacteria 
and fungi, assays for cryptococcal antigen and oligo-
clonal immunoglobulin bands, and cytology should be 
TABLE 41-3 
NONINFECTIOUS CAUSES OF CHRONIC MENINGITIS (CONTINUED)
CAUSATIVE AGENTS
CSF FORMULA
HELPFUL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
RISK FACTORS AND SYSTEMIC 
MANIFESTATIONS
Granulomatosis with polyan-
giitis (Wegener’s)
Mononuclear cells
Chest and sinus radiographs; 
urinalysis; ANCA antibodies 
in serum
Associated sinus, pulmonary, 
or renal lesions; CN palsies; 
skin lesions; peripheral neu-
ropathy
Other: multiple sclerosis, Sjögren’s syndrome, neonatal-onset multisystemic inﬂammatory disease (NOMID), and rarer forms 
of vasculitis (e.g., Cogan’s syndrome)
Abbreviations: ANCA, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; CN, cranial nerve; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; CT, computed tomography; HSV, her-
pes simplex virus; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PMNs, polymorphonuclear cells.
performed. Other specific CSF tests (Tables 41-2 and 41-3) 
or blood tests and cultures should be ordered as indi-
cated on the basis of the history, physical examination, 
or preliminary CSF results (i.e., eosinophilic, mononuclear, 
or polymorphonuclear meningitis). Rapid diagnosis may 
be facilitated by serologic tests and polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) testing to identify DNA sequences in the 
CSF that are specific for the suspected pathogen.
In most categories of chronic (not recurrent) menin-
gitis, mononuclear cells predominate in the CSF. When 
neutrophils predominate after 3 weeks of illness, the 
principal etiologic considerations are Nocardia asteroides, 
Actinomyces israelii, Brucella, Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(5–10% of early cases only), various fungi (Blastomyces 
dermatitidis, Candida albicans, Histoplasma capsulatum, 
FIGURE 41-1 
Primary central nervous system lymphoma. A 24-year-old 
man, immunosuppressed due to intestinal lymphangiecta-
sia, developed multiple cranial neuropathies. CSF ﬁndings 
consisted of 100 lymphocytes/μL and a protein of 2.5 g/L 
(250 mg/dL); cytology and cultures were negative. Gadolinium-
enhanced T1 MRI revealed diffuse, multifocal meningeal 
enhancement surrounding the brainstem (A), spinal cord, and 
cauda equina (B).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
534
Aspergillus spp., Pseudallescheria boydii, Cladophialophora 
bantiana), and noninfectious causes (SLE, exogenous 
chemical meningitis). When eosinophils predominate or 
are present in limited numbers in a primarily mononu-
clear cell response in the CSF, the differential diagnosis 
includes parasitic diseases (A. cantonensis, G. spinigerum, 
B. procyonis, or Toxocara canis infection, cysticercosis, 
schistosomiasis, echinococcal disease, T. gondii infec-
tion), fungal infections (6–20% eosinophils along with a 
predominantly lymphocyte pleocytosis, particularly with 
coccidioidal meningitis), neoplastic disease (lymphoma, 
leukemia, metastatic carcinoma), or other inflammatory 
processes (sarcoidosis, hypereosinophilic syndrome).
It is often necessary to broaden the number of diag-
nostic tests if the initial workup does not reveal the 
cause. In addition, repeated samples of large volumes of 
CSF may be required to diagnose certain infectious and 
malignant causes of chronic meningitis. For instance, 
lymphomatous or carcinomatous meningitis may be 
diagnosed by examination of sections cut from a cell 
block formed by spinning down the sediment from a 
large volume of CSF. The diagnosis of fungal menin-
gitis may require large volumes of CSF for culture of 
sediment. If standard lumbar puncture is unrewarding, 
a cervical cisternal tap to sample CSF near to the basal 
meninges may be fruitful.
LABORATORY 
INVESTIGATION In addition 
to the CSF examination, an attempt should be made to 
uncover pertinent underlying illnesses. Tuberculin skin 
test, chest radiograph, urine analysis and culture, blood 
count and differential, renal and liver function tests, 
alkaline phosphatase, sedimentation rate, antinuclear 
antibody, anti-Ro, anti-La antibody, and serum angio-
tensin-converting enzyme level are often indicated. 
Liver or bone marrow biopsy may be diagnostic in some 
cases of miliary tuberculosis, disseminated fungal infec-
tion, sarcoidosis, or metastatic malignancy. Abnormali-
ties discovered on chest radiograph or chest CT can 
be pursued by bronchoscopy or transthoracic needle 
biopsy.
MENINGEAL BIOPSY A meningeal biopsy should 
be strongly considered in patients who are severely dis-
abled, who need chronic ventricular decompression, 
or whose illness is progressing rapidly. The activities of 
the surgeon, pathologist, microbiologist, and cytologist 
should be coordinated so that a large enough sample 
is obtained and the appropriate cultures and histologic 
and molecular studies, including electron-microscopic 
and PCR studies, are performed. The diagnostic yield 
of meningeal biopsy can be increased by targeting 
regions that enhance with contrast on MRI or CT. With 
current microsurgical techniques, most areas of the 
basal meninges can be accessed for biopsy via a limited 
craniotomy. In a series from the Mayo Clinic reported by 
Cheng et al., MRI demonstrated meningeal enhance-
ment in 47% of patients undergoing meningeal biopsy. 
Biopsy of an enhancing region was diagnostic in 80% of 
cases; biopsy of nonenhancing regions was diagnostic 
in only 9%; sarcoid (31%) and metastatic adenocarcinoma 
(25%) were the most common conditions identified. 
Tuberculosis is the most common condition identified in 
many reports from outside the United States.
APPROACH TO THE ENIGMATIC CASE In 
approximately one-third of cases, the diagnosis is not 
known despite careful evaluation of CSF and potential 
extraneural sites of disease. A number of the organ-
isms that cause chronic meningitis may take weeks to 
be identified by cultures. In enigmatic cases, several 
options are available, determined by the extent of the 
clinical deficits and rate of progression. It is prudent to 
wait until cultures are finalized if the patient is asymp-
tomatic or symptoms are mild and not progressive. 
Unfortunately, in many cases progressive neurologic 
deterioration occurs, and rapid treatment is required. 
Ventricular-peritoneal shunts may be placed to relieve 
hydrocephalus, but the risk of disseminating the undi-
agnosed inflammatory process into the abdomen must 
be considered.
Empirical Treatment Diagnosis of the causative 
agent is essential because effective therapies exist for 
many etiologies of chronic meningitis, but if the condi-
tion is left untreated, progressive damage to the CNS 
and cranial nerves and roots is likely to occur. Occa-
sionally, empirical therapy must be initiated when all 
attempts at diagnosis fail. In general, empirical therapy in 
the United States consists of antimycobacterial agents, 
amphotericin for fungal infection, or glucocorticoids 
for noninfectious inflammatory causes. It is important 
to direct empirical therapy of lymphocytic meningitis 
at tuberculosis, particularly if the condition is associ-
ated with hypoglycorrhachia and sixth and other CN 
palsies, since untreated disease is fatal in 4–8 weeks. In 
the Mayo Clinic series, the most useful empirical therapy 
was administration of glucocorticoids rather than anti-
tuberculous therapy. Carcinomatous or lymphomatous 
meningitis may be difficult to diagnose initially, but the 
diagnosis becomes evident with time.
THE IMMUNOSUPPRESSED PATIENT
Chronic meningitis is not uncommon in the course of 
HIV infection. Pleocytosis and mild meningeal signs 
often occur at the onset of HIV infection, and occasion-
ally low-grade meningitis persists. Toxoplasmosis com-
monly presents as intracranial abscesses and may also 
be associated with meningitis. Other important causes 
 
CHAPTER 41
Chronic and Recurrent Meningitis
535
of chronic meningitis in AIDS include infection with 
Cryptococcus, Nocardia, Candida, or other fungi; syphi-
lis; and lymphoma (Fig. 41-1). Toxoplasmosis, cryptococ-
cosis, nocardiosis, and other fungal infections are important 
etiologic considerations in individuals with immunode-
ﬁciency states other than AIDS, including those due 
to immunosuppressive medications. Because of the 
increased risk of chronic meningitis and the attenua-
tion of clinical signs of meningeal irritation in immu-
nosuppressed individuals, CSF examination should be 
performed for any persistent headache or unexplained 
change in mental state.
 Anthony S. Fauci  ■   H. Clifford Lane 
 Clinical disease of the nervous system accounts for a 
signiﬁ cant degree of morbidity in a high percent-
age of patients with HIV infection. Neurologic prob-
lems occur throughout the course of infection and 
may be inﬂ ammatory, demyelinating, or degenerative 
in nature. These problems fall into four basic catego-
ries: neurologic disease caused by HIV itself, HIV-
related neoplasms, opportunistic infections of the 
nervous system, and adverse effects of medical therapy 
( Table 42-1 ). 
 AIDS CLASSIFICATION 
 The current CDC classiﬁ cation system for HIV-infected 
adolescents and adults categorizes persons on the basis 
of clinical conditions associated with HIV infection and 
CD4+ T lymphocyte counts. The system is based on 
three ranges of CD4+ T lymphocyte counts and three 
clinical categories and is represented by a matrix of nine 
mutually exclusive categories (Tables 42-2 and 42-3). 
Using this system, any HIV-infected individual with a 
CD4+ T cell count of <200/μL has AIDS by deﬁ ni-
tion, regardless of the presence of symptoms or oppor-
tunistic diseases ( Table 42-2 ). Once individuals have 
had a clinical condition in category B, their disease clas-
siﬁ cation cannot be reverted back to category A, even if 
the condition resolves; the same holds true for category 
C in relation to category B. 
 The deﬁ nition of AIDS is indeed complex and 
comprehensive and was established not for the prac-
tical care of patients, but for surveillance purposes. 
Thus, the clinician should not focus on whether or 
not the patient fulﬁ lls the strict deﬁ nition of AIDS, 
but should view HIV disease as a spectrum ranging 
from primary infection, with or without the acute syn-
drome, to the asymptomatic stage, to advanced disease. 
 ETIOLOGIC AGENT 
 HIV is the etiologic agent of AIDS; it belongs to the 
family of human retroviruses (Retroviridae) and the sub-
family of lentiviruses. Nononcogenic lentiviruses cause 
disease in other animal species, including sheep, horses, 
goats, cattle, cats, and monkeys. The four recognized 
human retroviruses belong to two distinct groups: the 
human T lymphotropic viruses (HTLV)-I and HTLV-
II, which are transforming retroviruses; and the human 
immunodeﬁ ciency viruses, HIV-1 and HIV-2, which 
 HIV NEUROLOGY 
 CHAPTER 42 
 TABLE 42-1  
NEUROLOGIC DISEASES IN PATIENTS WITH HIV 
INFECTION
 Opportunistic infections 
 Toxoplasmosis 
 Cryptococcosis 
  Progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy 
 Cytomegalovirus 
 Syphilis 
  Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis 
 HTLV-I infection 
 Amebiasis 
 Neoplasms 
 Primary CNS lymphoma 
 Kaposi’s sarcoma 
 Result of HIV-1 infection 
 Aseptic meningitis 
  HIV-associated neurocog-
nitive disorders, including 
HIV encephalopathy/AIDS 
dementia complex 
 Result of HIV-1 infection
(con’t) 
 Myelopathy 
 Vacuolar myelopathy 
 Pure sensory ataxia 
 Paresthesia/dysesthesia 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
  Acute inﬂ ammatory 
demyelinating polyneu-
ropathy (Guillain-Barré 
syndrome) 
  Chronic inﬂ ammatory 
demyelinating polyneu-
ropathy (CIDP) 
 Mononeuritis multiplex 
  Distal symmetric 
polyneuropathy 
 Myopathy 
536
 
CHAPTER 42
HIV Neurology
537
TABLE 42-2 
1993 REVISED CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM FOR HIV INFECTION AND EXPANDED AIDS SURVEILLANCE CASE 
DEFINITION FOR ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS
CLINICAL CATEGORIES
CD4+ T CELL 
CATEGORIES
A ASYMPTOMATIC, ACUTE  
(PRIMARY) HIV OR PGL
B SYMPTOMATIC, NOT  
A OR C CONDITIONS
C AIDS-INDICATOR 
CONDITIONS
>500/μL
A1
B1
C1
200–499/μL
A2
B2
C2
<200/μL
A3
B3
C3
Abbreviation: PGL, progressive generalized lymphadenopathy.
Source: MMWR 42(No. RR-17), December 18, 1992.
TABLE 42-3 
CLINICAL CATEGORIES OF HIV INFECTION
Category A: Consists of one or more of the conditions listed below in an adolescent or adult (>13 years) with documented HIV infection. Con-
ditions listed in categories B and C must not have occurred.
 Asymptomatic HIV infection
 Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
  Acute (primary) HIV infection with accompanying illness or history of acute HIV infection
Category B: Consists of symptomatic conditions in an HIV-infected adolescent or adult that are not included among conditions listed in clinical 
category C and that meet at least one of the following criteria: (1) The conditions are attributed to HIV infection or are indicative of a defect in 
cell-mediated immunity; or (2) the conditions are considered by physicians to have a clinical course or to require management that is compli-
cated by HIV infection. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:
  Bacillary angiomatosis
  Candidiasis, oropharyngeal (thrush)
  Candidiasis, vulvovaginal; persistent, frequent, or poorly responsive to therapy
  Cervical dysplasia (moderate or severe)/cervical carcinoma in situ
 Constitutional symptoms, such as fever (38.5°C) or diarrhea lasting >1 month
  Hairy leukoplakia, oral
  Herpes zoster (shingles), involving at least two distinct episodes or more than one dermatome
  Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
  Listeriosis
  Pelvic inﬂammatory disease, particularly if complicated by tuboovarian abscess
  Peripheral neuropathy
Category C: Conditions listed in the AIDS surveillance case deﬁnition.
  Candidiasis of bronchi, trachea, or lungs
  Candidiasis, esophageal
  Cervical cancer, invasivea
  Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
  Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary
  Cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal (>1 month’s duration)
  Cytomegalovirus disease (other than liver, spleen, or nodes)
  Cytomegalovirus retinitis (with loss of vision)
  Encephalopathy, HIV-related
  Herpes simplex: chronic ulcer(s) (>1 month’s duration); or bronchitis, pneumonia, or esophagitis
  Histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
  Isosporiasis, chronic intestinal (>1 month’s duration)
  Kaposi’s sarcoma
  Lymphoma, Burkitt’s (or equivalent term)
  Lymphoma, primary, of brain
  Mycobacterium avium complex or M. kansasii, disseminated or extrapulmonary
  Mycobacterium tuberculosis, any site (pulmonarya or extrapulmonary)
  Mycobacterium, other species or unidentiﬁed species, disseminated or extrapulmonary
  Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
  Pneumonia, recurrenta
  Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
  Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
  Toxoplasmosis of brain
  Wasting syndrome due to HIV
aAdded in the 1993 expansion of the AIDS surveillance case deﬁnition.
Source: MMWR 42(No. RR-17), December 18, 1992.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
538
cause cytopathic effects either directly or indirectly. 
The most common cause of HIV disease throughout 
the world, and certainly in the United States, is HIV-
1, which comprises several subtypes with different geo-
graphic distributions. HIV-2 was ﬁrst identiﬁed in 1986 
in West African patients and was originally conﬁned to 
West Africa. However, a number of cases that can be 
traced to West Africa or to sexual contacts with West 
Africans have been identiﬁed throughout the world.
MORPHOLOGY OF HIV
Electron microscopy shows that the HIV virion is an 
icosahedral structure (Fig. 42-1A) containing numerous 
external spikes formed by the two major envelope pro-
teins, the external gp120 and the transmembrane gp41. 
The virion buds from the surface of the infected cell 
and incorporates a variety of host proteins, including 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II 
antigens, into its lipid bilayer. The structure of HIV-1 is 
schematically diagrammed in Fig. 42-1B.
REPLICATION CYCLE OF HIV
HIV is an RNA virus whose hallmark is the reverse 
transcription of its genomic RNA to DNA by the 
enzyme reverse transcriptase. The replication cycle of HIV 
begins with the high-afﬁnity binding of the gp120 pro-
tein via a portion of its V1 region near the N terminus 
to its receptor on the host cell surface, the CD4 mol-
ecule (Fig. 42-2). The CD4 molecule is a 55-kDa pro-
tein found predominantly on a subset of T lymphocytes 
that are responsible for helper function in the immune 
system. It is also expressed on the surface of monocytes/
macrophages and dendritic/Langerhans cells. Once 
gp120 binds to CD4, the gp120 undergoes a conforma-
tional change that facilitates binding to one of a group 
of co-receptors. The two major co-receptors for HIV-1 
are CCR5 and CXCR4. Both receptors belong to the 
family of seven-transmembrane-domain G protein–
coupled cellular receptors, and the use of one or the 
other or both receptors by the virus for entry into the 
cell is an important determinant of the cellular tropism 
of the virus. Certain dendritic cells express a diversity of 
C-type lectin receptors on their surface, one of which 
is called DC-SIGN, that also bind with high afﬁnity to 
the HIV gp120 envelope protein, allowing the den-
dritic cell to facilitate the binding of virus to the CD4+ 
T cell upon engagement of dendritic cells with CD4+ 
T cells. Following binding of the envelope protein 
to the CD4 molecule associated with the previously 
-mentioned conformational change in the viral enve-
lope gp120, fusion with the host cell membrane occurs 
via the newly exposed gp41 molecule penetrating the 
plasma membrane of the target cell and then coiling 
gp120
Capsid
Matrix
RNA
gp41
Reverse
  transcriptase
Lipid
membrane
A
B
FIGURE 42-1
A. Electron micrograph of HIV. Figure illustrates a typical 
virion following budding from the surface of a CD4+ T lym-
phocyte, together with two additional incomplete virions in 
the process of budding from the cell membrane. B. Struc-
ture of HIV-1, including the gp120 outer membrane, gp41 
transmembrane components of the envelope, genomic 
RNA, enzyme reverse transcriptase, p18(17) inner mem-
brane (matrix), and p24 core protein (capsid). (vghghg by 
George V. Kelvin. Adapted from RC Gallo: Sci Am 256:46, 
1987.)
 
CHAPTER 42
HIV Neurology
539
upon itself to bring the virion and target cell together. 
Following fusion, the preintegration complex, com-
posed of viral RNA and viral enzymes and surrounded 
by a capsid protein coat, is released into the cytoplasm 
of the target cell. As the preintegration complex tra-
verses the cytoplasm to reach the nucleus, the viral 
reverse transcriptase enzyme catalyzes the reverse tran-
scription of the genomic RNA into DNA, and the pro-
tein coat opens to release the resulting double-stranded 
HIV-DNA. At this point in the replication cycle, the 
viral genome is vulnerable to cellular factors that can 
block the progression of infection. In particular, the 
cytoplasmic TRIM5-α protein in rhesus macaque 
cells blocks SIV replication at a point shortly after 
the virus fuses with the host cell. Although the exact 
mechanisms of action of TRIM5-α remain unclear, 
the human form is inhibited by cyclophilin A and is 
not effective in restricting HIV replication in human 
cells. The recently described APOBEC family of cel-
lular proteins also inhibits progression of virus infec-
tion after virus has entered the cell. APOBEC proteins 
bind to nascent reverse transcripts and deaminate viral 
cytidine, causing hypermutation of HIV genomes. It is 
still not clear whether (1) viral replication is inhibited 
by the binding of APOBEC to the virus genome with 
subsequent accumulation of reverse transcripts, or (2) 
by the hypermutations caused by the enzymatic deami-
nase activity of APOBEC proteins. HIV has evolved 
a powerful strategy to protect itself from APOBEC. 
The viral protein Vif targets APOBEC for proteasomal 
degradation.
With activation of the cell, the viral DNA accesses 
the nuclear pore and is exported from the cytoplasm 
to the nucleus, where it is integrated into the host cell 
chromosomes through the action of another virally 
encoded enzyme, integrase. HIV provirus (DNA) selec-
tively integrates into the nuclear DNA preferentially 
within introns of active genes and regional hotspots. 
This provirus may remain transcriptionally inactive 
(latent) or it may manifest varying levels of gene expres-
sion, up to active production of virus.
Cellular activation plays an important role in the rep-
lication cycle of HIV and is critical to the pathogene-
sis of HIV disease. Following initial binding and inter-
nalization of virions into the target cell, incompletely 
reverse-transcribed DNA intermediates are labile in 
quiescent cells and do not integrate efﬁciently into the 
host cell genome unless cellular activation occurs shortly 
after infection. Furthermore, some degree of activation 
of the host cell is required for the initiation of transcrip-
tion of the integrated proviral DNA into either genomic 
RNA or mRNA. This latter process may not necessarily 
be associated with the detectable expression of the clas-
sic cell surface markers of activation. In this regard, acti-
vation of HIV expression from the latent state depends 
on the interaction of a number of cellular and viral fac-
tors. Following transcription, HIV mRNA is trans-
lated into proteins that undergo modiﬁcation through 
HIV
Genomic RNA
Cellular DNA
Unintegrated
linear DNA
Reverse
transcriptase
Integrase
Co-receptor
Fusion
CD4
gp120
Protein synthesis,
processing, and assembly
mRNA
Integrated
proviral DNA
Budding
Genomic
RNA
Mature HIV virion
FIGURE 42-2
The replication cycle of HIV. See text for description. (Adapted from AS Fauci: Nature 384:529, 1996.)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
540
glycosylation, myristylation, phosphorylation, and cleav-
age. The viral particle is formed by the assembly of HIV 
proteins, enzymes, and genomic RNA at the plasma 
membrane of the cells. Budding of the progeny virion 
occurs through specialized regions in the lipid bilayer of 
the host cell membrane known as lipid rafts, where the 
core acquires its external envelope. The virally encoded 
protease then catalyzes the cleavage of the gag-pol pre-
cursor to yield the mature virion. Progression through 
the virus replication cycle is profoundly inﬂuenced by a 
variety of viral regulatory gene products. Likewise, each 
point in the replication cycle of HIV is a real or potential 
target for therapeutic intervention. Thus far, the reverse 
transcriptase, protease, and integrase enzymes as well as 
the process of virus–target cell binding and fusion have 
proven clinically to be susceptible to pharmacologic 
disruption.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND 
PATHOGENESIS
The hallmark of HIV disease is a profound immunodeﬁ-
ciency resulting primarily from a progressive quantitative 
and qualitative deﬁciency of the subset of T lymphocytes 
referred to as helper T cells occurring in a setting of poly-
clonal immune activation. The helper subset of T cells is 
deﬁned phenotypically by the presence on its surface of 
the CD4 molecule, which serves as the primary cellular 
receptor for HIV. When the number of CD4+ T cells 
declines below a certain level, the patient is at high risk 
for developing a variety of opportunistic diseases, particu-
larly the infections and neoplasms that are AIDS-deﬁning 
illnesses. Some features of AIDS, such as Kaposi sarcoma 
and certain neurologic abnormalities, cannot be explained 
completely by the immunosuppressive effects of HIV, 
since these complications may occur prior to the devel-
opment of severe immunologic impairment.
NEUROPATHOGENESIS
While there has been a remarkable decrease in the inci-
dence of HIV encephalopathy among those with access 
to treatment in the era of effective ARV therapy, HIV-
infected individuals can still experience a variety of 
neurologic abnormalities due either to opportunistic 
infections and neoplasms or to direct effects of HIV or 
its products. With regard to the latter, HIV has been 
demonstrated in the brain and CSF of infected indi-
viduals with and without neuropsychiatric abnormali-
ties. The main cell types that are infected in the brain in 
vivo are the perivascular macrophages and the microg-
lial cells; monocytes that have already been infected in 
the blood can migrate into the brain, where they then 
reside as macrophages, or macrophages can be directly 
infected within the brain. The precise mechanisms 
whereby HIV enters the brain are unclear; however, 
they are thought to relate, at least in part, to the ability 
of virus-infected and immune-activated macrophages to 
induce adhesion molecules such as E-selectin and vascu-
lar cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) on brain endo-
thelium. Other studies have demonstrated that HIV 
gp120 enhances the expression of intercellular adhe-
sion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in glial cells; this effect may 
facilitate entry of HIV-infected cells into the CNS and 
may promote syncytia formation. Virus isolates from 
the brain are preferentially R5 strains as opposed to X4 
strains; in this regard, HIV-infected individuals who are 
heterozygous for CCR5-∆32 appear to be relatively 
protected against the development of HIV encepha-
lopathy compared to wild-type individuals. Distinct 
HIV envelope sequences are associated with the clini-
cal expression of the AIDS dementia complex. There is 
no convincing evidence that brain cells other than those 
of monocyte/macrophage lineage can be productively 
infected in vivo.
HIV-infected individuals may manifest white mat-
ter lesions as well as neuronal loss. Given the absence 
of evidence of HIV infection of neurons either in vivo 
or in vitro, it is highly unlikely that direct infection of 
these cells accounts for their loss. Rather, the HIV-
mediated effects on neurons and oligodendrocytes are 
thought to involve indirect pathways whereby viral 
proteins, particularly gp120 and Tat, trigger the release 
of endogenous neurotoxins from macrophages and to 
a lesser extent from astrocytes. In addition, it has been 
demonstrated that both HIV-1 Nef and Tat can induce 
chemotaxis of leukocytes, including monocytes, into 
the CNS. Neurotoxins can be released from monocytes 
as a consequence of infection and/or immune activa-
tion. Monocyte-derived neurotoxic factors have been 
reported to kill neurons via the N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptor. In addition, HIV gp120 shed by 
virus-infected monocytes could cause neurotoxicity 
by antagonizing the function of vasoactive intestinal 
peptide (VIP), by elevating intracellular calcium lev-
els, and by decreasing nerve growth factor levels in the 
cerebral cortex. A variety of monocyte-derived cyto-
kines can contribute directly or indirectly to the neu-
rotoxic effects in HIV infection; these include TNF-α, 
IL-1, IL-6, TGF-β, IFN-γ, platelet-activating factor, 
and endothelin. Furthermore, among the CC-chemo-
kines, elevated levels of monocyte chemotactic pro-
tein (MCP) 1 in the brain and CSF have been shown 
to correlate best with the presence and degree of HIV 
encephalopathy. In addition, infection and/or activa-
tion of monocyte-lineage cells can result in increased 
production of eicosanoids, quinolinic acid, nitric oxide, 
excitatory amino acids such as L-cysteine and glutamate, 
 
CHAPTER 42
HIV Neurology
541
arachidonic acid, platelet activating factor, free radicals, 
TNF-α, and TGF-β, which may contribute to neuro-
toxicity. Astrocytes may play diverse roles in HIV neu-
ropathogenesis. Reactive gliosis or astrocytosis has been 
demonstrated in the brains of HIV-infected individu-
als, and TNF-α and IL-6 have been shown to induce 
astrocyte proliferation. In addition, astrocyte-derived 
IL-6 can induce HIV expression in infected cells in 
vitro. Furthermore, it has been suggested that astro-
cytes may downregulate macrophage-produced neurotox-
ins. It has been reported that HIV-infected individuals 
with the E4 allele for apolipoprotein E (apo E) are at 
increased risk for AIDS encephalopathy and periph-
eral neuropathy. The likelihood that HIV or its prod-
ucts are involved in neuropathogenesis is supported by 
the observation that neuropsychiatric abnormalities may 
undergo remarkable and rapid improvement upon the 
initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART).
It has also been suggested that the CNS may serve 
as a relatively sequestered site for a reservoir of latently 
infected cells that might be a barrier for the eradication 
of the virus by cART.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Clinical disease of the nervous systems accounts for a 
signiﬁcant degree of morbidity in a high percentage 
of patients with HIV infection (Table 42-1). The neu-
rologic problems that occur in HIV-infected individu-
als may be either primary to the pathogenic processes of 
HIV infection or secondary to opportunistic infections or 
neoplasms. Among the more frequent opportunistic dis-
eases that involve the CNS are toxoplasmosis, cryptococ-
cosis, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, and 
primary CNS lymphoma. Other less common problems 
include mycobacterial infections; syphilis; and infection 
with CMV, HTLV-I, T. cruzi, or Acanthamoeba. Over-
all, secondary diseases of the CNS occur in approximately 
one-third of patients with AIDS. These data antedate the 
widespread use of cART, and this frequency is consid-
erably less in patients receiving effective antiretroviral 
drugs. Primary processes related to HIV infection of the 
nervous system are reminiscent of those seen with other 
lentiviruses, such as the Visna-Maedi virus of sheep.
NEUROLOGIC DISEASES CAUSED BY HIV
HIV-associated cognitive impairment
The term HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) 
is used to describe a spectrum of disorders that range 
from asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI) 
to minor neurocognitive disorder (MND) to clinically 
severe dementia. The most severe form, HIV-associated 
dementia (HAD), also referred to as the AIDS dementia 
complex, or HIV encephalopathy, is considered an AIDS-
deﬁning illness. Most HIV-infected patients have some 
neurologic problem during the course of their disease. 
Even in the setting of suppressive cART, approximately 
50% of HIV-infected individuals can be shown to have 
mild to moderate neurocognitive impairment using sen-
sitive neuropsychiatric testing. Virtually all patients with 
HIV infection have some degree of nervous system 
involvement with the virus. This is evidenced by the 
fact that CSF ﬁndings are abnormal in ~90% of patients, 
even during the asymptomatic phase of HIV infec-
tion. CSF abnormalities include pleocytosis (50–65% of 
patients), detection of viral RNA (~75%), elevated CSF 
protein (35%), and evidence of intrathecal synthesis of 
anti-HIV antibodies (90%). It is important to point out 
that evidence of infection of the CNS with HIV does 
not imply impairment of cognitive function. The neu-
rologic function of an HIV-infected individual should 
be considered normal unless clinical signs and symptoms 
suggest otherwise.
HIV-associated dementia (also known as HIV encepha-
lopathy) consists of a constellation of signs and symp-
toms of CNS disease. While this is generally a late com-
plication of HIV infection that progresses slowly over 
months, it can be seen in patients with CD4+ T cell 
counts >350 cells/μL. A major feature of this entity is 
the development of dementia, deﬁned as a decline in 
cognitive ability from a previous level. It may present 
as impaired ability to concentrate, increased forgetful-
ness, difﬁculty reading, or increased difﬁculty perform-
ing complex tasks. Initially these symptoms may be 
indistinguishable from ﬁndings of situational depression 
or fatigue. In contrast to “cortical” dementia (such as 
Alzheimer’s disease), aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia are 
uncommon, leading some investigators to classify HIV-
associated dementia as a “subcortical dementia” charac-
terized by defects in short-term memory and executive 
function. In addition to dementia, patients with HIV-
associated dementia may also have motor and behav-
ioral abnormalities. Among the motor problems are 
unsteady gait, poor balance, tremor, and difﬁculty with 
rapid alternating movements. Increased tone and deep 
tendon reﬂexes may be found in patients with spinal 
cord involvement. Late stages may be complicated by 
bowel and/or bladder incontinence. Behavioral prob-
lems include apathy and lack of initiative, with pro-
gression to a vegetative state in some instances. Some 
patients develop a state of agitation or mild mania. 
These changes usually occur without signiﬁcant changes 
in level of alertness. This is in contrast to the ﬁnding 
of somnolence in patients with dementia due to toxic/
metabolic encephalopathies.
HIV-associated dementia is the initial AIDS-deﬁning 
illness in ~3% of patients with HIV infection and thus 
only rarely precedes clinical evidence of immunodeﬁ-
ciency. Clinically signiﬁcant encephalopathy eventually 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
542
develops in ~25% of untreated patients with AIDS. As 
immunologic function declines, the risk and severity of 
HIV encephalopathy increase. Autopsy series suggest 
that 80–90% of patients with HIV infection have his-
tologic evidence of CNS involvement. Several classiﬁ-
cation schemes have been developed for grading HIV-
associated dementia; a commonly used clinical staging 
system is outlined in Table 42-4.
The precise cause of HIV-associated dementia 
remains unclear, although the condition is thought to 
be a result of a combination of direct effects of HIV on 
the CNS and associated immune activation. HIV has 
been found in the brains of patients with HIV-associ-
ated dementia by Southern blot, in situ hybridization, 
PCR, and electron microscopy. Multinucleated giant 
cells, macrophages, and microglial cells appear to be the 
main cell types harboring virus in the CNS. Histologi-
cally, the major changes are seen in the subcortical areas 
of the brain and include pallor and gliosis, multinucle-
ated giant cell encephalitis, and vacuolar myelopathy. 
Less commonly, diffuse or focal spongiform changes 
occur in the white matter. Areas of the brain involved 
in motor, language, and judgment are most severely 
affected.
There are no speciﬁc criteria for a diagnosis of 
HIV-associated dementia, and this syndrome must 
be differentiated from a number of other diseases 
that affect the CNS of HIV-infected patients. The 
diagnosis of dementia depends upon demonstrating 
a decline in cognitive function. This can be accom-
plished objectively with the use of a Mini-Mental Sta-
tus Examination (MMSE) in patients for whom prior 
scores are available. For this reason, it is advisable for 
all patients with a diagnosis of HIV infection to have 
a baseline MMSE. However, changes in MMSE scores 
may be absent in patients with mild HIV-associated 
dementia. Imaging studies of the CNS, by either MRI 
or CT, often demonstrate evidence of cerebral atro-
phy (Fig. 42-3). MRI may also reveal small areas of 
increased density on T2-weighted images. Lumbar 
puncture is an important element of the evaluation 
of patients with HIV infection and neurologic abnor-
malities. It is generally most helpful in ruling out or 
TABLE 42-4
CLINICAL STAGING OF HIV ENCEPHALOPATHY (AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX)
STAGE
DEFINITION
0 (Normal)
Normal mental and motor function.
0.5 (Equivocal/subclinical)
Absent, minimal, or equivocal symptoms without impairment of work or capacity to perform 
activities of daily living. Mild signs (snout response, slowed ocular or extremity movements) may 
be present. Gait and strength are normal.
1 (Mild)
Able to perform all but the more demanding aspects of work or activities of daily living but with 
unequivocal evidence (signs or symptoms that may include performance on neuropsychological 
testing) of functional, intellectual, or motor impairment. Can walk without assistance.
2 (Moderate)
Able to perform basic activities of self-care but cannot work or maintain the more demanding 
aspects of daily life. Ambulatory, but may require a single prop.
3 (Severe)
Major intellectual incapacity (cannot follow news or personal events, cannot sustain complex 
conversation, considerable slowing of all output) or motor disability (cannot walk unassisted, 
usually with slowing and clumsiness of arms as well).
4 (End-stage)
Nearly vegetative. Intellectual and social comprehension and output are at a rudimentary level. 
Nearly or absolutely mute. Paraparetic or paraplegic with urinary and fecal incontinence.
Source: Adapted from JJ Sidtis, RW Price: Neurology 40:197, 1990.
FIGURE 42-3
AIDS dementia complex. Postcontrast CT scan through 
the lateral ventricles of a 47-year-old man with AIDS, altered 
mental status, and dementia. The lateral and third ventricles 
and the cerebral sulci are abnormally prominent. Mild white 
matter hypodensity is also seen adjacent to the frontal horns 
of the lateral ventricles.
 
CHAPTER 42
HIV Neurology
543
making a diagnosis of opportunistic infections. In 
HIV-associated dementia, patients may have the non-
speciﬁc ﬁndings of an increase in CSF cells and protein 
level. While HIV RNA can often be detected in the 
spinal ﬂuid and HIV can be cultured from the CSF, 
this ﬁnding is not speciﬁc for HIV-associated demen-
tia. There appears to be no correlation between the 
presence of HIV in the CSF and the presence of HIV-
associated dementia. Elevated levels of macrophage 
chemoattractant protein (MCP-1), β2-microglobulin, 
neopterin, and quinolinic acid (a metabolite of trypto-
phan reported to cause CNS injury) have been noted 
in the CSF of patients with HIV-associated demen-
tia. These ﬁndings suggest that these factors as well as 
inﬂammatory cytokines may be involved in the patho-
genesis of this syndrome.
Combination antiretroviral therapy is of beneﬁt in 
patients with HIV-associated dementia. Improvement 
in neuropsychiatric test scores has been noted for both 
adult and pediatric patients treated with antiretrovirals. 
The rapid improvement in cognitive function noted 
with the initiation of cART suggests that at least some 
component of this problem is quickly reversible, again 
supporting at least a partial role of soluble mediators 
in the pathogenesis. It should also be noted that these 
patients have an increased sensitivity to the side effects 
of neuroleptic drugs. The use of these drugs for symp-
tomatic treatment is associated with an increased risk 
of extrapyramidal side effects; therefore, patients with 
HIV-associated dementia who receive these agents must 
be monitored carefully. It is felt by many physicians 
that the decrease in the prevalence of severe cases of 
HIV-associated dementia brought about by cART has 
resulted in an increase in the prevalence of milder forms 
of this disorder.
Aseptic meningitis
Aseptic meningitis may be seen in any but the very late 
stages of HIV infection. In the setting of acute primary 
infection patients may experience a syndrome of head-
ache, photophobia, and meningismus. Rarely, an acute 
encephalopathy due to encephalitis may occur. Cranial 
nerve involvement may be seen, predominantly cranial 
nerve VII but occasionally V and/or VIII. CSF ﬁnd-
ings include a lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevated protein 
level, and normal glucose level. This syndrome, which 
cannot be clinically differentiated from other viral men-
ingitides (Chap. 41), usually resolves spontaneously 
within 2–4 weeks; however, in some patients, signs and 
symptoms may become chronic. Aseptic meningitis may 
occur any time in the course of HIV infection; how-
ever, it is rare following the development of AIDS. This 
fact suggests that clinical aseptic meningitis in the con-
text of HIV infection is an immune-mediated disease.
HIV myelopathy
Spinal cord disease, or myelopathy, is present in ~20% 
of patients with AIDS, often as part of HIV-associated 
neurocognitive disorder. In fact, 90% of the patients 
with HIV-associated myelopathy have some evidence 
of dementia, suggesting that similar pathologic processes 
may be responsible for both conditions. Three main 
types of spinal cord disease are seen in patients with 
AIDS. The ﬁrst of these is a vacuolar myelopathy. This 
condition is pathologically similar to subacute com-
bined degeneration of the cord such as occurs with per-
nicious anemia. Although vitamin B12 deﬁciency can be 
seen in patients with AIDS as a primary complication of 
HIV infection, it does not appear to be responsible for 
the myelopathy seen in the majority of patients. Vacuo-
lar myelopathy is characterized by a subacute onset and 
often presents with gait disturbances, predominantly 
ataxia and spasticity; it may progress to include blad-
der and bowel dysfunction. Physical ﬁndings include 
evidence of increased deep tendon reﬂexes and exten-
sor plantar responses. The second form of spinal cord 
disease involves the dorsal columns and presents as a 
pure sensory ataxia. The third form is also sensory in 
nature and presents with paresthesias and dysesthesias 
of the lower extremities. In contrast to the cognitive 
problems, these spinal cord syndromes do not respond 
well to antiretroviral drugs, and therapy is mainly 
supportive.
One important disease of the spinal cord that also 
involves the peripheral nerves is a myelopathy and poly-
radiculopathy seen in association with CMV infec-
tion. This entity is generally seen late in the course of 
HIV infection and is fulminant in onset, with lower 
extremity and sacral paresthesias, difﬁculty in walking, 
areﬂexia, ascending sensory loss, and urinary reten-
tion. The clinical course is rapidly progressive over a 
period of weeks. CSF examination reveals a predomi-
nantly neutrophilic pleocytosis, and CMV DNA can 
be detected by CSF PCR. Therapy with ganciclovir or 
foscarnet can lead to rapid improvement, and prompt 
initiation of foscarnet or ganciclovir therapy is impor-
tant in minimizing the degree of permanent neuro-
logic damage. Combination therapy with both drugs 
should be considered in patients who have been previ-
ously treated for CMV disease. Other diseases involving 
the spinal cord in patients with HIV infection include 
HTLV-I-associated myelopathy (HAM), neurosyphilis, 
infection with herpes simplex or varicella-zoster, TB, 
and lymphoma.
HIV neuropathy
Peripheral neuropathies are common in patients with 
HIV infection. They occur at all stages of illness and 
take a variety of forms. Early in the course of HIV 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
544
infection, an acute inﬂammatory demyelinating poly-
neuropathy resembling Guillain-Barré syndrome may 
occur (Chap. 46). In other patients, a progressive or 
relapsing-remitting inﬂammatory neuropathy resem-
bling chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneu-
ropathy (CIDP) has been noted. Patients commonly 
present with progressive weakness, areﬂexia, and mini-
mal sensory changes. CSF examination often reveals a 
mononuclear pleocytosis, and peripheral nerve biopsy 
demonstrates a perivascular inﬁltrate suggesting an 
autoimmune etiology. Plasma exchange or IVIg has 
been tried with variable success. Because of the immu-
nosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids, they should 
be reserved for severe cases of CIDP refractory to 
other measures. Another autoimmune peripheral neu-
ropathy seen in patients with AIDS is mononeuritis 
multiplex (due to a necrotizing arteritis of peripheral 
nerves). The most common peripheral neuropathy in 
patients with HIV infection is a distal sensory polyneu-
ropathy, also referred to as painful sensory neuropathy, 
predominantly sensory neuropathy, or distal symmetric 
peripheral neuropathy. This condition may be a direct 
consequence of HIV infection or a side effect of dide-
oxynucleoside therapy. It is more common in taller 
individuals, older individuals, and those with lower 
CD4 counts. Two-thirds of patients with AIDS may 
be shown by electrophysiologic studies to have some 
evidence of peripheral nerve disease. Presenting symp-
toms are usually painful burning sensations in the feet 
and lower extremities. Findings on examination include 
a stocking-type sensory loss to pinprick, temperature, 
and touch sensation and a loss of ankle reﬂexes. Motor 
changes are mild and are usually limited to weakness 
of the intrinsic foot muscles. Response of this condi-
tion to antiretrovirals has been variable, perhaps because 
antiretrovirals are responsible for the problem in some 
instances. When due to dideoxynucleoside therapy, 
patients with lower extremity peripheral neuropa-
thy may complain of a sensation that they are walking 
on ice. Other entities in the differential diagnosis of 
peripheral neuropathy include diabetes mellitus, vita-
min B12 deﬁciency, and side effects from metronidazole 
or dapsone. For distal symmetric polyneuropathy that 
fails to resolve following the discontinuation of dide-
oxynucleosides, therapy is symptomatic; gabapentin, 
carbamazepine, tricyclics, or analgesics may be effective 
for dysesthesias. Treatment-naive patients may respond 
to cART.
HIV myopathy
Myopathy may complicate the course of HIV infec-
tion; causes include HIV infection itself, zidovudine, 
and the generalized wasting syndrome. HIV-associated 
myopathy may range in severity from an asymptom-
atic elevation in creatine kinase levels to a subacute 
syndrome characterized by proximal muscle weakness 
and myalgias. Quite pronounced elevations in cre-
atine kinase may occur in asymptomatic patients, par-
ticularly after exercise. The clinical signiﬁcance of this 
as an isolated laboratory ﬁnding is unclear. A variety 
of both inﬂammatory and noninﬂammatory pathologic 
processes have been noted in patients with more severe 
myopathy, including myoﬁber necrosis with inﬂamma-
tory cells, nemaline rod bodies, cytoplasmic bodies, and 
mitochondrial abnormalities. Profound muscle wasting, 
often with muscle pain, may be seen after prolonged 
zidovudine therapy. This toxic side effect of the drug 
is dose-dependent and is related to its ability to inter-
fere with the function of mitochondrial polymerases. It 
is reversible following discontinuation of the drug. Red 
ragged ﬁbers are a histologic hallmark of zidovudine-
induced myopathy.
HIV-related neoplasms
Systemic lymphoma
Lymphomas occur with an increased frequency in 
patients with congenital or acquired T cell immu-
nodeﬁciencies. AIDS is no exception; at least 6% of 
all patients with AIDS develop lymphoma at some 
time during the course of their illness. This is a 120-
fold increase in incidence compared to the general 
population. In contrast to the situation with Kaposi’s 
sarcoma, primary CNS lymphoma, and most oppor-
tunistic infections, the incidence of AIDS-associated 
systemic lymphomas has not experienced as dramatic 
a decrease as a consequence of the widespread use of 
effective cART. Lymphoma occurs in all risk groups, 
with the highest incidence in patients with hemophilia 
and the lowest incidence in patients from the Carib-
bean or Africa with heterosexually acquired infec-
tion. Lymphoma is a late manifestation of HIV infec-
tion, generally occurring in patients with CD4+ T 
cell counts <200/μL. As HIV disease progresses, the 
risk of lymphoma increases. The attack rate for lym-
phoma increases exponentially with increasing dura-
tion of HIV infection and decreasing level of immuno-
logic function. At 3 years following a diagnosis of HIV 
infection, the risk of lymphoma is 0.8% per year; by 
8 years after infection, it is 2.6% per year. As individu-
als with HIV infection live longer as a consequence of 
improved cART and better treatment and prophylaxis 
of opportunistic infections, it is anticipated that the 
incidence of lymphomas may increase.
The clinical presentation of lymphoma in patients 
with HIV infection is quite varied, ranging from focal 
seizures to rapidly growing mass lesions in the oral 
mucosa to persistent unexplained fever. At least 80% 
of patients present with extranodal disease, and a simi-
lar percentage have B-type symptoms of fever, night 
 
CHAPTER 42
HIV Neurology
545
sweats, or weight loss. Virtually any site in the body 
may be involved. The most common extranodal site is 
the CNS, which is involved in approximately one-third 
of all patients with lymphoma. Approximately 60% of 
these cases are primary CNS lymphoma.
CNS lymphoma
Primary CNS lymphoma accounts for ~20% of the cases 
of lymphoma in patients with HIV infection. In contrast 
to HIV-associated Burkitt’s lymphoma, primary CNS 
lymphomas are usually positive for EBV. In one study, 
the incidence of Epstein-Barr positivity was 100%. This 
malignancy does not have a predilection for any par-
ticular age group. The median CD4+ T cell count at 
the time of diagnosis is ~50/μL. Thus, CNS lymphoma 
generally presents at a later stage of HIV infection 
than systemic lymphoma. This fact may at least in part 
explain the poorer prognosis for this subset of patients.
Primary CNS lymphoma generally presents with 
focal neurologic deﬁcits, including cranial nerve ﬁnd-
ings, headaches, and/or seizures. MRI or CT gener-
ally reveals a limited number (one to three) of 3- to 
5-cm lesions (Fig. 42-4). The lesions often show 
ring enhancement on contrast administration and may 
occur in any location. Locations that are most com-
monly involved with CNS lymphoma are deep in the 
white matter. Contrast enhancement is usually less pro-
nounced than that seen with toxoplasmosis. The main 
diseases in the differential diagnosis are cerebral toxo-
plasmosis and cerebral Chagas’ disease. In addition to 
the 20% of lymphomas in HIV-infected individuals 
that are primary CNS lymphomas, CNS disease is also 
seen in HIV-infected patients with systemic lymphoma. 
Approximately 20% of patients with systemic lym-
phoma have CNS disease in the form of leptomenin-
geal involvement. This fact underscores the importance 
of lumbar puncture in the staging evaluation of patients 
with systemic lymphoma.
Both conventional and unconventional approaches 
have been employed in an attempt to treat HIV-related 
lymphomas. Systemic lymphoma is generally treated by 
the oncologist with combination chemotherapy. Earlier 
disappointing ﬁgures are being replaced with more opti-
mistic results for the treatment of systemic lymphoma 
following the availability of more effective cART and 
the use of rituximab in CD20+ tumors. While there is 
controversy regarding the use of antiretrovirals during 
chemotherapy, there is no question that their use overall 
in patients with HIV lymphoma has improved survival. 
As in most situations in patients with HIV disease, those 
with the higher CD4+ T cell counts tend to do better. 
Response rates as high as 72% with a median survival of 
33 months and disease-free intervals up to 9 years have 
been reported. Treatment of primary CNS lymphoma 
remains a signiﬁcant challenge. Treatment is complicated 
by the fact that this illness usually occurs in patients with 
advanced HIV disease. Palliative measures such as radia-
tion therapy provide some relief. The prognosis remains 
poor in this group, with a 2-year survival of 29%.
HIV-related opportunistic infections
The most common HIV-related neurologic opportunis-
tic infections are toxoplasmosis, cryptococcal infections, 
and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. The 
risk of many such infections correlates well with the 
CD4+ T cell count (Fig. 42-5). A selected group of 
common and important opportunistic infections of the 
nervous system in patients with HIV is discussed next.
Cryptococcosis
C. neoformans is the leading infectious cause of men-
ingitis in patients with AIDS. It is the initial AIDS-
deﬁning illness in ~2% of patients and generally occurs 
in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL. Cryp-
tococcal meningitis is particularly common in patients 
with AIDS in Africa, occurring in ~5% of patients. Most 
patients present with a picture of subacute meningoen-
cephalitis with fever, nausea, vomiting, altered mental 
status, headache, and meningeal signs. The incidence of 
seizures and focal neurologic deﬁcits is low. The CSF 
proﬁle may be normal or may show only modest eleva-
tions in WBC or protein levels and decreases in glucose. 
In addition to meningitis, patients may develop crypto-
coccomas and cranial nerve involvement. Approximately 
one-third of patients also have pulmonary disease. 
Uncommon manifestations of cryptococcal infection 
FIGURE 42-4
Central nervous system lymphoma. Postcontrast T1-
weighted MR scan in a patient with AIDS, an altered mental 
status, and hemiparesis. Multiple enhancing lesions, some 
ring-enhancing, are present. The left Sylvian lesion shows 
gyral and subcortical enhancement, and the lesions in the 
caudate and splenium (arrowheads) show enhancement of 
adjacent ependymal surfaces.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
546
include skin lesions that resemble molluscum contagiosum, 
lymphadenopathy, palatal and glossal ulcers, arthritis, 
gastroenteritis, myocarditis, and prostatitis. The prostate 
gland may serve as a reservoir for smoldering cryptococ-
cal infection. The diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis is 
made by identiﬁcation of organisms in spinal ﬂuid with 
India ink examination or by the detection of cryptococ-
cal antigen. A biopsy may be needed to make a diag-
nosis of CNS cryptococcoma. Treatment is with IV 
amphotericin B, at a dose of 0.7 mg/kg daily, or lipo-
somal amphotericin 4-6 mg/kg daily, with ﬂucytosine, 
25 mg/kg qid for at least 2 weeks, and, if possible, until 
the CSF culture turns negative. This is followed by 
ﬂuconazole, 400 mg/d PO for 8 weeks, and then ﬂu-
conazole, 200 mg/d until the CD4+ T cell count has 
increased to >200 cells/μL for 6 months in response to 
cART. Repeated lumbar puncture may be required to 
manage increased intracranial pressure. Symptoms may 
recur with initiation of cART as an immune reconstitu-
tion syndrome. Other fungi that may cause meningitis in 
patients with HIV infection are C. immitis and H. capsu-
latum. Meningoencephalitis has also been reported due 
to Acanthamoeba or Naegleria.
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis has been one of the most common causes 
of secondary CNS infections in patients with AIDS, 
but its incidence is decreasing in the era of cART. It is 
most common in patients from the Caribbean and from 
France, where the seroprevalence of T. gondii is around 
50%. Toxoplasmosis is generally a late complication 
of HIV infection and usually occurs in patients with 
CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL. Cerebral toxoplasmo-
sis is thought to represent a reactivation of latent tissue 
cysts. It is 10 times more common in patients with anti-
bodies to the organism than in patients who are serone-
gative. Patients diagnosed with HIV infection should be 
screened for IgG antibodies to T. gondii during the time 
of their initial workup. Those who are seronegative 
should be counseled about ways to minimize the risk of 
primary infection including avoiding the consumption of 
undercooked meat and careful hand washing after contact 
with soil or changing the cat litter box. The most com-
mon clinical presentation of cerebral toxoplasmosis in 
patients with HIV infection is fever, headache, and focal 
neurologic deﬁcits. Patients may present with seizure, 
hemiparesis, or aphasia as a manifestation of these focal 
deﬁcits or with a picture more inﬂuenced by the accom-
panying cerebral edema and characterized by confusion, 
dementia, and lethargy, which can progress to coma. The 
diagnosis is usually suspected on the basis of MRI ﬁnd-
ings of multiple lesions in multiple locations, although 
in some cases only a single lesion is seen. Pathologically, 
these lesions generally exhibit inﬂammation and central 
necrosis and, as a result, demonstrate ring enhancement 
on contrast MRI (Fig. 42-6) or, if MRI is unavailable 
Opportunistic illness
CD4 (cells/μL3)
HSV HZos Crp
KS
Cry
Can PCP NHL DEM PML WS
Tox
CMV PCP2 MAC
*
* * * * *
* * *
* * *
*
*
*
100
200
300
0
FIGURE 42-5
Relationship between CD4+ T cell counts and the devel-
opment of opportunistic diseases. Boxplot of the median 
(line inside the box), ﬁrst quartile (bottom of the box), third 
quartile (top of the box), and mean (asterisk) CD4+ lympho-
cyte count at the time of the development of opportunistic 
disease. Can, candidal esophagitis; CMV, cytomegalovirus 
infection; Crp, cryptosporidiosis; Cry, cryptococcal menin-
gitis; DEM, AIDS dementia complex; HSV, herpes simplex 
virus infection; HZos, herpes zoster; KS, Kaposi’s sarcoma; 
MAC, Mycobacterium avium complex bacteremia; NHL, non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma; PCP, primary Pneumocystis jiroveci 
pneumonia; PCP2, secondary P. jiroveci pneumonia; PML, 
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; Tox, Toxo-
plasma gondii encephalitis; WS, wasting syndrome. (From 
RD Moore, RE Chaisson: Ann Intern Med 124:633, 1996.)
 
CHAPTER 42
HIV Neurology
547
or contraindicated, on double-dose contrast CT. There 
is usually evidence of surrounding edema. In addition to 
toxoplasmosis, the differential diagnosis of single or mul-
tiple enhancing mass lesions in the HIV-infected patient 
includes primary CNS lymphoma and, less commonly, 
TB or fungal or bacterial abscesses. The deﬁnitive diag-
nostic procedure is brain biopsy. However, given the 
morbidity than can accompany this procedure, it is usu-
ally reserved for the patient who has failed 2–4 weeks 
of empiric therapy. If the patient is seronegative for T. 
gondii, the likelihood that a mass lesion is due to toxo-
plasmosis is <10%. In that setting, one may choose to 
be more aggressive and perform a brain biopsy sooner. 
Standard treatment is sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine 
with leucovorin as needed for a minimum of 4–6 weeks. 
Alternative therapeutic regimens include clindamycin in 
combination with pyrimethamine; atovaquone plus pyri-
methamine; and azithromycin plus pyrimethamine plus 
rifabutin. Relapses are common, and it is recommended 
that patients with a history of prior toxoplasmic encepha-
litis receive maintenance therapy with sulfadiazine, pyri-
methamine, and leucovorin as long as their CD4+ T cell 
counts remain <200 cells/μL. Patients with CD4+ T cell 
counts <100/μL and IgG antibody to Toxoplasma should 
receive primary prophylaxis for toxoplasmosis. Fortu-
nately, the same daily regimen of a single double-strength 
tablet of TMP/SMX used for P. jiroveci prophylaxis pro-
vides adequate primary protection against toxoplasmosis. 
Secondary prophylaxis/maintenance therapy for toxo-
plasmosis may be discontinued in the setting of effective 
cART and increases in CD4+ T cell counts to >200/μL 
for 6 months.
 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy 
(PML)
JC virus, a human polyomavirus that is the etiologic 
agent of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), 
is an important opportunistic pathogen in patients 
with AIDS. While ~80% of the general adult popula-
tion have antibodies to JC virus, indicative of prior 
infection, <10% of healthy adults show any evidence 
of ongoing viral replication. PML is the only known 
clinical manifestation of JC virus infection. It is a late 
manifestation of AIDS and is seen in ~4% of patients 
with AIDS. The lesions of PML begin as small foci of 
demyelination in subcortical white matter that eventu-
ally coalesce. The cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, and 
brainstem may all be involved. Patients typically have 
a protracted course with multifocal neurologic deﬁcits, 
with or without changes in mental status. Approxi-
mately 20% of patients experience seizures. Ataxia, 
hemiparesis, visual ﬁeld defects, aphasia, and sensory 
defects may occur. MRI typically reveals multiple, non-
enhancing white matter lesions that may coalesce and 
have a predilection for the occipital and parietal lobes. 
The lesions show signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted 
images and diminished signal on T1-weighted images. 
The measurement of JC virus DNA levels in CSF has a 
diagnostic sensitivity of 76% and a speciﬁcity of close to 
100%. Prior to the availability of cART, the majority of 
patients with PML died within 3–6 months of the onset 
of symptoms. Paradoxical worsening of PML has been 
seen with initiation of cART as an immune reconstitu-
tion syndrome. There is no speciﬁc treatment for PML; 
however, a minimal median survival of 2 years and sur-
vival of >15 years have been reported in patients with 
PML treated with cART for their HIV disease. Unfor-
tunately only ~50% of patients with HIV infection and 
PML show neurologic improvement with cART. Stud-
ies with other antiviral agents such as cidofovir have 
failed to show clear beneﬁt. Factors inﬂuencing a favor-
able prognosis for PML in the setting of HIV infection 
include a CD4+ T cell count >100/μL at baseline and 
the ability to maintain an HIV viral load of <500 copies 
per milliliter. Baseline HIV-1 viral load does not have 
independent predictive value of survival. PML is one 
of the few opportunistic infections that continues to 
occur with some frequency despite the widespread use 
of cART.
Chagas’ disease
Reactivation American trypanosomiasis may present as acute 
meningoencephalitis with focal neurologic signs, fever, 
headache, vomiting, and seizures. Accompanying car-
diac disease in the form of arrhythmias or heart failure 
should increase the index of suspicion. The presence of 
antibodies to Trypanosoma cruzi supports the diagnosis. 
In South America, reactivation of Chagas’ disease is con-
sidered to be an AIDS-deﬁning condition and may be 
FIGURE 42-6
Central nervous system toxoplasmosis. A coronal post-
contrast T1-weighted MR scan demonstrates a peripheral 
enhancing lesion in the left frontal lobe, associated with an 
eccentric nodular area of enhancement (arrow); this so-called 
eccentric target sign is typical of toxoplasmosis.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
548
the initial AIDS-deﬁning condition. The majority of 
cases occur in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200 
cells/μL. Lesions appear radiographically as single or 
multiple hypodense areas, typically with ring enhance-
ment and edema. They are found predominantly in the 
subcortical areas, a feature that differentiates them from 
the deeper lesions of toxoplasmosis. T. cruzi amasti-
gotes, or trypanosomes, can be identiﬁed from biopsy 
specimens or CSF. Other CSF ﬁndings include ele-
vated protein and a mild (<100 cells/μL) lymphocytic 
pleocytosis. Organisms can also be identiﬁed by direct 
examination of the blood. Treatment consists of benz-
imidazole (2.5 mg/kg bid) or nifurtimox (2 mg/kg qid) 
for at least 60 days, followed by maintenance therapy 
for the duration of immunodeﬁciency with either drug 
at a dose of 5 mg/kg three times a week. As is the case 
with cerebral toxoplasmosis, successful therapy with 
antiretrovirals may allow discontinuation of therapy for 
Chagas’ disease.
Speciﬁc neurologic presentations
Stroke
Stroke may occur in patients with HIV infection. In 
contrast to the other causes of focal neurologic deﬁ-
cits in patients with HIV infection, the symptoms of 
a stroke are sudden in onset. Patients with HIV infec-
tion have an increased prevalence of many classic risk 
factors associated with stroke, including smoking and 
diabetes. It also appears that HIV infection itself can 
lead to an increase in carotid artery stiffness. Among 
the secondary infectious diseases in patients with HIV 
infection that may be associated with stroke are vascu-
litis due to cerebral varicella zoster or neurosyphilis and 
septic embolism in association with fungal infection. 
Other elements of the differential diagnosis of stroke in 
the patient with HIV infection include atherosclerotic 
cerebral vascular disease, thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, and cocaine or amphetamine use.
Seizures
Seizures may be a consequence of opportunistic infec-
tions, neoplasms, or HIV-associated dementia. The sei-
zure threshold is often lower than normal in patients with 
advanced HIV infection due to the frequent presence of 
electrolyte abnormalities. Seizures are seen in 15–40% of 
patients with cerebral toxoplasmosis, 15–35% of patients 
with primary CNS lymphoma, 8% of patients with cryp-
tococcal meningitis, and 7–50% of patients with HIV-
associated dementia. Seizures may also be seen in patients 
with CNS tuberculosis, aseptic meningitis, and progres-
sive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Seizures may be the 
presenting clinical symptom of HIV disease. In one study 
of 100 patients with HIV infection presenting with a ﬁrst 
seizure, cerebral mass lesions were the most common 
cause, responsible for 32 of the 100 new-onset seizures. 
Of these 32 cases, 28 were due to toxoplasmosis and 4 
to lymphoma. HIV-associated dementia accounted for 
an additional 24 new-onset seizures. Cryptococcal men-
ingitis was the third most common diagnosis, responsible 
for 13 of the 100 seizures. In 23 cases, no cause could be 
found, and it is possible that these cases represent a sub-
category of HIV-associated dementia. Of these 23 cases, 
16 (70%) had two or more seizures, suggesting that anti-
convulsant therapy is indicated in all patients with HIV 
infection and seizures unless a rapidly correctable cause is 
found. While phenytoin remains the initial treatment of 
choice, hypersensitivity reactions to this drug have been 
reported in >10% of patients with AIDS, and therefore 
the use of phenobarbital, valproic acid, or levetiracetam 
must be considered as an alternative. Due to a variety of 
drug-drug interactions between antiseizure medications 
and antiretrovirals, drug levels need to be monitored 
carefully.
 Stanley B. Prusiner  ■   Bruce L. Miller 
549
 Prions are infectious proteins that cause degeneration 
of the central nervous system (CNS). Prion diseases are 
disorders of protein conformation, the most common 
of which in humans is called Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
(CJD). CJD typically presents with dementia and myoc-
lonus, is relentlessly progressive, and generally causes 
death within a year of onset. Most CJD patients are 
between 50 and 75 years of age; however, patients as 
young as 17 and as old as 83 have been recorded. 
 In mammals, prions reproduce by binding to the nor-
mal,  c ellular isoform of the  pr ion  p rotein (PrP C ) and stimu-
lating conversion of PrP C into the di s ease- c ausing isoform 
(PrP Sc ). PrP C is rich in α-helix and has little β-structure, 
while PrP Sc has less α-helix and a high amount of 
β-structure ( Fig. 43-1 ). This α-to-β structural transition 
in the prion protein (PrP) is the fundamental event under-
lying prion diseases ( Table 43-1 ). 
 Four new concepts have emerged from studies of pri-
ons: (1) Prions are the only known infectious pathogens 
that are devoid of nucleic acid; all other infectious agents 
possess genomes composed of either RNA or DNA 
that direct the synthesis of their progeny. (2) Prion dis-
eases may be manifest as infectious, genetic, and sporadic 
 PRION DISEASES 
 CHAPTER 43 
Helix A
Helix C
Helix B
Helix C
Helix B
Recombinant PrP
PrPSc model
A
B
 FIGURE 43-1 
Structures of prion proteins. A. NMR structure of Syrian ham-
ster recombinant (rec) PrP(90–231). Presumably, the structure 
of the α-helical form of recPrP(90–231) resembles that of PrP C . 
recPrP(90–231) is viewed from the interface where PrP Sc is 
thought to bind to PrP C . Shown are: α-helices A (residues 144–
157), B (172–193), and C (200–227). Flat ribbons depict β-strands 
S1 (129–131) and S2 (161–163).  ( A  , from SB Prusiner: N Engl J 
Med 344:1516, 2001; with permission.)  B. Structural model of 
PrP Sc . The 90–160 region has been modeled onto a β-helical 
architecture while the COOH terminal helices B and C are pre-
served as in PrP C .  (Image prepared by C. Govaerts.) 
TABLE 43-1
 GLOSSARY OF PRION TERMINOLOGY 
Prion
Pro teinaceous  in fectious particle that lacks 
nucleic acid. Prions are composed entirely 
of PrP Sc molecules. They can cause 
scrapie in sheep and goats, and related 
neurodegenerative diseases of humans 
such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
PrP Sc 
Disease-causing isoform of the prion 
protein. This protein is the only identiﬁ able 
macromolecule in puriﬁ ed preparations of 
scrapie prions.
Pr PC 
Cellular isoform of the prion protein. PrP C is 
the precursor of PrP Sc .
PrP 27-30
A fragment of PrP Sc , generated by 
truncation of the NH 2 -terminus by limited 
digestion with proteinase K. PrP 27-30 
retains prion infectivity and polymerizes 
into amyloid.
PRNP 
PrP gene located on human chromosome 20.
Prion rod
An aggregate of prions composed 
largely of PrP 27-30 molecules. Created 
by detergent extraction and limited 
proteolysis of PrP Sc . Morphologically and 
histochemically indistinguishable from 
many amyloids.
PrP amyloid
Amyloid containing PrP in the brains of 
animals or humans with prion disease; 
often accumulates as plaques.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
550
disorders; no other group of illnesses with a single etiol-
ogy presents with such a wide spectrum of clinical mani-
festations. (3) Prion diseases result from the accumulation 
of PrPSc, the conformation of which differs substantially 
from that of its precursor, PrPC. (4) PrPSc can exist in a 
variety of different conformations, each of which seems 
to specify a particular disease phenotype. How a speciﬁc 
conformation of a PrPSc molecule is imparted to PrPC 
during prion replication to produce nascent PrPSc with 
the same conformation is unknown. Additionally, it is 
unclear what factors determine where in the CNS a par-
ticular PrPSc molecule will be deposited.
SPECTRUM OF PRION DISEASES
The sporadic form of CJD is the most common prion dis-
order in humans. Sporadic CJD (sCJD) accounts for ∼85% 
of all cases of human prion disease, while inherited prion 
diseases account for 10–15% of all cases (Table 43-2). 
Familial CJD (fCJD), Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker 
(GSS) disease, and fatal familial insomnia (FFI) are all dom-
inantly inherited prion diseases that are caused by muta-
tions in the PrP gene.
Although infectious prion diseases account for 
<1% of all cases and infection does not seem to 
play an important role in the natural history of 
these illnesses, the transmissibility of prions is an impor-
tant biologic feature. Kuru of the Fore people of New 
Guinea is thought to have resulted from the consumption 
of brains from dead relatives during ritualistic cannibalism. 
With the cessation of ritualistic cannibalism in the late 
1950s, kuru has nearly disappeared, with the exception 
of a few recent patients exhibiting incubation periods of 
>40 years. Iatrogenic CJD (iCJD) seems to be the result 
of the accidental inoculation of patients with prions. Vari-
ant CJD (vCJD) in teenagers and young adults in Europe 
is the result of exposure to tainted beef from cattle with 
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE).
Six diseases of animals are caused by prions (Table 
43-2). Scrapie of sheep and goats is the prototypic prion 
disease. Mink encephalopathy, BSE, feline spongiform 
encephalopathy, and exotic ungulate encephalopathy are 
all thought to occur after the consumption of prion-
infected foodstuffs. The BSE epidemic emerged in 
Britain in the late 1980s and was shown to be due to 
industrial cannibalism. Whether BSE began as a spo-
radic case of BSE in a cow or started with scrapie in 
sheep is unknown. The origin of chronic wasting dis-
ease (CWD), a prion disease endemic in deer and elk 
in regions of North America, is uncertain. In contrast 
to other prion diseases, CWD is highly communicable. 
Feces from asymptomatic, infected cervids contain prions 
that are likely to be responsible for the spread of CWD.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
CJD is found throughout the world. The incidence of 
sCJD is approximately one case per million population, 
and thus it accounts for about 1 in every 10,000 deaths. 
TABLE 43-2
THE PRION DISEASES
DISEASE
HOST
MECHANISM OF PATHOGENESIS
Human
Kuru
Fore people
Infection through ritualistic cannibalism
iCJD
Humans
Infection from prion-contaminated hGH, duramater grafts, etc.
vCJD
Humans
Infection from bovine prions
fCJD
Humans
Germ-line mutations in PRNP
GSS
Humans
Germ-line mutations in PRNP
FFI
Humans
Germ-line mutation in PRNP (D178N, M129)
sCJD
Humans
Somatic mutation or spontaneous conversion of PrPC into PrPSc?
sFI
Humans
Somatic mutation or spontaneous conversion of PrPC into PrPSc?
Animal
Scrapie
Sheep, goats
Infection in genetically susceptible sheep
BSE
Cattle
Infection with prion-contaminated MBM
TME
Mink
Infection with prions from sheep or cattle
CWD
Mule deer, elk
Unknown
FSE
Cats
Infection with prion-contaminated beef
Exotic ungulate  
encephalopathy
Greater kudu, nyala,or oryx
Infection with prion-contaminated MBM
Abbreviations: BSE, bovine spongiform encephalopathy; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; CWD, chronic wasting disease; fCJD, familial 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; FFI, fatal familial insomnia; FSE, feline spongiform encephalopathy; GSS, Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker dis-
ease; hGH, human growth hormone; iCJD, iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; MBM, meat and bone meal; sCJD, sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease; sFI, sporadic fatal insomnia; TME, transmissible mink encephalopathy; vCJD, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
 
CHAPTER 43
Prion Diseases
551
Because sCJD is an age-dependent neurodegenerative 
disease, its incidence is expected to increase steadily as 
older segments of populations in developed and devel-
oping countries continue to expand. Although many 
geographic clusters of CJD have been reported, each 
has been shown to segregate with a PrP gene muta-
tion. Attempts to identify common exposure to some 
etiologic agent have been unsuccessful for both the spo-
radic and familial cases. Ingestion of scrapie-infected 
sheep or goat meat as a cause of CJD in humans has not 
been demonstrated by epidemiologic studies, although 
speculation about this potential route of inoculation 
continues. Of particular interest are deer hunters who 
develop CJD, because up to 90% of culled deer in some 
game herds have been shown to harbor CWD prions. 
Whether prion disease in deer or elk has passed to cows, 
sheep, or directly to humans remains unknown. Studies 
with rodents demonstrate that oral infection with pri-
ons can occur, but the process is inefﬁcient compared to 
intracerebral inoculation.
PATHOGENESIS
The human prion diseases were initially classiﬁed as 
neurodegenerative disorders of unknown etiology on 
the basis of pathologic changes being conﬁned to the 
CNS. With the transmission of kuru and CJD to apes, 
investigators began to view these diseases as infectious 
CNS illnesses caused by slow viruses. Even though 
the familial nature of a subset of CJD cases was well 
described, the signiﬁcance of this observation became 
more obscure with the transmission of CJD to animals. 
Eventually the meaning of heritable CJD became clear 
with the discovery of mutations in the PRNP gene of 
these patients. The prion concept explains how a dis-
ease can manifest as a heritable as well as an infectious 
illness. Moreover, the hallmark of all prion diseases, 
whether sporadic, dominantly inherited, or acquired by 
infection, is that they involve the aberrant metabolism 
of PrP.
A major feature that distinguishes prions from viruses 
is the ﬁnding that both PrP isoforms are encoded by a 
chromosomal gene. In humans, the PrP gene is desig-
nated PRNP and is located on the short arm of chro-
mosome 20. Limited proteolysis of PrPSc produces a 
smaller, protease-resistant molecule of ∼142 amino acids 
designated PrP 27-30; PrPC is completely hydrolyzed 
under the same conditions (Fig. 43-2). In the pres-
ence of detergent, PrP 27-30 polymerizes into amyloid. 
Prion rods formed by limited proteolysis and detergent 
extraction are indistinguishable from the ﬁlaments that 
aggregate to form PrP amyloid plaques in the CNS. 
Both the rods and the PrP amyloid ﬁlaments found in 
brain tissue exhibit similar ultrastructural morphology 
and green-gold birefringence after staining with Congo 
red dye.
Prion strains
The existence of prion strains raised the question of how 
heritable biologic information can be enciphered in a mol-
ecule other than nucleic acid. Various strains of prions 
have been deﬁned by incubation times and the distribu-
tion of neuronal vacuolation. Subsequently, the patterns of 
PrPSc deposition were found to correlate with vacuolation 
proﬁles, and these patterns were also used to characterize 
prion strains.
Persuasive evidence that strain-speciﬁc information is 
enciphered in the tertiary structure of PrPSc comes from 
transmission of two different inherited human prion dis-
eases to mice expressing a chimeric human-mouse PrP 
transgene. In FFI, the protease-resistant fragment of PrPSc 
after deglycosylation has a molecular mass of 19 kDa, 
whereas in fCJD and most sporadic prion diseases, it is 
21 kDa (Table 43-3). This difference in molecular mass 
was shown to be due to different sites of proteolytic 
cleavage at the NH2 termini of the two human PrPSc 
molecules, reﬂecting different tertiary structures. These 
distinct conformations were not unexpected because the 
amino acid sequences of the PrPs differ.
Extracts from the brains of patients with FFI trans-
mitted disease into mice expressing a chimeric human-
mouse PrP transgene and induced formation of the 
19-kDa PrPSc, whereas brain extracts from fCJD and 
sCJD patients produced the 21-kDa PrPSc in mice 
expressing the same transgene. On second passage, these 
differences were maintained, demonstrating that chime-
ric PrPSc can exist in two different conformations based 
on the sizes of the protease-resistant fragments, even 
though the amino acid sequence of PrPSc is invariant.
This analysis was extended when patients with spo-
radic fatal insomnia (sFI) were identiﬁed. Although 
they did not carry a PRNP gene mutation, the patients 
demonstrated a clinical and pathologic phenotype that 
PrP Polypeptide
PrPC
PrPSc
CHO CHO
GPI
S
S
PrP 27-30
Codon
209 amino acids
209 amino acids
~142 amino acids
1
23
50
94
131
188
231
254
FIGURE 43-2 
Prion protein isoforms. Bar diagram of Syrian hamster PrP, 
which consists of 254 amino acids. After processing of the 
NH2 and COOH termini, both PrPC and PrPSc consist of 209 
residues. After limited proteolysis, the NH2 terminus of PrPSc is 
truncated to form PrP 27–30 composed of ∼142 amino acids.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
552
was indistinguishable from that of patients with FFI. 
Furthermore, 19-kDa PrPSc was found in their brains, 
and on passage of prion disease to mice expressing a 
chimeric human-mouse PrP transgene, 19-kDa PrPSc 
was also found. These ﬁndings indicate that the disease 
phenotype is dictated by the conformation of PrPSc and 
not the amino acid sequence. PrPSc acts as a template 
for the conversion of PrPC into nascent PrPSc. On the 
passage of prions into mice expressing a chimeric ham-
ster-mouse PrP transgene, a change in the conformation 
of PrPSc was accompanied by the emergence of a new 
strain of prions.
Many new strains of prions were generated using 
recombinant (rec) PrP produced in bacteria; recPrP 
was polymerized into amyloid ﬁbrils and inoculated 
into transgenic mice expressing high levels of wild-type 
mouse PrPC; about 500 days later, the mice died of prion 
disease. The incubation times of the “synthetic prions” in 
mice were dependent on the conditions used for polym-
erization of the amyloid ﬁbrils. Highly stable amyloids 
gave rise to stable prions with long incubation times; 
low-stability amyloids led to prions with short incubation 
times. Amyloids of intermediate stability gave rise to pri-
ons with intermediate stabilities and intermediate incuba-
tion times. Such ﬁndings are consistent with earlier stud-
ies showing that the incubation times of synthetic and 
naturally occurring prions are directly proportional to the 
stability of the prion.
Species barrier
Studies on the role of the primary and tertiary structures 
of PrP in the transmission of prion disease have given 
new insights into the pathogenesis of these maladies. 
The amino acid sequence of PrP encodes the species 
of the prion, and the prion derives its PrPSc sequence 
from the last mammal in which it was passaged. While 
the primary structure of PrP is likely to be the most 
important or even sole determinant of the tertiary struc-
ture of PrPC, PrPSc seems to function as a template in 
determining the tertiary structure of nascent PrPSc mol-
ecules as they are formed from PrPC. In turn, prion 
diversity appears to be enciphered in the conformation 
of PrPSc, and thus prion strains seem to represent differ-
ent conformers of PrPSc.
In general, transmission of prion disease from one 
species to another is inefﬁcient, in that not all intracere-
brally inoculated animals develop disease, and those that 
fall ill do so only after long incubation times that can 
approach the natural life span of the animal. This “spe-
cies barrier” to transmission is correlated with the degree 
of similarity between the amino acid sequences of PrPC 
in the inoculated host and of PrPSc in the prion inocu-
lum. The importance of sequence similarity between the 
host and donor PrP argues that PrPC directly interacts 
with PrPSc in the prion conversion process.
SPORADIC AND INHERITED PRION 
DISEASES
Several different scenarios might explain the initiation 
of sporadic prion disease: (1) A somatic mutation may 
be the cause and thus follow a path similar to that for 
germ-line mutations in inherited disease. In this situ-
ation, the mutant PrPSc must be capable of target-
ing wild-type PrPC, a process known to be possible 
for some mutations but less likely for others. (2) The 
activation energy barrier separating wild-type PrPC 
from PrPSc could be crossed on rare occasions when 
viewed in the context of a population. Most individu-
als would be spared while presentations in the elderly 
with an incidence of ∼1 per million would be seen. (3) 
PrPSc may be present at low levels in some normal cells, 
where it performs some important, as yet unknown, 
function. The level of PrPSc in such cells is hypothesized 
TABLE 43-3
DISTINCT PRION STRAINS GENERATED IN HUMANS WITH INHERITED PRION DISEASES AND TRANSMITTED TO 
TRANSGENIC MICEa
INOCULUM
HOST SPECIES
HOST PrP GENOTYPE
INCUBATION TIME  
[DAYS ± SEM] (n/n0)
PrPSc(kDa)
None
  
Human
  FFI(D178N, M129)
  
19
FFI
  
Mouse
  
Tg(MHu2M)
  206 ± 7 (7/7)
  
19
FFI → Tg(MHu2M)
  
Mouse
  
Tg(MHu2M)
  136 ± 1 (6/6)
  
19
None
  
Human
  
fCJD(E200K)
  
21
fCJD
  
Mouse
  
Tg(MHu2M)
  170 ± 2 (10/10)
  
21
fCJD → Tg(MHu2M)
  
Mouse
  
Tg(MHu2M)
  167 ± 3 (15/15)
  
21
aTg(MHu2M) mice express a chimeric mouse-human PrP gene.
Notes: Clinicopathologic phenotype is determined by the conformation of PrPSc in accord with the results of the transmission of human prions 
from patients with FFI to transgenic mice. fCJD, familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; FFI, fatal familial insomnia.
 
CHAPTER 43
Prion Diseases
553
to be sufﬁciently low as to be not detected by routine 
bioassay. In some altered metabolic states, the cellular 
mechanisms for clearing PrPSc might become compro-
mised and the rate of PrPSc formation would then begin 
to exceed the capacity of the cell to clear it. The third 
possible mechanism is attractive since it suggests PrPSc 
is not simply a misfolded protein, as proposed for the 
ﬁrst and second mechanisms, but that it is an alterna-
tively folded molecule with a function. Moreover, the 
multitude of conformational states that PrPSc can adopt, 
as described earlier, raises the possibility that PrPSc or 
another prion-like protein might function in a process 
like short-term memory where information storage 
occurs in the absence of new protein synthesis.
More than 40 different mutations resulting in non-
conservative substitutions in the human PRNP gene 
have been found to segregate with inherited human 
prion diseases. Missense mutations and expansions in the 
octapeptide repeat region of the gene are responsible for 
familial forms of prion disease. Five different mutations 
of the PRNP gene have been linked genetically to heri-
table prion disease.
Although phenotypes may vary dramatically within 
families, speciﬁc phenotypes tend to be observed with 
certain mutations. A clinical phenotype indistinguish-
able from typical sCJD is usually seen with substitutions 
at codons 180, 183, 200, 208, 210, and 232. Substitutions 
at codons 102, 105, 117, 198, and 217 are associated with 
the GSS variant of prion disease. The normal human PrP 
sequence contains ﬁve repeats of an eight-amino-acid 
sequence. Insertions from two to nine extra octarepeats 
frequently cause variable phenotypes ranging from a 
condition indistinguishable from sCJD to a slowly pro-
gressive dementing illness of many years’ duration to an 
early-age-of-onset disorder that is similar to Alzheimer’s 
disease. A mutation at codon 178 resulting in substitution 
of asparagine for aspartic acid produces FFI if a methio-
nine is encoded at the polymorphic 129 residue on the 
same allele. Typical CJD is seen if the D178N mutation 
occurs with a valine encoded at position 129 of the same 
allele.
HUMAN PRNP GENE POLYMORPHISMS
Polymorphisms inﬂuence the susceptibility to sporadic, 
inherited, and infectious forms of prion disease. The 
methionine/valine polymorphism at position 129 not 
only modulates the age of onset of some inherited prion 
diseases but can also determine the clinical phenotype. 
The ﬁnding that homozygosity at codon 129 predis-
poses to sCJD supports a model of prion production that 
favors PrP interactions between homologous proteins.
Substitution of the basic residue lysine at position 218 
in mouse PrP produced dominant-negative inhibition 
of prion replication in transgenic mice. This same lysine 
at position 219 in human PrP has been found in 12% 
of the Japanese population, and this group appears to be 
resistant to prion disease. Dominant-negative inhibition 
of prion replication was also found with substitution of 
the basic residue arginine at position 171; sheep with 
arginine are resistant to scrapie prions but are susceptible 
to BSE prions that were inoculated intracerebrally.
INFECTIOUS PRION DISEASES
IATROGENIC CJD
Accidental transmission of CJD to humans appears to 
have occurred with corneal transplantation, contaminated 
electroencephalogram (EEG) electrode implantation, and 
surgical procedures. Corneas from donors with inappar-
ent CJD have been transplanted to apparently healthy 
recipients who developed CJD after prolonged incu-
bation periods. The same improperly decontaminated 
EEG electrodes that caused CJD in two young patients 
with intractable epilepsy caused CJD in a chimpanzee 18 
months after their experimental implantation.
Surgical procedures may have resulted in accidental 
inoculation of patients with prions, presumably because 
some instrument or apparatus in the operating theater 
became contaminated when a CJD patient underwent 
surgery. Although the epidemiology of these studies is 
highly suggestive, no proof for such episodes exists.
Dura mater grafts
More than 160 cases of CJD after implantation of dura 
mater grafts have been recorded. All of the grafts were 
thought to have been acquired from a single manufac-
turer whose preparative procedures were inadequate 
to inactivate human prions. One case of CJD occurred 
after repair of an eardrum perforation with a pericar-
dium graft.
Human growth hormone and pituitary 
gonadotropin therapy
The transmission of CJD prions from contaminated 
human growth hormone (hGH) preparations derived 
from human pituitaries has been responsible for fatal cer-
ebellar disorders with dementia in >180 patients rang-
ing in age from 10 to 41 years. These patients received 
injections of hGH every 2–4 days for 4–12 years. If it is 
thought that these patients developed CJD from injec-
tions of prion-contaminated hGH preparations, the pos-
sible incubation periods range from 4 to 30 years. Only 
recombinant hGH is now used therapeutically so that 
possible contamination with prions is no longer an issue. 
Four cases of CJD have occurred in women receiving 
human pituitary gonadotropin.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
554
VARIANT CJD
The restricted geographic occurrence and chronol-
ogy of vCJD raised the possibility that BSE prions had 
been transmitted to humans through the consump-
tion of tainted beef. More than 190 cases of vCJD have 
occurred, with >90% of these in Britain. vCJD has also 
been reported in people either living in or originat-
ing from France, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, 
Spain, Saudi Arabia, United States, Canada, and Japan.
The steady decline in the number of vCJD cases over 
the past decade argues that there will not be a prion dis-
ease epidemic in Europe, similar to those seen for BSE 
and kuru. What is certain is that prion-tainted meat 
should be prevented from entering the human food 
supply.
The most compelling evidence that vCJD is caused 
by BSE prions was obtained from experiments in mice 
expressing the bovine PrP transgene. Both BSE and 
vCJD prions were efﬁciently transmitted to these trans-
genic mice and with similar incubation periods. In 
contrast to sCJD prions, vCJD prions did not transmit 
disease efﬁciently to mice expressing a chimeric human-
mouse PrP transgene. Earlier studies with nontransgenic 
mice suggested that vCJD and BSE might be derived 
from the same source because both inocula transmitted 
disease with similar but very long incubation periods.
Attempts to determine the origin of BSE and vCJD 
prions have relied on passaging studies in mice, some 
of which are described earlier, as well as studies of the 
conformation and glycosylation of PrPSc. One scenario 
suggests that a particular conformation of bovine PrPSc 
was selected for heat resistance during the rendering 
process and was then reselected multiple times as cat-
tle infected by ingesting prion-contaminated meat and 
bone meal (MBM) were slaughtered and their offal ren-
dered into more MBM.
NEUROPATHOLOGY
Frequently the brains of patients with CJD have no rec-
ognizable abnormalities on gross examination. Patients 
who survive for several years have variable degrees of 
cerebral atrophy.
On light microscopy, the pathologic hallmarks of 
CJD are spongiform degeneration and astrocytic gliosis. 
The lack of an inﬂammatory response in CJD and 
other prion diseases is an important pathologic feature 
of these degenerative disorders. Spongiform degenera-
tion is characterized by many 1- to 5-μm vacuoles in 
the neuropil between nerve cell bodies. Generally the 
spongiform changes occur in the cerebral cortex, puta-
men, caudate nucleus, thalamus, and molecular layer 
of the cerebellum. Astrocytic gliosis is a constant but 
nonspeciﬁc feature of prion diseases. Widespread pro-
liferation of ﬁbrous astrocytes is found throughout the 
gray matter of brains infected with CJD prions. Astro-
cytic processes ﬁlled with glial ﬁlaments form extensive 
networks.
Amyloid plaques have been found in ∼10% of CJD 
cases. Puriﬁed CJD prions from humans and animals 
exhibit the ultrastructural and histochemical character-
istics of amyloid when treated with detergents during 
limited proteolysis. In ﬁrst passage from some human 
Japanese CJD cases, amyloid plaques have been found in 
mouse brains. These plaques stain with antibodies raised 
against PrP.
The amyloid plaques of GSS disease are morphologi-
cally distinct from those seen in kuru or scrapie. GSS 
plaques consist of a central dense core of amyloid sur-
rounded by smaller globules of amyloid. Ultrastruc-
turally, they consist of a radiating ﬁbrillar network of 
amyloid ﬁbrils, with scant or no neuritic degeneration. 
The plaques can be distributed throughout the brain 
but are most frequently found in the cerebellum. They 
are often located adjacent to blood vessels. Congophilic 
angiopathy has been noted in some cases of GSS disease.
In vCJD, a characteristic feature is the presence of 
“ﬂorid plaques.” These are composed of a central core 
of PrP amyloid, surrounded by vacuoles in a pattern 
suggesting petals on a ﬂower.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Nonspeciﬁc prodromal symptoms occur in about a third 
of patients with CJD and may include fatigue, sleep 
disturbance, weight loss, headache, anxiety, vertigo, 
malaise, and ill-deﬁned pain. Most patients with CJD 
present with deﬁcits in higher cortical function. These 
deﬁcits almost always progress over weeks or months 
to a state of profound dementia characterized by mem-
ory loss, impaired judgment, and a decline in virtually 
all aspects of intellectual function. A few patients pres-
ent with either visual impairment or cerebellar gait and 
coordination deﬁcits. Frequently the cerebellar deﬁcits 
are rapidly followed by progressive dementia. Visual 
problems often begin with blurred vision and dimin-
ished acuity, rapidly followed by dementia.
Other symptoms and signs include extrapyramidal 
dysfunction manifested as rigidity, masklike facies, or 
(less commonly) choreoathetoid movements; pyramidal 
signs (usually mild); seizures (usually major motor) and, 
less commonly, hypoesthesia; supranuclear gaze palsy; 
optic atrophy; and vegetative signs such as changes in 
weight, temperature, sweating, or menstruation.
Myoclonus
Most patients (∼90%) with CJD exhibit myoclonus that 
appears at various times throughout the illness. Unlike 
other involuntary movements, myoclonus persists dur-
ing sleep. Startle myoclonus elicited by loud sounds or 
 
CHAPTER 43
Prion Diseases
555
bright lights is frequent. It is important to stress that 
myoclonus is neither speciﬁc nor conﬁned to CJD and 
tends to occur later in the course of CJD. Dementia 
with myoclonus can also be due to Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD) (Chap. 29), dementia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 
29), corticobasal degeneration (Chap. 29), cryptococcal 
encephalitis, or the myoclonic epilepsy disorder Unver-
richt-Lundborg disease (Chap. 26).
Clinical course
In documented cases of accidental transmission of CJD 
to humans, an incubation period of 1.5–2 years pre-
ceded the development of clinical disease. In other 
cases, incubation periods of up to 40 years have been 
suggested. Most patients with CJD live 6–12 months 
after the onset of clinical signs and symptoms, whereas 
some live for up to 5 years.
DIAGNOSIS
The constellation of dementia, myoclonus, and peri-
odic electrical bursts in an afebrile 60-year-old patient 
generally indicates CJD. Clinical abnormalities in CJD 
are conﬁned to the CNS. Fever, elevated sedimentation 
rate, leukocytosis in blood, or a pleocytosis in cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid (CSF) should alert the physician to another 
etiology to explain the patient’s CNS dysfunction.
Variations in the typical course appear in inherited 
and transmitted forms of the disease. fCJD has an earlier 
mean age of onset than sCJD. In GSS disease, ataxia is 
usually a prominent and presenting feature, with demen-
tia occurring late in the disease course. GSS disease typi-
cally presents earlier than CJD (mean age 43 years) and 
is typically more slowly progressive than CJD; death 
usually occurs within 5 years of onset. FFI is character-
ized by insomnia and dysautonomia; dementia occurs 
only in the terminal phase of the illness. Rare sporadic 
cases have been identiﬁed. vCJD has an unusual clinical 
course, with a prominent psychiatric prodrome that may 
include visual hallucinations and early ataxia, while frank 
dementia is usually a late sign of vCJD.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Many conditions may mimic CJD superﬁcially. Demen-
tia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 29) is the most common 
disorder to be mistaken for CJD. It can present in a sub-
acute fashion with delirium, myoclonus, and extrapyra-
midal features. Other neurodegenerative disorders (Chap. 
29) to consider include AD, frontotemporal dementia, 
corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, 
ceroid lipofuscinosis, and myoclonic epilepsy with Lafora 
bodies (Chap. 26). The absence of abnormalities on dif-
fusion-weighted and ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) MRI will almost always distinguish these 
dementing conditions from CJD.
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, which presents as a 
subacute progressive encephalopathy with myoclonus 
and periodic triphasic complexes on the EEG, should 
be excluded in every case of suspected CJD. It is diag-
nosed by the ﬁnding of high titers of antithyroglobulin 
or antithyroid peroxidase (antimicrosomal) antibodies 
in the blood and improves with glucocorticoid therapy. 
Unlike CJD, ﬂuctuations in severity typically occur in 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy.
Intracranial vasculitides may produce nearly all of 
the symptoms and signs associated with CJD, some-
times without systemic abnormalities. Myoclonus is 
exceptional with cerebral vasculitis, but focal seizures 
may confuse the picture. Prominent headache, absence 
of myoclonus, stepwise change in deﬁcits, abnormal 
CSF, and focal white matter changes on MRI or angio-
graphic abnormalities all favor vasculitis.
Paraneoplastic conditions, particularly limbic enceph-
alitis and cortical encephalitis, can also mimic CJD. In 
many of these patients, dementia appears prior to the 
diagnosis of a tumor, and in some, no tumor is ever 
found. Detection of the paraneoplastic antibodies is 
often the only way to distinguish these cases from CJD.
Other diseases that can simulate CJD include neurosyphi-
lis, AIDS dementia complex (Chap. 42), progressive multi-
focal leukoencephalopathy (Chap. 40), subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis, progressive rubella panencephalitis, herpes 
simplex encephalitis (Chap. 40), diffuse intracranial tumor 
(gliomatosis cerebri; Chap. 37), anoxic encephalopathy, 
dialysis dementia, uremia, hepatic encephalopathy, voltage-
gated potassium channel (VGkC) autoimmune encephalop-
athy, and lithium or bismuth intoxication.
LABORATORY TESTS
The only speciﬁc diagnostic tests for CJD and other 
human prion diseases measure PrPSc. The most widely 
used method involves limited proteolysis that gener-
ates PrP 27-30, which is detected by immunoassay after 
denaturation. The conformation-dependent immunoas-
say (CDI) is based on immunoreactive epitopes that are 
exposed in PrPC but buried in PrPSc. In humans, the 
diagnosis of CJD can be established by brain biopsy if 
PrPSc is detected. If no attempt is made to measure PrPSc, 
but the constellation of pathologic changes frequently 
found in CJD is seen in a brain biopsy, then the diagnosis 
is reasonably secure (see “Neuropathology,” earlier in the 
chapter). The high sensitivity and speciﬁcity of cortical 
ribboning and basal ganglia hyperintensity on FLAIR and 
diffusion-weighted MRI for the diagnosis of CJD have 
greatly diminished the need for brain biopsy in patients 
with suspected CJD. Because PrPSc is not uniformly dis-
tributed throughout the CNS, the apparent absence of 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
556
PrPSc in a limited sample such as a biopsy does not rule 
out prion disease. At autopsy, sufﬁcient brain samples 
should be taken for both PrPSc immunoassay, preferably 
by CDI, and immunohistochemistry of tissue sections.
To establish the diagnosis of either sCJD or familial 
prion disease, sequencing the PRNP gene must be per-
formed. Finding the wild-type PRNP gene sequence 
permits the diagnosis of sCJD if there is no history to 
suggest infection from an exogenous source of prions. 
The identiﬁcation of a mutation in the PRNP gene 
sequence that encodes a nonconservative amino acid 
substitution argues for familial prion disease.
CT may be normal or show cortical atrophy. MRI is 
valuable for distinguishing sCJD from most other condi-
tions. On FLAIR sequences and diffusion-weighted imag-
ing, ∼90% of patients show increased intensity in the basal 
ganglia and cortical ribboning (Fig. 43-3). This pattern is 
not seen with other neurodegenerative disorders but has 
been seen infrequently with viral encephalitis, paraneoplas-
tic syndromes, or seizures. When the typical MRI pattern 
is present, in the proper clinical setting, diagnosis is facili-
tated. However, some cases of sCJD do not show this typ-
ical pattern, and other early diagnostic approaches are still 
needed.
CSF is nearly always normal but may show pro-
tein elevation and, rarely, mild pleocytosis. Although 
the stress protein 14-3-3 is elevated in the CSF of 
some patients with CJD, similar elevations of 14-3-3 
are found in patients with other disorders; thus this 
elevation is not speciﬁc. Similarly, elevations of CSF 
neuron-speciﬁc enolase and tau occur in CJD but lack 
speciﬁcity for diagnosis.
The EEG is often useful in the diagnosis of CJD, 
although only about 60% of individuals show the typi-
cal pattern. During the early phase of CJD, the EEG is 
usually normal or shows only scattered theta activity. 
In most advanced cases, repetitive, high-voltage, tri-
phasic, and polyphasic sharp discharges are seen, but in 
many cases their presence is transient. The presence of 
these stereotyped periodic bursts of <200 ms duration, 
occurring every 1–2 s, makes the diagnosis of CJD very 
likely. These discharges are frequently but not always 
symmetric; there may be a one-sided predominance 
in amplitude. As CJD progresses, normal background 
rhythms become fragmentary and slower.
CARE OF CJD PATIENTS
Although CJD should not be considered either conta-
gious or communicable, it is transmissible. The risk of 
accidental inoculation by aerosols is very small; none-
theless, procedures producing aerosols should be per-
formed in certiﬁed biosafety cabinets. Biosafety level 
2 practices, containment equipment, and facilities are 
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health. 
The primary problem in caring for patients with CJD 
is the inadvertent infection of health care workers by 
needle and stab wounds. Electroencephalographic and 
electromyographic needles should not be reused after 
studies on patients with CJD have been performed.
There is no reason for pathologists or other morgue 
employees to resist performing autopsies on patients 
whose clinical diagnosis was CJD. Standard microbio-
logic practices outlined here, along with speciﬁc recom-
mendations for decontamination, seem to be adequate 
precautions for the care of patients with CJD and the 
handling of infected specimens.
DECONTAMINATION OF CJD PRIONS
Prions are extremely resistant to common inactivation 
procedures, and there is some disagreement about the 
optimal conditions for sterilization. Some investigators 
recommend treating CJD-contaminated materials once 
with 1 N NaOH at room temperature, but we believe 
this procedure may be inadequate for sterilization. 
Autoclaving at 134°C for 5 h or treatment with 2 N 
NaOH for several hours is recommended for steriliza-
tion of prions. The term sterilization implies complete 
destruction of prions; any residual infectivity can be 
hazardous. Recent studies show that sCJD prions bound 
to stainless steel surfaces are resistant to inactivation by 
autoclaving at 134°C for 2 h; exposure of bound prions 
to an acidic detergent solution prior to autoclaving ren-
dered prions susceptible to inactivation.
FIGURE 43-3 
T2-weighted (FLAIR) MRI showing hyperintensity in the cortex 
in a patient with sporadic CJD. This so-called “cortical ribbon-
ing” along with increased intensity in the basal ganglia on T2 
or diffusion-weighted imaging can aid in the diagnosis of CJD.
 
CHAPTER 43
Prion Diseases
557
PREVENTION AND THERAPEUTICS
There is no known effective therapy for preventing or 
treating CJD. The ﬁnding that phenothiazines and acri-
dines inhibit PrPSc formation in cultured cells led to clin-
ical studies of quinacrine in CJD patients. Unfortunately, 
quinacrine failed to slow the rate of cognitive decline 
in CJD, possibly because therapeutic concentrations 
in the brain were not achieved. Although inhibition of 
the P-glycoprotein (Pgp) transport system resulted in 
substantially increased quinacrine levels in the brains of 
mice, the prion incubation times were not extended by 
treatment with the drug. Whether such an approach can 
be used to treat CJD remains to be established.
Like the acridines, anti-PrP antibodies have been 
shown to eliminate PrPSc from cultured cells. Addition-
ally, such antibodies in mice, either administered by injec-
tion or produced from a transgene, have been shown 
to prevent prion disease when prions are introduced by 
a peripheral route, such as intraperitoneal inoculation. 
Unfortunately, the antibodies were ineffective in mice 
inoculated intracerebrally with prions. Several drugs, 
including pentosan polysulfate as well as porphyrin and 
phenylhydrazine derivatives, delay the onset of disease in 
animals inoculated intracerebrally with prions if the drugs 
are given intracerebrally beginning soon after inoculation.
PRION-LIKE PROTEINS CAUSING 
OTHER NEURODEGENERATIVE 
DISEASES
There is mounting evidence that prion-like changes 
in protein conformation underlie Alzheimer’s (AD), 
Parkinson’s (PD), and Huntington’s (HD) diseases as 
well as the frontotemporal dementias (FTDs) and amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Experimental studies have 
shown that transgenic mice expressing mutant amy-
loid precursor protein (APP) develop amyloid plaques 
containing ﬁbrils composed of the amyloid beta (Aβ) 
peptide about a year after inoculation with extracts 
prepared from the brains of patients with AD. Mutant 
tau aggregates in transgenic mice and cultured cells can 
trigger the aggregation of wild-type tau into ﬁbrils that 
resemble those in neuroﬁbrillary tangles and Pick bod-
ies that have been found in AD, FTDs, Pick’s disease, 
and some cases of posttraumatic head injury. In patients 
with advanced PD who received grafts of fetal substan-
tia nigral neurons, Lewy bodies containing β-sheet–rich 
α-synuclein have been identiﬁed in grafted cells about 
10 years after transplantation. These ﬁndings argue for 
the axonal transport of misfolded α-synuclein cross-
ing into grafted neurons, where it initiates aggregation 
of nascent α-synuclein into ﬁbrils that coalesce to form 
Lewy bodies.
Taken together, a wealth of data argues that all neu-
rodegenerative diseases are caused by proteins that 
undergo aberrant processing, which results in their 
assembly into amyloid ﬁbrils. In each degenerative brain 
disease, prion-like protein processing is responsible for 
the accumulation of a particular protein in an altered 
state that leads to neurodegeneration. Interestingly, 
once these aberrant, prion-like proteins have polym-
erized into amyloid ﬁbrils, they are probably inert. 
Amyloid plaques containing PrPSc are a nonobligatory 
feature of prion disease in humans and animals. Further-
more, amyloid plaques in AD do not correlate with the 
level of dementia; however, the level of soluble (oligo-
meric) Aβ peptide does correlate with memory loss and 
other intellectual deﬁcits.
 Josep Dalmau  ■   Myrna R. Rosenfeld 
558
 Paraneoplastic neurologic disorders (PNDs) are cancer-
related syndromes that can affect any part of the nervous 
system  ( Table 44-1 ) . They are caused by mechanisms 
other than metastasis or by any of the complications 
of cancer such as coagulopathy, stroke, metabolic and 
nutritional conditions, infections, and side effects of 
cancer therapy. In 60% of patients the neurologic symp-
toms precede the cancer diagnosis. Clinically disabling 
PNDs occur in 0.5–1% of all cancer patients, but they 
affect 2–3% of patients with neuroblastoma or small cell 
lung cancer (SCLC) and 30–50% of patients with thy-
moma or sclerotic myeloma. 
 PARANEOPLASTIC NEUROLOGIC 
SYNDROMES 
 CHAPTER 44 
TABLE 44-1
 PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES OF THE 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
CLASSIC SYNDROMES: 
USUALLY OCCUR WITH 
CANCER ASSOCIATION
NONCLASSIC SYNDROMES: 
MAY OCCUR WITH AND 
WITHOUT CANCER 
ASSOCIATION
 Encephalomyelitis 
 Limbic encephalitis 
 Cerebellar degeneration 
(adults) 
 Opsoclonus-myoclonus 
 Subacute sensory 
neuronopathy 
 Gastrointestinal paresis or 
pseudo-obstruction 
 Dermatomyositis (adults) 
 Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome 
 Cancer or melanoma 
associated retinopathy 
 Brainstem encephalitis 
 Stiff-person syndrome 
 Necrotizing myelopathy 
 Motor neuron disease 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Subacute and chronic mixed 
sensory-motor neuropathies 
 Neuropathy associated with 
plasma cell dyscrasias and 
lymphoma 
 Vasculitis of nerve 
 Pure autonomic neuropathy 
 Acute necrotizing myopathy 
 Polymyositis 
 Vasculitis of muscle 
 Optic neuropathy 
 BDUMP 
 Abbreviation: BDUMP, bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation.
 PATHOGENESIS 
 Most PNDs are mediated by immune responses triggered 
by neuronal proteins (onconeuronal antigens) expressed 
by tumors. In PNDs of the central nervous system 
(CNS), many antibody-associated immune responses have 
been identiﬁ ed  ( Table 44-2 ) . These antibodies react 
with the patient’s tumor, and their detection in serum 
or cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) usually predicts the presence 
of cancer. When the antigens are intracellular, most syn-
dromes are associated with extensive inﬁ ltrates of CD4+ 
and CD8+ T cells, microglial activation, gliosis, and vari-
able neuronal loss. The inﬁ ltrating T cells are often in 
close contact with neurons undergoing degeneration, 
suggesting a primary pathogenic role. T cell–mediated 
cytotoxicity may contribute directly to cell death in these 
PNDs. Thus both humoral and cellular immune mecha-
nisms participate in the pathogenesis of many PNDs. This 
complex immunopathogenesis may underlie the resistance 
of many of these conditions to therapy. 
 In contrast to the disorders associated with immune 
responses against intracellular antigens, those associated 
with antibodies to antigens expressed on the neuronal 
cell surface of the CNS or at neuromuscular synapses 
are more responsive to immunotherapy  ( Table 44-3 , 
 Fig. 44-1 ) . These disorders occur with and without a 
cancer association, and there is increasing evidence that 
they are mediated by the antibodies. 
 Other PNDs are likely immune-mediated, although 
their antigens are unknown. These include several syn-
dromes of inﬂ ammatory neuropathies and myopathies. 
In addition, many patients with typical PND syndromes 
are antibody-negative. 
For still other PNDs, the cause remains quite 
obscure. These include, among others, several neuropa-
thies that occur in the terminal stages of cancer and a 
number of neuropathies associated with plasma cell 
 
CHAPTER 44
Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes 
559
dyscrasias or lymphoma without evidence of inﬂam-
matory inﬁltrates or deposits of immunoglobulin, cryo-
globulin, or amyloid.
APPROACH TO THE
  PATIENT 
Paraneoplastic Neurologic Disorders
Three key concepts are important for the diagnosis and 
management of PNDs. First, it is common for symptoms to 
appear before the presence of a tumor is known; second, 
the neurologic syndrome usually develops rapidly, pro-
ducing severe deficits in a short period of time; and third, 
TABLE 44-2
ANTIBODIES TO INTRACELLULAR ANTIGENS, SYNDROMES, AND ASSOCIATED CANCERS
ANTIBODY
ASSOCIATED NEUROLOGIC SYNDROME(S)
TUMORS
Anti-Hu
Encephalomyelitis, subacute sensory neuronopathy
SCLC
Anti-Yo
Cerebellar degeneration
Ovary, breast
Anti-Ri
Cerebellar degeneration, opsoclonus
Breast, gynecologic, SCLC
Anti-Tr
Cerebellar degeneration
Hodgkin lymphoma
Anti-CV2/CRMP5
Encephalomyelitis, chorea, optic neuritis, uveitis, 
peripheral neuropathy
SCLC, thymoma, other
Anti-Ma proteins
Limbic, hypothalamic, brainstem encephalitis
Testicular (Ma2), other (Ma)
Anti-amphiphysin
Stiff-person syndrome, encephalomyelitis
Breast, SCLC
Recoverin, bipolar cell  
antibodies, othersa
Cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR)
Melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR)
SCLC (CAR), melanoma (MAR)
Anti-GAD
Stiff-person, cerebellar syndromes
Infrequent tumor association (thymoma)
aA variety of target antigens have been identiﬁed.
Abbreviations: CRMP, collapsing response-mediator protein; SCLC, small cell lung cancer.
there is evidence that prompt tumor control improves the 
neurologic outcome. Therefore, the major concern of the 
physician is to recognize a disorder promptly as paraneo-
plastic to identify and treat the tumor.
PND OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
AND DORSAL ROOT GANGLIA When symp-
toms involve brain, spinal cord, or dorsal root ganglia,  
the suspicion of PND is usually based on a combina-
tion of clinical, radiologic, and CSF findings. In these 
cases, a biopsy of the affected tissue is often difficult to 
obtain, and although useful to rule out other disorders 
TABLE 44-3
ANTIBODIES TO CELL SURFACE OR SYNAPTIC ANTIGENS, SYNDROMES, AND ASSOCIATED TUMORS
ANTIBODY
NEUROLOGIC SYNDROME
TUMOR TYPE WHEN ASSOCIATED
Anti-AChR (muscle)a
Myasthenia gravis
Thymoma
Anti-AChR (neuronal)a
Autonomic neuropathy
SCLC
Anti-VGKC-related proteinsb 
(LGI1, Caspr2)
Neuromyotonia, limbic encephalitis
Thymoma, SCLC
Anti-VGCCc
LEMS, cerebellar degeneration
SCLC
Anti-NMDARd
Anti-NMDAR encephalitis
Teratoma
Anti-AMPARd
Limbic encephalitis with relapses
SCLC, thymoma, breast
Anti-GABABRd
Limbic encephalitis, seizures
SCLC, neuroendocrine
Glycine receptord
Encephalomyelitis with rigidity, stiff-person syndrome
Lung cancer
aA direct pathogenic role of these antibodies has been demonstrated.
bAnti-VGKC-related proteins are pathogenic for some types of neuromyotonia.
cAnti-VGCC antibodies are pathogenic for LEMS.
dThese antibodies are strongly suspected to be pathogenic.
Abbreviations: AChR, acetylcholine receptor; AMPAR, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptor; GABABR, gamma-
aminobutyric acid B receptor; GAD, glutamic acid decarboxylase; LEMS, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome; NMDAR, N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor; SCLC, small cell lung cancer; VGCC, voltage-gated calcium channel; VGKC, voltage-gated potassium channel.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
560
FIGURE 44-1 
Antibodies to NR1/NR2 subunits of the NMDA receptor 
in a patient with paraneoplastic encephalitis and ovarian 
teratoma. Panel A is a section of dentate gyrus of rat hip-
pocampus immunolabeled (brown staining) with the patient’s 
antibodies. The reactivity predominates in the molecular layer, 
which is highly enriched in dendritic processes. Panel B 
shows the antibody reactivity with cultures of rat hippocampal 
neurons; the intense green immunolabeling is due to the anti-
bodies against the NR1 subunits of NMDA receptors.
A
B
(e.g.,  metastasis, infection), neuropathologic findings are 
not specific for PND. Furthermore, there are no specific 
radiologic or electrophysiologic tests that are diagnostic of 
PND. The presence of antineuronal antibodies (Tables 44-2 
and 44-3) may help in the diagnosis, but only 60–70% of 
PNDs of the CNS and less than 20% of those involving the 
peripheral nervous system have neuronal or neuromus-
cular antibodies that can be used as diagnostic tests. 
MRI and CSF studies are important to rule out neuro-
logic complications due to the direct spread of cancer, 
particularly metastatic and leptomeningeal disease. In 
most PNDs the MRI findings are nonspecific. Paraneo-
plastic limbic encephalitis is usually associated with 
characteristic MRI abnormalities in the mesial tempo-
ral lobes (discussed later), but similar findings can occur 
with other disorders (e.g., nonparaneoplastic autoim-
mune limbic encephalitis, and human herpesvirus type 
6 [HHV-6] encephalitis) (Fig. 44-2). The CSF profile of 
patients with PND of the CNS or dorsal root ganglia 
typically consists of mild to moderate pleocytosis (<200 
mononuclear cells, predominantly lymphocytes), an 
increase in the protein concentration, intrathecal synthe-
sis of IgG, and a variable presence of oligoclonal bands.
PND OF NERVE AND MUSCLE If symptoms 
involve peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction, or 
muscle, the diagnosis of a specific PND is usually estab-
lished on clinical, electrophysiologic, and pathologic 
grounds. The clinical history, accompanying symptoms 
(e.g., anorexia, weight loss), and type of syndrome dic-
tate the studies and degree of effort needed to dem-
onstrate a neoplasm. For example, the frequent asso-
ciation of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) 
with SCLC should lead to a chest and abdomen CT or 
body positron emission tomography (PET) scan and, if 
negative, periodic tumor screening for at least 3 years 
FIGURE 44-2 
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence MRI of a 
patient with limbic encephalitis and LGI1 antibodies. Note 
the abnormal hyperintensity involving the medial aspect of 
the temporal lobes.
 
CHAPTER 44
Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes 
561
after the neurologic diagnosis. In contrast, the weak 
association of polymyositis with cancer calls into ques-
tion the need for repeated cancer screenings in this situ-
ation. Serum and urine immunofixation studies should 
be considered in patients with peripheral neuropathy of 
unknown cause; detection of a monoclonal gammopa-
thy suggests the need for additional studies to uncover 
a B cell or plasma cell malignancy. In paraneoplastic 
neuropathies, diagnostically useful antineuronal anti-
bodies are limited to anti-CV2/CRMP5 and anti-Hu. 
For any type of PND, if antineuronal antibodies are 
negative, the diagnosis relies on the demonstration 
of cancer and the exclusion of other cancer-related or 
independent neurologic disorders. Combined CT and 
PET scans often uncover tumors undetected by other 
tests. For germ-cell tumors of the testis and teratomas 
of the ovary ultrasound and MRI may reveal tumors 
undetectable by PET.
SPECIFIC PARANEOPLASTIC 
NEUROLOGIC SYNDROMES
PARANEOPLASTIC ENCEPHALOMYELITIS 
AND FOCAL ENCEPHALITIS
The term encephalomyelitis describes an inﬂammatory 
process with multifocal involvement of the nervous sys-
tem, including brain, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal 
cord. It is often associated with dorsal root ganglia and 
autonomic dysfunction. For any given patient, the clini-
cal manifestations are determined by the areas predomi-
nantly involved, but pathologic studies almost always 
reveal abnormalities beyond the symptomatic regions. 
Several clinicopathologic syndromes may occur alone or 
in combination: (1) cortical encephalitis, which may pres-
ent as “epilepsia partialis continua”; (2) limbic encephalitis, 
characterized by confusion, depression, agitation, anxi-
ety, severe short-term memory deﬁcits, partial complex 
seizures, and sometimes dementia (the MRI usually 
shows unilateral or bilateral medial temporal lobe abnor-
malities, best seen with T2 and ﬂuid-attenuated inver-
sion recovery sequences, and occasionally enhancing 
with gadolinium); (3) brainstem encephalitis, resulting in 
eye movement disorders (nystagmus, opsoclonus, supra-
nuclear or nuclear paresis), cranial nerve paresis, dysar-
thria, dysphagia, and central autonomic dysfunction; 
(4) cerebellar gait and limb ataxia; (5) myelitis, which may 
cause lower or upper motor neuron symptoms, myoc-
lonus, muscle rigidity, and spasms; and (6) autonomic 
dysfunction as a result of involvement of the neuraxis at 
multiple levels, including hypothalamus, brainstem, and 
autonomic nerves (see autonomic neuropathy). Cardiac 
arrhythmias, postural hypotension, or central hypoven-
tilation are frequent causes of death in patients with 
encephalomyelitis.
Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and focal encepha-
litis are usually associated with SCLC, but many other 
cancers have also been reported. Patients with SCLC 
and these syndromes usually have anti-Hu antibodies in 
serum and CSF. Anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies occur 
less frequently; some of these patients may develop cho-
rea, uveitis, or optic neuritis. Antibodies to Ma proteins 
are associated with limbic, hypothalamic, and brainstem 
encephalitis and occasionally with cerebellar symptoms 
(Fig. 44-3); some patients develop hypersomnia, cata-
plexy, and severe hypokinesia. MRI abnormalities are 
frequent, including those described with limbic enceph-
alitis and variable involvement of the hypothalamus, 
basal ganglia, or upper brainstem. The oncologic asso-
ciations of these antibodies are shown in Table 44-2.
A
B
C
FIGURE 44-3 
MRI and tumor of a patient with anti-Ma2-associated 
encephalitis. Panels A and B are ﬂuid-attenuated inversion 
recovery MRI sequences showing abnormal hyperintensi-
ties in the medial temporal lobes, hypothalamus, and upper 
brainstem. Panel C corresponds to a section of the patient’s 
orchiectomy incubated with a speciﬁc marker (Oct4) of germ-
cell tumors. The positive (brown) cells correspond to an intra-
tubular germ-cell neoplasm.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
562
TREATMENT 
Encephalomyelitis and Focal Encephalitis
Most types of paraneoplastic encephalitis and encepha-
lomyelitis respond poorly to treatment. Stabilization 
of symptoms or partial neurologic improvement may 
occasionally occur, particularly if there is a satisfac-
tory response of the tumor to treatment. The roles of 
plasma exchange, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), 
and immunosuppression have not been established. 
Approximately 30% of patients with anti-Ma2-associated 
encephalitis respond to treatment of the tumor (usually 
a germ-cell neoplasm of the testis) and immunotherapy.
ENCEPHALITIDES WITH ANTIBODIES TO 
CELL-SURFACE OR SYNAPTIC PROTEINS 
(TABLE 44-3)
These disorders are important for three reasons: (1) they 
can occur with and without tumor association, (2) some 
syndromes predominate in young individuals and chil-
dren, and (3) despite the severity of the symptoms, 
patients usually respond to treatment of the tumor, if 
found, and immunotherapy (glucocorticoids, plasma 
exchange, IVIg, rituximab, or cyclophosphamide).
Encephalitis with antibodies to voltage-gated potassium chan-
nel (VGKC)-related proteins (LGI1, Caspr2) predominates 
in men and frequently presents with memory loss and sei-
zures (limbic encephalopathy), along with hyponatremia 
and sleep and autonomic dysfunction. Less commonly, 
patients develop neuromyotonia or a mixed clinical picture 
(Morvan’s syndrome). Approximately 20% of patients with 
antibodies to VGKC-related proteins have an underlying 
tumor, usually SCLC or thymoma.
Encephalitis with N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) recep-
tor antibodies (Fig. 44-1) usually occurs in young women 
and children, but men and older patients of both sexes 
can be affected. The disorder has a characteristic pat-
tern of symptom progression that includes a prodrome 
resembling a viral process, followed in a few days by the 
onset of severe psychiatric symptoms, memory loss, sei-
zures, decreased level of consciousness, abnormal move-
ments (orofacial, limb, and trunk dyskinesias, dystonic 
postures), autonomic instability, and frequent hypoven-
tilation. The syndrome is often misdiagnosed as a viral 
or idiopathic encephalitis, neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome, or encephalitis lethargica, and many patients are 
initially evaluated by psychiatrists with the suspicion of 
drug abuse or an acute psychosis. The detection of an 
associated ovarian teratoma is age-dependant; 50% of 
female patients older than age 18 have uni- or bilateral 
ovarian teratomas, while less than 9% of girls younger 
than 14 years have a teratoma. In male patients the 
detection of a tumor is rare.
Encephalitis with α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-
4-propionate (AMPA) receptor antibodies affects middle-aged 
women, who develop acute limbic dysfunction or less 
frequently prominent psychiatric symptoms; 70% of the 
patients have an underlying tumor in the lung, breast, or 
thymus. The neurologic disorder responds to treatment 
of the tumor and immunotherapy. Neurologic relapses 
may occur; these also respond to immunotherapy and are 
not necessarily associated with tumor recurrence.
Encephalitis with γ-aminobutyric acid type B (GABAB) 
receptor antibodies usually presents with limbic encepha-
litis and seizures; 50% of the patients have SCLC or a 
neuroendocrine tumor of the lung. Neurologic symp-
toms often respond to immunotherapy and treatment 
of the tumor if found. Patients may have additional 
antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), of 
unclear signiﬁcance. Other antibodies to nonneuronal 
proteins are often found in these patients as well as in 
patients with AMPA receptor antibodies, indicating a 
general tendency to autoimmunity.
PARANEOPLASTIC CEREBELLAR 
DEGENERATION
This disorder is often preceded by a prodrome that 
may include dizziness, oscillopsia, blurry or double 
vision, nausea, and vomiting. A few days or weeks 
later, patients develop dysarthria, gait and limb ataxia, 
and variable dysphagia. The examination usually shows 
downbeating nystagmus and, rarely, opsoclonus. Brain-
stem dysfunction, upgoing toes, or a mild neuropa-
thy may occur, but more often the clinical features are 
restricted to the cerebellum. Early in the course, MRI 
studies are usually normal; later, the MRI typically 
reveals cerebellar atrophy. The disorder results from 
extensive degeneration of Purkinje cells, with variable 
involvement of other cerebellar cortical neurons, deep 
cerebellar nuclei, and spinocerebellar tracts. The tumors 
more frequently involved are SCLC, cancer of the 
breast and ovary, and Hodgkin lymphoma.
Anti-Yo antibodies in patients with breast and gyne-
cologic cancers and anti-Tr antibodies in patients with 
Hodgkin lymphoma are the two immune responses 
typically associated with prominent or pure cerebellar 
degeneration. Antibodies to P/Q-type voltage-gated 
calcium channels (VGCC) occur in some patients with 
SCLC and cerebellar dysfunction; only some of these 
patients develop LEMS. A variable degree of cerebellar 
dysfunction can be associated with virtually any of the 
antibodies and PND of the CNS shown in Table 44-2. 
A number of single case reports have described 
neurologic improvement after tumor removal, plasma 
exchange, IVIg, cyclophosphamide, rituximab, or glu-
cocorticoids. However, large series of patients with 
antibody-positive paraneoplastic cerebellar degenera-
tion show that this disorder rarely improves with any 
treatment.
 
CHAPTER 44
Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes 
563
PARANEOPLASTIC OPSOCLONUS-
MYOCLONUS SYNDROME
Opsoclonus is a disorder of eye movement characterized 
by involuntary, chaotic saccades that occur in all direc-
tions of gaze; it is frequently associated with myoclonus 
and ataxia. Opsoclonus-myoclonus may be cancer-
related or idiopathic. When the cause is paraneoplas-
tic, the tumors involved are usually cancer of the lung 
and breast in adults and neuroblastoma in children. 
The pathologic substrate of opsoclonus-myoclonus is 
unclear, but studies suggest that disinhibition of the fasti-
gial nucleus of the cerebellum is involved. Most patients 
do not have detectable antineuronal antibodies. A small 
subset of patients with ataxia, opsoclonus, and other 
eye-movement disorders develop anti-Ri antibodies; in 
rare instances muscle rigidity, autonomic dysfunction, 
and dementia also occur. The tumors most frequently 
involved in anti-Ri-associated syndromes are breast and 
ovarian cancer. If the tumor is not successfully treated, 
the neurologic syndrome in adults often progresses to 
encephalopathy, coma, and death. In addition to treating 
the tumor, symptoms may respond to immunotherapy 
(glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and/or IVIg).
At least 50% of children with opsoclonus-myoclonus 
have an underlying neuroblastoma. Hypotonia, ataxia, 
behavioral changes, and irritability are frequent accom-
panying symptoms. Neurologic symptoms often improve 
with treatment of the tumor and glucocorticoids, adre-
nocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), plasma exchange, 
IVIg, and rituximab. Many patients are left with psycho-
motor retardation and behavioral and sleep problems.
PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES  
OF THE SPINAL CORD
The number of reports of paraneoplastic spinal cord 
syndromes, such as subacute motor neuronopathy and acute 
necrotizing myelopathy, has decreased in recent years. 
This may represent a true decrease in incidence, due to 
improved and prompt oncologic interventions, or the 
identiﬁcation of nonparaneoplastic etiologies.
Some patients with cancer develop upper or lower 
motor neuron dysfunction or both, resembling amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. It is unclear whether these disorders 
have a paraneoplastic etiology or simply coincide with 
the presence of cancer. There are isolated case reports 
of cancer patients with motor neuron dysfunction who 
had neurologic improvement after tumor treatment. A 
search for lymphoma should be undertaken in patients 
with a rapidly progressive motor neuron syndrome and 
a monoclonal protein in serum or CSF.
Paraneoplastic myelitis may present with upper or 
lower motor neuron symptoms, segmental myoclo-
nus, and rigidity, and can be the ﬁrst manifestation of 
encephalomyelitis.
Paraneoplastic myelopathy can also produce several 
syndromes characterized by prominent muscle stiffness 
and rigidity. The spectrum ranges from focal symp-
toms in one or several extremities (stiff-limb syndrome 
or stiff-person syndrome) to a disorder that also affects the 
brainstem (known as encephalomyelitis with rigidity) and 
likely has a different pathogenesis. Some patients with 
encephalomyelitis and rigidity have glycine receptor 
antibodies.
PARANEOPLASTIC STIFF-PERSON 
SYNDROME
This disorder is characterized by progressive muscle rigid-
ity, stiffness, and painful spasms triggered by auditory, sen-
sory, or emotional stimuli. Rigidity mainly involves the 
lower trunk and legs, but it can affect the upper extremi-
ties and neck. Symptoms improve with sleep and general 
anesthetics. Electrophysiologic studies demonstrate con-
tinuous motor unit activity. Antibodies associated with the 
stiff-person syndrome target proteins (GAD, amphiphysin) 
involved in the function of inhibitory synapses utilizing 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) or glycine as neurotransmit-
ters. Paraneoplastic stiff-person syndrome and amphiphy-
sin antibodies are often related to SCLC and breast cancer. 
By contrast, antibodies to GAD may occur in some cancer 
patients but are much more frequently present in the non-
paraneoplastic disorder.
TREATMENT 
Stiff-Person Syndrome
Optimal treatment of stiff-person syndrome requires 
therapy of the underlying tumor, glucocorticoids, and 
symptomatic use of drugs that enhance GABA-ergic 
transmission (diazepam, baclofen, sodium valproate, 
tiagabine, vigabatrin). A benefit of IVIg has been demon-
strated for the nonparaneoplastic disorder but remains 
to be established for the paraneoplastic syndrome.
PARANEOPLASTIC SENSORY 
NEURONOPATHY OR DORSAL ROOT 
GANGLIONOPATHY
This syndrome is characterized by sensory deﬁcits that 
may be symmetric or asymmetric, painful dysesthesias, 
radicular pain, and decreased or absent reﬂexes. All 
modalities of sensation and any part of the body includ-
ing face and trunk can be involved. Specialized sensa-
tions such as taste and hearing can also be affected. 
Electrophysiologic studies show decreased or absent 
sensory nerve potentials with normal or near-normal 
motor conduction velocities. Symptoms result from an 
inﬂammatory, likely immune-mediated, process that 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
564
targets the dorsal root ganglia, causing neuronal loss, 
proliferation of satellite cells, and secondary degenera-
tion of the posterior columns of the spinal cord. The 
dorsal and less frequently the anterior nerve roots and 
peripheral nerves may also be involved. This disorder 
often precedes or is associated with encephalomyelitis 
and autonomic dysfunction and has the same immuno-
logic and oncologic associations, e.g., anti-Hu antibod-
ies and SCLC.
TREATMENT 
Sensory Neuronopathy
As with anti-Hu-associated encephalomyelitis, the thera-
peutic approach focuses on prompt treatment of the 
tumor. Glucocorticoids occasionally produce clinical 
stabilization or improvement. The benefit of IVIg and 
plasma exchange is not proved.
PARANEOPLASTIC PERIPHERAL 
NEUROPATHIES
These disorders may develop any time during the 
course of the neoplastic disease. Neuropathies occurring 
at late stages of cancer or lymphoma usually cause mild 
to moderate sensorimotor deﬁcits due to axonal degen-
eration of unclear etiology. These neuropathies are 
often masked by concurrent neurotoxicity from che-
motherapy and other cancer therapies. In contrast, the 
neuropathies that develop in the early stages of cancer 
frequently show a rapid progression, sometimes with a 
relapsing and remitting course, and evidence of inﬂam-
matory inﬁltrates and axonal loss or demyelination 
in biopsy studies. If demyelinating features predomi-
nate (Chap. 45), IVIg, plasma exchange, or glucocorti-
coids may improve symptoms. Occasionally anti-CV2/
CRMP5 antibodies are present; detection of anti-Hu 
suggests concurrent dorsal root ganglionitis.
Guillain-Barré syndrome and brachial plexitis have occa-
sionally been reported in patients with lymphoma, but 
there is no clear evidence of a paraneoplastic association.
Malignant monoclonal gammopathies include: (1) multiple 
myeloma and sclerotic myeloma associated with IgG or 
IgA monoclonal proteins; and (2) Waldenström’s mac-
roglobulinemia, B cell lymphoma, and chronic B cell 
lymphocytic leukemia associated with IgM monoclo-
nal proteins. These disorders may cause neuropathy by a 
variety of mechanisms, including compression of roots 
and plexuses by metastasis to vertebral bodies and pelvis, 
deposits of amyloid in peripheral nerves, and paraneo-
plastic mechanisms. The paraneoplastic variety has several 
distinctive features. Approximately half of patients with 
sclerotic myeloma develop a sensorimotor neuropathy 
with predominantly motor deﬁcits, resembling a chronic 
inﬂammatory demyelinating neuropathy (Chap. 46); some 
patients develop elements of the POEMS syndrome (poly-
neuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, 
skin changes). Treatment of the plasmacytoma or scle-
rotic lesions usually improves the neuropathy. In contrast, 
the sensorimotor or sensory neuropathy associated with 
multiple myeloma rarely responds to treatment. Between 
5 and 10% of patients with Waldenström’s macroglobu-
linemia develop a distal symmetric sensorimotor neuropa-
thy with predominant involvement of large sensory ﬁbers. 
These patients may have IgM antibodies in their serum 
against myelin-associated glycoprotein and various ganglio-
sides (Chap. 46). In addition to treating the Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinemia, other therapies may improve the neu-
ropathy, including plasma exchange, IVIg, chlorambucil, 
cyclophosphamide, ﬂudarabine, or rituximab.
Vasculitis of the nerve and muscle causes a painful sym-
metric or asymmetric distal axonal sensorimotor neurop-
athy with variable proximal weakness. It predominantly 
affects elderly men and is associated with an elevated 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and increased CSF pro-
tein concentration. SCLC and lymphoma are the pri-
mary tumors involved. Glucocorticoids and cyclophos-
phamide often result in neurologic improvement.
Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability (neuromyotonia, or Isaacs’ 
syndrome) is characterized by spontaneous and continuous 
muscle ﬁber activity of peripheral nerve origin. Clinical 
features include cramps, muscle twitching (fasciculations 
or myokymia), stiffness, delayed muscle relaxation (pseu-
domyotonia), and spontaneous or evoked carpal or pedal 
spasms. The involved muscles may be hypertrophic, and 
some patients develop paresthesias and hyperhidrosis. 
CNS dysfunction, including mood changes, sleep disor-
der, or hallucinations, may occur. The electromyogram 
(EMG) shows ﬁbrillations; fasciculations; and doublet, 
triplet, or multiplet single-unit (myokymic) discharges 
that have a high intraburst frequency. Approximately 
20% of patients have serum antibodies to Caspr2-related 
proteins. The disorder often occurs without cancer; if 
paraneoplastic, benign, and malignant thymomas and 
SCLC are the usual tumors. Phenytoin, carbamazepine, 
and plasma exchange improve symptoms.
Paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathy usually develops 
as a component of other disorders, such as LEMS and 
encephalomyelitis. It may rarely occur as a pure or pre-
dominantly autonomic neuropathy with adrenergic or 
cholinergic dysfunction at the pre- or postganglionic 
levels. Patients can develop several life-threatening com-
plications, such as gastrointestinal paresis with pseudoob-
struction, cardiac dysrhythmias, and postural hypoten-
sion. Other clinical features include abnormal pupillary 
responses, dry mouth, anhidrosis, erectile dysfunction, 
and problems in sphincter control. The disorder occurs 
in association with several tumors, including SCLC, 
cancer of the pancreas or testis, carcinoid tumors, and 
lymphoma. Because autonomic symptoms can be the 
 
CHAPTER 44
Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes 
565
gastrointestinal tract, breast, kidney, and prostate, among 
others. Glucocorticoids and treatment of the underlying 
tumor rarely control the disorder.
PARANEOPLASTIC VISUAL SYNDROMES
This group of disorders involves the retina and, less 
frequently, the uvea and optic nerves. The term cancer-
associated retinopathy is used to describe paraneoplastic 
cone and rod dysfunction characterized by photosen-
sitivity, progressive loss of vision and color perception, 
central or ring scotomas, night blindness, and attenua-
tion of photopic and scotopic responses in the elec-
troretinogram (ERG). The most commonly associated 
tumor is SCLC. Melanoma-associated retinopathy 
affects patients with metastatic cutaneous melanoma. 
Patients develop acute onset of night blindness and 
shimmering, ﬂickering, or pulsating photopsias that often 
progress to visual loss. The ERG shows reduced b waves 
with normal dark adapted a waves. Paraneoplastic optic 
neuritis and uveitis are very uncommon and can develop 
in association with encephalomyelitis. Some patients 
with paraneoplastic uveitis harbor anti-CV2/CRMP5 
antibodies.
Some paraneoplastic retinopathies are associated with 
serum antibodies that speciﬁcally react with the sub-
set of retinal cells undergoing degeneration, support-
ing an immune-mediated pathogenesis (Table 44-2). 
Paraneoplastic retinopathies usually fail to improve with 
treatment, although rare responses to glucocorticoids, 
plasma exchange, and IVIg have been reported.
presenting feature of encephalomyelitis, serum anti-Hu 
and anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies should be sought. 
Antibodies to ganglionic (alpha3-type) neuronal acetyl-
choline receptors are the cause of autoimmune auto-
nomic ganglionopathy, a disorder that frequently occurs 
without cancer association (Chap. 33).
LAMBERT-EATON MYASTHENIC 
SYNDROME
LEMS is discussed in Chap. 47.
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
Myasthenia gravis is discussed in Chap. 47.
POLYMYOSITIS-DERMATOMYOSITIS
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are discussed in detail 
in Chap. 49.
ACUTE NECROTIZING MYOPATHY
Patients with this syndrome develop myalgias and rapid 
progression of weakness involving the extremities and 
the pharyngeal and respiratory muscles, often resulting in 
death. Serum muscle enzymes are elevated, and muscle 
biopsy shows extensive necrosis with minimal or absent 
inﬂammation and sometimes deposits of complement. 
The disorder occurs as a paraneoplastic manifestation of 
a variety of cancers including SCLC and cancer of the 
 Anthony A. Amato  ■   Richard J. Barohn 
566
 Peripheral nerves are composed of sensory, motor, and 
autonomic elements. Diseases can affect the cell body of 
a neuron or its peripheral processes, namely the axons 
or the encasing myelin sheaths. Most peripheral nerves 
are mixed and contain sensory and motor as well as 
autonomic ﬁ bers. Nerves can be subdivided into three 
major classes: large myelinated, small myelinated, and 
small unmyelinated. Motor axons are usually large 
myelinated ﬁ bers that conduct rapidly (approximately 
50 m/s). Sensory ﬁ bers may be any of the three types. 
Large-diameter sensory ﬁ bers conduct proprioception 
and vibratory sensat ion to the brain, while the smaller-
diameter myelinated and unmyelinated ﬁ bers transmit 
pain and temperature sensation. Autonomic nerves are 
also small in diameter. Thus, peripheral neuropathies 
can impair sensory, motor, or autonomic function, 
either singly or in combination. Peripheral neuropa-
thies are further classiﬁ ed into those that primarily affect 
the cell body (e.g., neuronopathy or ganglionopathy), 
myelin (myelinopathy), and the axon (axonopathy). 
These different classes of peripheral neuropathies have 
distinct clinical and electrophysiologic features. This 
chapter discusses the clinical approach to a patient sus-
pected of having a peripheral neuropathy, as well as 
speciﬁ c neuropathies, including hereditary and acquired 
neuropathies. The inﬂ ammatory neuropathies are dis-
cussed in  Chap. 46 . 
 GENERAL APPROACH 
 In approaching a patient with a neuropathy, the clini-
cian has three main goals: (1) identify where the lesion 
is, (2) identify the cause, and (3) determine the proper 
treatment. The ﬁ rst goal is accomplished by obtaining 
a thorough history, neurologic examination, and elec-
trodiagnostic and other laboratory studies  ( Fig. 45-1 ) . 
While gathering this information, seven key questions 
are asked ( Table 45-1 ), the answers to which can 
usually identify the category of pathology that is pres-
ent  ( Table 45-2 ) . Despite an extensive evaluation, 
in approximately half of patients no etiology is ever 
found; these patients typically have a predominately 
sensory polyneuropathy and have been labeled as hav-
ing idiopathic or cryptogenic sensory polyneuropathy 
(CSPN). 
 INFORMATION FROM THE HISTORY AND 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION: SEVEN KEY 
QUESTIONS ( TABLE 45-1 ) 
 1. What systems are involved? 
 It is important to determine if the patient’s symptoms 
and signs are motor, sensory, autonomic, or a combina-
tion of these. If the patient has only weakness without 
any evidence of sensory or autonomic dysfunction, a 
motor neuropathy, neuromuscular junction abnormal-
ity, or myopathy should be considered. Some peripheral 
neuropathies are associated with signiﬁ cant autonomic 
nervous system dysfunction. Symptoms of autonomic 
involvement include fainting spells or orthostatic light-
headedness; heat intolerance; or any bowel, bladder, or 
sexual dysfunction ( Chap. 33 ). There will typically be 
an orthostatic fall in blood pressure without an appro-
priate increase in heart rate. Autonomic dysfunction 
in the absence of diabetes should alert the clinician to 
the possibility of amyloid polyneuropathy. Rarely, a 
pandysautonomic syndrome can be the only manifesta-
tion of a peripheral neuropathy without other motor or 
sensory ﬁ ndings. The majority of neuropathies are pre-
dominantly sensory in nature. 
 2. What is the distribution of weakness? 
 Delineating the pattern of weakness, if present, is 
essential for diagnosis, and in this regard two additional 
questions should be answered: (1) Does the weakness 
only involve the distal extremity or is it both proximal 
 PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY 
 CHAPTER 45 
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
567
and distal? and (2) Is the weakness focal and asymmet-
ric or is it symmetric? Symmetric proximal and distal 
weakness is the hallmark of acquired immune demy-
elinating polyneuropathies, both the acute form (acute 
inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy [AIDP] 
also known as Guillain-Barré syndrome [GBS]) and 
the chronic form (chronic inﬂammatory demyelinat-
ing polyneuropathy [CIDP]). The importance of ﬁnd-
ing symmetric proximal and distal weakness in a patient 
who presents with both motor and sensory symptoms 
cannot be overemphasized because this identiﬁes the 
important subset of patients who may have a treat-
able acquired demyelinating neuropathic disorder (i.e., 
AIDP or CIDP).
Findings of an asymmetric or multifocal pattern of 
weakness narrows the differential diagnosis. Some neu-
ropathic disorders may present with unilateral extremity 
weakness. In the absence of sensory symptoms and signs, 
such weakness evolving over weeks or months would 
be worrisome for motor neuron disease (e.g., amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis [ALS]), but it would be impor-
tant to exclude multifocal motor neuropathy that may be 
treatable (Chap. 32). In a patient presenting with asym-
metric subacute or acute sensory and motor symptoms 
and signs, radiculopathies, plexopathies, compressive 
mononeuropathies, or multiple mononeuropathies (e.g., 
mononeuropathy multiplex) must be considered.
3. What is the nature of the sensory 
involvement?
The patient may have loss of sensation (numbness), 
altered sensation to touch (hyperpathia or allodynia), or 
uncomfortable spontaneous sensations (tingling, burn-
ing, or aching) (Chap. 15). Neuropathic pain can be 
burning, dull, and poorly localized (protopathic pain), 
presumably transmitted by polymodal C nociceptor 
ﬁbers, or sharp and lancinating (epicritic pain), relayed 
by A-delta ﬁbers. If pain and temperature perception 
are lost, while vibratory and position sense are preserved 
along with muscle strength, deep tendon reﬂexes, and 
normal nerve conduction studies, a small-ﬁber neuropa-
thy is likely. This is important, as the most likely cause 
of small-ﬁber neuropathies, when one is identiﬁed, is 
diabetes mellitus or glucose intolerance. Amyloid neu-
ropathy should be considered as well in such cases, but 
most of these small-ﬁber neuropathies remain idiopathic 
in nature despite extensive evaluation.
Severe proprioceptive loss also narrows the differ-
ential diagnosis. Affected patients will note imbalance, 
FIGURE 45-1 
Approach to the evaluation of peripheral neuropathies. CIDP, chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; 
GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Patient Complaint: ? Neuropathy
History and examination compatible with neuropathy?
Mononeuropathy
Mononeuropathy multiplex
Polyneuropathy
Evaluation of other
 disorder or
 reassurance and
 follow-up
EDx
Is the lesion axonal
 or demyelinating?
Is entrapment or
 compression present?
Is a contributing systemic 
  disorder present?
Axonal
Demyelinating
 with focal
 conduction block
Axonal
Demyelinating
Consider
 vasculitis or 
 other multifocal
 process
Consider
 multifocal
 form of
 CIDP
Subacute
 course (months)
Chronic
 course (years)
Uniform slowing,
 chronic
Nonuniform slowing,
conduction block
Decision on need
 for surgery (nerve repair,
 transposition, or release
 procedure)
Possible
 nerve
 biopsy
Test for paraprotein,
 HIV, Lyme disease
Review history for toxins;
 test for associated
 systemic disease or
 intoxication
Test for paraprotein,
   if negative
Review family
 history; examine
 family members;
 genetic testing
If chronic or
 subacute: CIDP
If acute: GBS
Treatment appropriate
 for specific diagnosis
If tests are
 negative, consider
 treatment for
 CIDP
Treatment appropriate
 for specific diagnosis
Genetic counseling if appropriate
Treatment
  for CIDP;
  see Ch. 46
IVIg or
 plasmapheresis;
 supportive
 care including
 respiratory assistance
EDx
EDx
No
Yes
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
568
especially in the dark. A neurologic examination reveal-
ing a dramatic loss of proprioception with vibration loss 
and normal strength should alert the clinician to con-
sider a sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy (Table 
45-2, Pattern 8). In particular, if this loss is asymmetric 
or affects the arms more than the legs, this pattern sug-
gests a non-length-dependent process as seen in sensory 
neuronopathies.
4. Is there evidence of upper motor neuron 
involvement?
If the patient presents with symmetric distal sensory 
symptoms and signs suggestive of a distal sensory neu-
ropathy, but there is additional evidence of symmet-
ric upper motor neuron involvement (Chap. 12), the 
physician should consider a disorder such as combined 
system degeneration with neuropathy. The most com-
mon cause for this pattern is vitamin B12 deﬁciency, 
but other causes of combined system degeneration 
with neuropathy should be considered (e.g., cop-
per deﬁciency, HIV infection, severe hepatic disease, 
adrenomyeloneuropathy).
5. What is the temporal evolution?
It is important to determine the onset, duration, and evo-
lution of symptoms and signs. Does the disease have an 
acute (days to 4 weeks), subacute (4–8 weeks), or chronic 
(>8 weeks) course? Is the course monophasic, progres-
sive, or relapsing? Most neuropathies are insidious and 
slowly progressive in nature. Neuropathies with acute 
and subacute presentations include GBS, vasculitis, and 
radiculopathies related to diabetes or Lyme disease. A 
relapsing course can be present in CIDP and porphyria.
6. Is there evidence for a hereditary 
neuropathy?
In patients with slowly progressive distal weakness 
over many years with very little in the way of sensory 
symptoms yet with signiﬁcant sensory deﬁcits on clini-
cal examination, the clinician should consider a heredi-
tary neuropathy (e.g., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease or 
CMT). On examination, the feet may show arch and toe 
abnormalities (high or ﬂat arches, hammertoes); scoliosis 
may be present. In suspected cases, it may be necessary 
to perform both neurologic and electrophysiologic stud-
ies on family members in addition to the patient.
7. Does the patient have any other medical 
conditions?
It is important to inquire about associated medical con-
ditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, systemic lupus erythema-
tosus); preceding or concurrent infections (e.g. diarrheal 
illness preceding GBS); surgeries (e.g., gastric bypass and 
nutritional neuropathies); medications (toxic neuropa-
thy), including over-the-counter vitamin preparations 
(B6), alcohol; dietary habits; and use of dentures (e.g., 
ﬁxatives contain zinc that can lead to copper deﬁciency).
PATTERN RECOGNITION APPROACH TO 
NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS
Based upon the answers to the seven key questions, 
neuropathic disorders can be classiﬁed into several pat-
terns based on the distribution or pattern of sensory, 
motor, and autonomic involvement (Table 45-2). Each 
pattern has a limited differential diagnosis. A ﬁnal diag-
nosis is established by utilizing other clues such as the 
temporal course, presence of other disease states, family 
history, and information from laboratory studies.
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
The electrodiagnostic (EDx) evaluation of patients with 
a suspected peripheral neuropathy consists of nerve con-
duction studies (NCS) and needle electromyography 
(EMG). In addition, studies of autonomic function can 
TABLE 45-1
APPROACH TO NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS: SEVEN 
KEY QUESTIONS
1. What systems are involved?
– Motor, sensory, autonomic, or combinations
2. What is the distribution of weakness?
– Only distal versus proximal and distal
– Focal/asymmetric versus symmetric
3. What is the nature of the sensory involvement?
–  Temperature loss or burning or stabbing pain (e.g., small 
ﬁber)
– Vibratory or proprioceptive loss (e.g., large ﬁber)
4. Is there evidence of upper motor neuron involvement?
– Without sensory loss
– With sensory loss
5. What is the temporal evolution?
– Acute (days to 4 weeks)
– Subacute (4 to 8 weeks)
– Chronic (>8 weeks)
6. Is there evidence for a hereditary neuropathy?
– Family history of neuropathy
– Lack of sensory symptoms despite sensory signs
7. Are there any associated medical conditions?
–  Cancer, diabetes mellitus, connective tissue disease or 
other autoimmune diseases, infection (e.g., HIV, Lyme 
disease, leprosy)
–  Medications including over-the-counter drugs that may 
cause a toxic neuropathy
– Preceding events, drugs, toxins
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
569
TABLE 45-2
PATTERNS OF NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS
Pattern 1: Symmetric proximal and distal weakness with sensory loss
  Consider: inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (GBS and CIDP)
Pattern 2: Symmetric distal sensory loss with or without distal weakness
   Consider: cryptogenic or idiopathic sensory polyneuropathy (CSPN), diabetes mellitus and other metabolic disorders, 
drugs, toxins, hereditary (Charcot-Marie-Tooth, amyloidosis, and others)
Pattern 3: Asymmetric distal weakness with sensory loss
With involvement of multiple nerves
   Consider: multifocal CIDP, vasculitis, cryoglobulinemia, amyloidosis, sarcoid, infectious (leprosy, Lyme, hepatitis B or C, 
HIV, CMV), hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), tumor inﬁltration
With involvement of single nerves/regions
  Consider: may be any of the above but also could be compressive mononeuropathy, plexopathy, or radiculopathy
Pattern 4: Asymmetric proximal and distal weakness with sensory loss
   Consider: polyradiculopathy or plexopathy due to diabetes mellitus, meningeal carcinomatosis or lymphomatosis, heredi-
tary plexopathy (HNPP, HNA), idiopathic
Pattern 5: Asymmetric distal weakness without sensory loss
With upper motor neuron ﬁndings
  Consider: motor neuron disease
Without upper motor neuron ﬁndings
   Consider: progressive muscular atrophy, juvenile monomelic amyotrophy (Hirayama disease), multifocal motor neuropa-
thy, multifocal acquired motor axonopathy
Pattern 6: Symmetric sensory loss and distal areﬂexia with upper motor neuron ﬁndings
   Consider: Vitamin B12, vitamin E, and copper deﬁciency with combined system degeneration with peripheral neuropathy, 
hereditary leukodystrophies (e.g., adrenomyeloneuropathy)
Pattern 7: Symmetric weakness without sensory loss
With proximal and distal weakness
  Consider: spinal muscular atrophy
With distal weakness
  Consider: hereditary motor neuropathy (“distal” SMA) or atypical CMT
Pattern 8: Asymmetric proprioceptive sensory loss without weakness
  Consider causes of a sensory neuronopathy (ganglionopathy):
  Cancer (paraneoplastic)
  Sjögren’s syndrome
  Idiopathic sensory neuronopathy (possible GBS variant)
  Cisplatin and other chemotherapeutic agents
  Vitamin B6 toxicity
  HIV-related sensory neuronopathy
Pattern 9: Autonomic symptoms and signs
  Consider neuropathies associated with prominent autonomic dysfunction:
  Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
  Amyloidosis (familial and acquired)
  Diabetes mellitus
  Idiopathic pandysautonomia (may be a variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome)
  Porphyria
  HIV-related autonomic neuropathy
  Vincristine and other chemotherapeutic agents
Abbreviations: CIDP, chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; CMT, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease; CMV, cytomegalovirus; GBS, 
Guillain-Barré syndrome; HIV, human immunodeﬁciency virus; HNA, hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
570
be valuable. The electrophysiologic data provides addi-
tional information about the distribution of the neu-
ropathy that will support or refute the ﬁndings from 
the history and physical examination; it can conﬁrm 
whether the neuropathic disorder is a mononeuropa-
thy, multiple mononeuropathy (mononeuropathy mul-
tiplex), radiculopathy, plexopathy, or generalized poly-
neuropathy. Similarly, EDx evaluation can ascertain 
whether the process involves only sensory ﬁbers, motor 
ﬁbers, autonomic ﬁbers, or a combination of these. 
Finally, the electrophysiologic data can help distinguish 
axonopathies from myelinopathies as well as axonal 
degeneration secondary to ganglionopathies from the 
more common length-dependent axonopathies.
NCS are most helpful in classifying a neuropathy as 
being due to axonal degeneration or segmental demy-
elination (Table 45-3). In general, low-amplitude 
potentials with relatively preserved distal latencies, con-
duction velocities, and late potentials, along with ﬁbril-
lations on needle EMG, suggest an axonal neuropathy. 
On the other hand, slow conduction velocities, pro-
longed distal latencies and late potentials, relatively pre-
served amplitudes, and the absence of ﬁbrillations on 
needle EMG imply a primary demyelinating neuropa-
thy. The presence of nonuniform slowing of conduc-
tion velocity, conduction block, or temporal dispersion 
further suggests an acquired demyelinating neuropathy 
(e.g., GBS or CIDP) as opposed to a hereditary demy-
elinating neuropathy (e.g., CMT type 1).
Autonomic studies are used to assess small myelinated 
(A-delta) or unmyelinated (C) nerve ﬁber involvement. 
Such testing includes heart rate response to deep breath-
ing, heart rate, and blood pressure response to both the 
Valsalva maneuver and tilt-table testing, and quantita-
tive sudomotor axon reﬂex testing (Chap. 33). These 
studies are particularly useful in patients who have pure 
small-ﬁber neuropathy or autonomic neuropathy in 
which routine NCS are normal.
OTHER IMPORTANT LABORATORY 
INFORMATION
In patients with generalized symmetric peripheral neu-
ropathy, a standard laboratory evaluation should include 
a complete blood count, basic chemistries including 
serum electrolytes and tests of renal and hepatic func-
tion, fasting blood glucose (FBS), HbA1c, urinalysis, 
thyroid function tests, B12, folate, erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor, antinuclear anti-
bodies (ANA), serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), 
and urine for Bence Jones protein. An oral glucose 
tolerance test is indicated in patients with painful 
TABLE 45-3
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC FEATURES: AXONAL DEGENERATION VS. SEGMENTAL DEMYELINATION
AXONAL DEGENERATION
SEGMENTAL DEMYELINATION
Motor Nerve Conduction Studies
CMAP amplitude
Decreased
Normal (except with CB)
Distal latency
Normal
Prolonged
Conduction velocity
Normal
Slow
Conduction block
Absent
Present
Temporal dispersion
Absent
Present
F wave
Normal or absent
Prolonged or absent
H reﬂex
Normal or absent
Prolonged or absent
Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies
SNAP amplitude
Decreased
Normal
Distal latency
Normal
Prolonged
Conduction velocity
Normal
Slow
Needle EMG
Spontaneous activity
 Fibrillations
Present
Absent
 Fasciculations
Present
Absent
Motor unit potentials
 Recruitment
Decreased
Decreased
 Morphology
Long duration/polyphasic
Normal
Abbreviations: CB, conduction block; CMAP, compound motor action potential; EMG, electromyography; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
571
sensory neuropathies even if FBS and HbA1c are normal, 
as the test is abnormal in about one-third of such patients. 
Serum and urine immunoﬁxation electrophoresis (IFE) 
are necessary, rather than just an SPEP, in patients with a 
demyelinating neuropathy or if one suspects amyloidosis 
(e.g., severe autonomic symptoms) as an IFE is more sen-
sitive at identifying a monoclonal gammopathy. A skel-
etal survey should be performed in patients with acquired 
demyelinating neuropathies and M-spikes to look for 
osteosclerotic or lytic lesions. Patients with monoclonal 
gammopathy should also be referred to a hematologist for 
consideration of a bone marrow biopsy. In addition to 
the previously mentioned tests, patients with a mononeu-
ropathy multiplex pattern of involvement should have a 
vasculitis workup, including antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies (ANCA), cryoglobulins, hepatitis serology, 
Western blot for Lyme disease, HIV, and occasionally a 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) titer.
There are many autoantibody panels (various anti-
ganglioside antibodies) marketed for screening routine 
neuropathy patients for a treatable condition. These 
autoantibodies have no proven clinical utility or added 
beneﬁt beyond the information obtained from a com-
plete clinical examination and detailed EDx. A heavy 
metal screen is also not necessary as a screening proce-
dure, unless there is a history of possible exposure or 
suggestive features on examination (e.g., severe painful 
sensorimotor and autonomic neuropathy and alope-
cia—thallium; severe painful sensorimotor neuropathy 
with or without GI disturbance and Mee’s lines—arse-
nic; wrist or ﬁnger extensor weakness and anemia with 
basophilic stippling of red blood cells—lead).
In patients with suspected GBS or CIDP, a lumbar 
puncture is indicated to look for an elevated cerebral 
spinal ﬂuid (CSF) protein. In idiopathic cases of GBS 
and CIDP, there should not be pleocytosis in the CSF. 
If cells are present, one should consider HIV infection, 
Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, or lymphomatous or leuke-
mic inﬁltration of nerve roots. Some patients with GBS 
and CIDP have abnormal liver function tests. In these 
cases, it is important to also check for hepatitis B and C, 
HIV, CMV, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. In 
patients with an axonal GBS (by EMG/NCS) or those 
with a suspicious coinciding history (e.g., unexplained 
abdominal pain, psychiatric illness, signiﬁcant autonomic 
dysfunction), it is reasonable to screen for porphyria.
In patients with a severe sensory ataxia, a sensory gan-
glionopathy or neuronopathy should be considered. The 
most common causes of sensory ganglionopathies are 
Sjögren’s syndrome and a paraneoplastic neuropathy. Neu-
ropathy can be the initial manifestation of Sjögren’s syn-
drome. Thus, one should always inquire about dry eyes 
and mouth in patients with sensory signs and symptoms. 
Further, some patients can manifest sicca complex with-
out full-blown Sjögren’s syndrome. Thus, patients with 
sensory ataxia should have an senile systemic amyloidosis 
(SSA) and single strand binding (SSB) in addition to the 
routine ANA. To workup a possible paraneoplastic sensory 
ganglionopathy, anti-neuronal nuclear antibodies (e.g., 
anti-Hu antibodies) should be obtained (Chap. 44). These 
antibodies are most commonly seen in patients with small 
cell carcinoma of the lung but are seen also in breast, ovar-
ian, lymphoma, and other cancers. Importantly, the para-
neoplastic neuropathy can precede the detection of the 
cancer, and detection of these autoantibodies should lead 
to a search for malignancy.
NERVE BIOPSIES
Nerve biopsies are now rarely indicated for evaluation of 
neuropathies. The primary indication for nerve biopsy 
is suspicion for amyloid neuropathy or vasculitis. In 
most instances, the abnormalities present on biopsies do 
not help distinguish one form of peripheral neuropathy 
from another (beyond what is already apparent by clini-
cal examination and the NCS). Nerve biopsies should 
only be done if the NCS studies are abnormal. The sural 
nerve is most commonly biopsied because it is a pure 
sensory nerve and biopsy will not result in loss of motor 
function. In suspected vasculitis, a combination biopsy of 
a superﬁcial peroneal nerve (pure sensory) and the under-
lying peroneus brevis muscle obtained from a single small 
incision increases the diagnostic yield. Tissue can be ana-
lyzed by frozen section and parafﬁn section to assess the 
supporting structures for evidence of inﬂammation, vas-
culitis, or amyloid deposition. Semithin plastic sections, 
teased ﬁber preparations, and electron microscopy are 
used to assess the morphology of the nerve ﬁbers and to 
distinguish axonopathies from myelinopathies.
SKIN BIOPSIES
Skin biopsies are sometimes used to diagnose a small-
ﬁber neuropathy. Following a punch biopsy of the skin 
in the distal lower extremity, immunologic staining can 
be used to measure the density of small unmyelinated 
ﬁbers. The density of these nerve ﬁbers is reduced in 
patients with small-ﬁber neuropathies in whom nerve 
conduction studies and routine nerve biopsies are often 
normal. This technique may allow for an objective 
measurement in patients with mainly subjective symp-
toms. However, it adds little to what one already knows 
from the clinical examination and EDx.
SPECIFIC DISORDERS
HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most com-
mon type of hereditary neuropathy. Rather than one dis-
ease, CMT is a syndrome of several genetically distinct 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
572
disorders (Table 45-4). The various subtypes of CMT 
are classiﬁed according to the nerve conduction veloci-
ties and predominant pathology (e.g., demyelination 
or axonal degeneration), inheritance pattern (autoso-
mal dominant, recessive, or X-linked), and the speciﬁc 
mutated genes. Type 1 CMT (or CMT1) refers to inher-
ited demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathies, while 
the axonal sensory neuropathies are classiﬁed as CMT2. 
By deﬁnition, motor conduction velocities in the arms 
are slowed to less than 38 m/s in CMT1 and are greater 
than 38 m/s in CMT2. However, most cases of CMT1 
actually have motor nerve conduction velocities (NCVs) 
between 20 and 25 m/s. CMT1 and CMT2 usually begin 
in childhood or early adult life; however, onset later in 
life can occur, particularly in CMT2. Both are associated 
with autosomal dominant inheritance, with a few excep-
tions. CMT3 is an autosomal dominant neuropathy that 
appears in infancy and is associated with severe demyelin-
ation or hypomyelination. CMT4 is an autosomal reces-
sive neuropathy that typically begins in childhood or early 
adult life. There are no medical therapies for any of the 
CMTs, but physical and occupational therapy can be ben-
eﬁcial as can bracing (e.g., ankle-foot orthotics for foot-
drop) and other orthotic devices.
CMT1
CMT1 is the most common form of hereditary neu-
ropathy, with the ratio of CMT1:CMT2 being approx-
imately 2:1. Affected individuals usually present in the 
ﬁrst to third decade of life with distal leg weakness (e.g., 
footdrop), although patients may remain asymptomatic 
even late in life. People with CMT generally do not 
complain of numbness or tingling, which can be helpful 
in distinguishing CMT from acquired forms of neurop-
athy in which sensory symptoms usually predominate. 
Although usually asymptomatic in this regard, reduced 
sensation to all modalities is apparent on examination. 
Muscle stretch reﬂexes are unobtainable or reduced 
throughout. There is often atrophy of the muscles 
below the knee (particularly the anterior compartment), 
leading to so-called inverted champagne bottle legs.
TABLE 45-4
CLASSIFICATION OF CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE AND RELATED NEUROPATHIES
NAME
INHERITANCE
GENE LOCATION
GENE PRODUCT
CMT1
CMT1A
AD
17p11.2
PMP-22 (usually duplication 
of gene)
CMT1B
AD
1q21-23
MPZ
CMT1C
AD
16p13.1-p12.3
LITAF
CMT1D
AD
10q21.1-22.1
ERG2
CMT1E (with deafness)
AD
17p11.2
Point mutations in  
PMP 22 gene
CMT1F
AD
8p13-21
Neuroﬁlament light chain
CMT1X
X-linked dominant
Xq13
Connexin-32
HNPP
AD
17p11.2
1q21-23
PMP-22
MPZ
CMT2
CMT2A2 (allelic to HMSN VI with 
optic atrophy)
AD
1p36.2
MFN2
CMT2B
AD
3q13-q22
RAB7
CMT2B1 (allelic to LGMD 1B)
AR
1q21.2
Lamin A/C
CMT2B2
AR and AD
19q13
MED25 for AR
Unknown for AD
CMT2C (with vocal cord and  
diaphragm paralysis)
AD
12q23-24
TRPV4
CMT2D (allelic to distal SMA5)
AD
7p14
Glycine tRNA synthetase
CMT2E (allelic to CMT 1F)
AD
8p21
Neuroﬁlament light chain
CMT2F
AD
7q11-q21
Heat-shock 27-kDa 
protein-1
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
573
TABLE 45-4
CLASSIFICATION OF CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE AND RELATED NEUROPATHIES
NAME
INHERITANCE
GENE LOCATION
GENE PRODUCT
CMT2G (may be allelic to CMT4H)
AD
12q12-q13
? (Frabin)
CMT2H
AD
8q21.3
? (may be GDAP1)
CMT2I (allelic to CMT1B)
AD
1q22
MPZ
CMT2J
AD
1q22
MPZ
CMT2K (allelic to CMT4A)
AD
8q13-q21
GDAP1
CMT2L (allelic to distal hereditary  
motor neuropathy type 2)
AD
12q24
Heat-shock protein 8
CMT2M
AD
16q22
Dynamin-2
CMT2X
X-linked
Xq22-24
PRPS1
CMT3
  (Dejerine-Sottas disease, congenital  
 hypomyelinating neuropathy)
AD
AD
AR
AR
17p11.2
1q21-23
10q21.1-22.1
19q13
PMP-22
MPZ
ERG2
Periaxon
CMT4
CMT4A
AR
8q13-21.1
GDAP1
CMT4B1
CMT4B2
AR AR
11q23
11p15
MTMR2
MTMR13
CMT4C
AR
5q23-33
SH3TC2
CMT4D
(HMSN-Lom)
AR
8q24
NDRG1
CMT4E
(Congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy)
AR
-
Probably includes PMP22, 
MPZ, and ERG-2
CMT4F
AR
19q13.1-13.3
Periaxin
CMT4G
AR
10q23.2
HKI
CMT4H
AR
12q12-q13
Frabin
CMT4J
AR
6q21
FIG4
HNA
AD
17q24
SEPT9
HMSN-P
AD
3q13-q14
?
HSAN1
AD;
Rare AR and 
X-linked cases  
also reported
9q22
SPTLC1
HSAN2
AR
12p13.33
PRKWNK1
HSAN3
AR
9q21
IKAP
HSAN4
AR
3q
trkA/NGF 
receptor
HSAN5
AD or AR
1p11.2-p13.2
NGFb
Abbreviations: AARS, alanyl-tRNA synthetase; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CMT, Charcot-Marie-Tooth; ERG2, early 
growth response-2 protein; FIG4, FDG1-related F actin–binding protein; GDAP1, ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein-1; HK1, 
hexokinase 1; HMSN-P, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-proximal; HNA, hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy; HNPP, hereditary neuropa-
thy with liability to pressure palsies; HSAN; hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy; IKAP, kB kinase complex-associated protein; LGMD, 
limb girdle muscular dystrophy; LITAF, lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor α factor; MED25, mediator 25; MFN2, mitochondrial 
fusion protein mitofusin 2 gene; MPZ, myelin protein zero protein; MTMR2, myotubularin-related protein-2; NDRG1, N-myc downstream regu-
lated 1; PMP-22, peripheral myelin protein-22; PRKWNK1, protein kinase, lysine deﬁcient 1; PRPS1, phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 
1; RAB7, Ras-related protein 7; SEPT9, Septin 9; SH3TC2, SH3 domain and tetratricopeptide repeats 2; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SPTLC1, 
serine palmitoyltransferase long-chain base 1; TrkA/NGF, tyrosine kinase A/nerve growth factor; tRNA, transfer ribonucleic acid; TRPV4, transient 
receptor potential cation channel, subfamily V, member 4.
Source: Modiﬁed from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008.
(CONTINUED)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
574
Motor NCVs are usually in the 20–25 m/s range. 
Nerve biopsies usually are not performed on patients 
suspected of having CMT1, as the diagnosis usually can 
be made by less invasive testing (e.g., NCS and genetic 
studies). However, when done, the biopsies reveal reduc-
tion of myelinated nerve ﬁbers with a predilection for the 
loss of the large-diameter ﬁbers and Schwann cell prolif-
eration around thinly or demyelinated ﬁbers, forming so-
called onion bulbs.
CMT1A is the most common subtype of CMT1, 
representing 70% of cases, and is caused by a 1.5-mega-
base (Mb) duplication within chromosome 17p11.2-12 
wherein the gene for peripheral myelin protein-22 
(PMP-22) lies. This results in patients having three cop-
ies of the PMP-22 gene rather than two. This protein 
accounts for 2–5% of myelin protein and is expressed 
in compact portions of the peripheral myelin sheath. 
Approximately 20% of patients with CMT1 have 
CMT1B, which is caused by mutations in the myelin 
protein zero (MPZ). CMT1B is for the most part clini-
cally, electrophysiologically, and histologically indis-
tinguishable from CMT1A. MPZ is an integral myelin 
protein and accounts for more than half of the myelin 
protein in peripheral nerves. Other forms of CMT1 are 
much less common and again indistinguishable from 
one another clinically and electrophysiologically.
CMT2
CMT2 tends to present later in life compared to CMT1. 
Affected individuals usually become symptomatic in the 
second decade of life; some cases present earlier in child-
hood, while others remain asymptomatic into late adult 
life. Clinically, CMT2 is for the most part indistinguish-
able from CMT1. NCS are helpful in this regard; in con-
trast to CMT1, the velocities are normal or only slightly 
slowed. The most common cause of CMT2 is a mutation 
in the gene for mitofusin 2 (MFN2), which accounts for 
one-third of CMT2 cases overall. MFN2 localizes to the 
outer mitochondrial membrane, where it regulates the 
mitochondrial network architecture by fusion of mito-
chondria. The other genes associated with CMT2 are 
much less common.
CMT3
CMT3 was originally described by Dejerine and Sottas as 
a hereditary demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy 
presenting in infancy or early childhood. Affected children 
are severely weak. Motor NCVs are markedly slowed, 
typically 5–10 m/s or less. Most cases of CMT3 are caused 
by point mutations in the genes for PMP-22, MPZ, or 
ERG-2, which are also the genes responsible for CMT1.
CMT4
CMT4 is extremely rare and is characterized by a severe, 
childhood-onset sensorimotor polyneuropathy that is 
usually inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. 
Electrophysiologic and histologic evaluations can show 
demyelinating or axonal features. CMT4 is genetically 
heterogenic (Table 45-4).
CMT1X
CMT1X is an X-linked dominant disorder with clinical 
features similar to CMT1 and -2, except that the neu-
ropathy is much more severe in men than in women. 
CMT1X accounts for approximately 10–15% of CMT 
overall. Men usually present in the ﬁrst two decades of life 
with atrophy and weakness of the distal arms and legs, are-
ﬂexia, pes cavus, and hammertoes. Obligate women carri-
ers are frequently asymptomatic, but can develop signs and 
symptoms. Onset in women is usually after the second 
decade of life, and the neuropathy is milder in severity.
NCS reveal features of both demyelination and axo-
nal degeneration that are more severe in men compared 
to women. In men, motor NCVs in the arms and legs 
are moderately slowed (in the low to mid 30-m/s range). 
About 50% of men with CMT1X have motor NCVs 
between 15 and 35 m/s with about 80% of these falling 
between 25 and 35 m/s (intermediate slowing). In con-
trast, about 80% of women with CMT1X have NCV in 
the normal range and 20% had MNCV in the interme-
diate range. CMT1X is caused by mutations in the con-
nexin 32 gene. Connexins are gap junction structural 
proteins that are important in cell-to-cell communication.
Hereditary neuropathy with liability to 
pressure palsies (HNPP)
HNPP is an autosomal dominant disorder related to 
CMT1A. While CMT1A is usually associated with a 
1.5-Mb duplication in chromosome 17p11.2 that results 
in an extra copy of PMP-22 gene, HNPP is caused by 
inheritance of the chromosome with the correspond-
ing 1.5-Mb deletion of this segment, and thus affected 
individuals have only one copy of the PMP-22 gene. 
Patients usually manifest in the second or third decade 
of life with painless numbness and weakness in the dis-
tribution of single peripheral nerves, although multiple 
mononeuropathies can occur. Symptomatic mononeu-
ropathy or multiple mononeuropathies are often pre-
cipitated by trivial compression of nerve(s) as can occur 
with wearing a backpack, leaning on the elbows, or 
crossing one’s legs for even a short period of time. These 
pressure-related mononeuropathies may take weeks or 
months to resolve. In addition, some affected individu-
als manifest with a progressive or relapsing, generalized 
and symmetric, sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy that 
resembles CMT.
Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy (HNA)
HNA is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by recurrent attacks of pain, weakness, and sensory loss 
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
575
in the distribution of the brachial plexus often begin-
ning in childhood. These attacks are similar to those 
seen with idiopathic brachial plexitis (discussed later). 
Attacks may occur in the postpartum period, follow-
ing surgery, or at other times of stress. Most patients 
recover over several weeks or months. Slightly dysmor-
phic features, including hypotelorism, epicanthal folds, 
cleft palate, syndactyly, micrognathia, and facial asym-
metry, are evident in some individuals. EDx demon-
strate an axonal process. HNA is caused by mutations in 
septin 9 (SEPT9). Septins may be important in forma-
tion of the neuronal cytoskeleton and have a role in cell 
division, but the mechanism of causing HNA is unclear.
Hereditary sensory and autonomic 
neuropathy (HSAN)
The HSANs are a very rare group of hereditary neuropa-
thies in which sensory and autonomic dysfunction predom-
inates over muscle weakness, unlike CMT, in which motor 
ﬁndings are most prominent (Table 45-4). Nevertheless, 
affected individuals can develop motor weakness and there 
can be overlap with CMT. There are no medical therapies 
available to treat these neuropathies, other than prevention 
and treatment of mutilating skin and bone lesions.
Of the HSANs, only HSAN1 typically presents in 
adults. The HSAN1 is the most common of the HSANs 
and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Affected 
individuals with HSAN1 usually manifest in the second 
through fourth decade of life. HSAN1 is associated with 
the degeneration of small myelinated and unmyelinated 
nerve ﬁbers leading to severe loss of pain and temperature 
sensation, deep dermal ulcerations, recurrent osteomyelitis, 
Charcot joints, bone loss, gross foot and hand deformities, 
and amputated digits. Although most people with HSAN1 
do not complain of numbness, they often describe burning, 
aching, or lancinating pains. Autonomic neuropathy is not 
a prominent feature, but bladder dysfunction and reduced 
sweating in the feet may occur. HSAN1A is caused by 
mutations in the serine palmitoyltransferase long-chain base 
1 (SPTLC1) gene.
OTHER HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES 
(TABLE 45-5)
FABRY DISEASE
Fabry disease (angiokeratoma corporis diffusum) is an 
X-linked dominant disorder. While men are more 
commonly and severely affected, women can also show 
severe signs of the disease. Angiokeratomas are reddish-
purple maculopapular lesions that are usually found 
around the umbilicus, scrotum, inguinal region, and 
perineum. Burning or lancinating pain in the hands 
and feet often develops in males in late childhood or 
early adult life. However, the neuropathy is usually 
overshadowed by complications arising from the asso-
ciated premature atherosclerosis (e.g., hypertension, 
renal failure, cardiac disease, and stroke) that often lead 
to death by the ﬁfth decade of life. Some patients also 
manifest primarily with a dilated cardiomyopathy.
Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the α-gala-
ctosidase gene that leads to the accumulation of 
ceramide trihexoside in nerves and blood vessels. A 
decrease in α-galactosidase activity is evident in leuko-
cytes and cultured ﬁbroblasts. Glycolipid granules may 
be appreciated in ganglion cells of the peripheral and 
sympathetic nervous systems and in perineurial cells. 
Enzyme replacement therapy with α-galactosidase B 
can improve the neuropathy if patients are treated early, 
before irreversible nerve ﬁber loss.
ADRENOLEUKODYSTROPHY/
ADRENOMYELONEUROPATHY
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) and adrenomyeloneu-
ropathy (AMN) are allelic X-linked dominant disorders 
TABLE 45-5
RARE HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES
Hereditary Disorders of Lipid Metabolism
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Krabbe disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy)
Fabry disease
Adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy
Refsum disease
Tangier disease
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Hereditary Ataxias with Neuropathy
Friedreich ataxia
Vitamin E deﬁciency
Spinocerebellar ataxia
Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-Kornzweig disease)
Disorders of Defective DNA Repair
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Cockayne syndrome
Giant Axonal Neuropathy
Porphyria
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP)
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP)
Variegate porphyria (VP)
Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (FAP)
Transthyretin-related
Gelsolin-related
Apolipoprotein A1-related
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
576
caused by mutations in the peroxisomal transmem-
brane adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) 
transporter gene. Patients with ALD manifest with 
CNS abnormalities. However, 30% with mutations in 
this gene present with the AMN phenotype that typi-
cally manifests in the third to ﬁfth decade of life with 
mild to moderate peripheral neuropathy combined with 
progressive spastic paraplegia (Chap. 35). Rare patients 
present with an adult-onset spinocerebellar ataxia or 
only with adrenal insufﬁciency.
EDx is suggestive of a primary axonopathy with sec-
ondary demyelination. Nerve biopsies demonstrate a loss 
of myelinated and unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers with lamel-
lar inclusions in the cytoplasm of Schwann cells. Very 
long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) levels (C24, C25, and 
C26) are increased in the urine. Laboratory evidence of 
adrenal insufﬁciency is evident in approximately two-
thirds of patients. The diagnosis can be conﬁrmed by 
genetic testing.
Adrenal insufﬁciency is managed by replacement 
therapy; however, there is no proven effective therapy 
for the neurologic manifestations of ALD/AMN. Diets 
low in VLCFAs and supplemented with Lorenzo’s oil 
(erucic and oleic acids) reduce the levels of VLCFAs 
and increase the levels of C22 in serum, ﬁbroblasts, and 
liver; however, several large, open-label trials of Loren-
zo’s oil failed to demonstrate efﬁcacy.
REFSUM DISEASE
Refsum disease can manifest in infancy to early adult-
hood with the classic tetrad of (1) peripheral neuropathy, 
(2) retinitis pigmentosa, (3) cerebellar ataxia, and (4) ele-
vated CSF protein concentration. Most affected individu-
als develop progressive distal sensory loss and weakness in 
the legs leading to footdrop by their 20s. Subsequently, 
the proximal leg and arm muscles may become weak. 
Patients may also develop sensorineural hearing loss, car-
diac conduction abnormalities, ichthyosis, and anosmia.
Serum phytanic acid levels are elevated. Sensory and 
motor NCS reveal reduced amplitudes, prolonged laten-
cies, and slowed conduction velocities. Nerve biopsy 
demonstrates a loss of myelinated nerve ﬁbers, with 
remaining axons often thinly myelinated and associated 
with onion bulb formation.
Refsum disease is genetically heterogeneous but 
autosomal recessive in nature. Classical Refsum dis-
ease with childhood or early adult onset is caused by 
mutations in the gene that encodes for phytanoyl-CoA 
α-hydroxylase (PAHX). Less commonly, mutations in 
the gene encoding peroxin 7 receptor protein (PRX 7) 
are responsible. These mutations lead to the accumula-
tion of phytanic acid in the central and peripheral ner-
vous systems. Refsum disease is treated by removing 
phytanic precursors (phytols: ﬁsh oils, dairy products, 
and ruminant fats) from the diet.
TANGIER DISEASE
Tangier disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
that can present as (1) asymmetric multiple mononeu-
ropathies, (2) a slowly progressive symmetric polyneu-
ropathy predominantly in the legs, or (3) a pseudo-
syringomyelia pattern with dissociated sensory loss 
(i.e., abnormal pain/temperature perception but pre-
served position/vibration in the arms [Chap. 35]). 
The tonsils may appear swollen and yellowish-orange 
in color, while there may also be splenomegaly and 
lymphadenopathy.
Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the ATP-
binding cassette transporter 1 (ABC1) gene, which leads 
to markedly reduced levels of high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol levels while triacylglycerol levels 
are increased. Nerve biopsies reveal axonal degenera-
tion with demyelination and remyelination. Electron 
microscopy demonstrates abnormal accumulation of 
lipid in Schwann cells, particularly those encompassing 
umyelinated and small myelinated nerves. There is no 
speciﬁc treatment.
PORPHYRIA
Porphyria is a group of inherited disorders caused by 
defects in heme biosynthesis. Three forms of porphyria 
are associated with peripheral neuropathy: acute inter-
mittent porphyria (AIP), hereditary coproporphyria 
(HCP), and variegate porphyria (VP). The acute neuro-
logic manifestations are similar in each, with the excep-
tion that a photosensitive rash is seen with HCP and VP 
but not in AIP. Attacks of porphyria can be precipitated 
by certain drugs (usually those metabolized by the P450 
system), hormonal changes (e.g., pregnancy, menstrual 
cycle), and dietary restrictions.
An acute attack of porphyria may begin with sharp 
abdominal pain. Subsequently, patients may develop 
agitation, hallucinations, or seizures. Several days later, 
back and extremity pain followed by weakness ensues, 
mimicking GBS. Weakness can involve the arms or the 
legs and can be asymmetric, proximal, or distal in distri-
bution, as well as affecting the face and bulbar muscu-
lature. Dysautonomia and signs of sympathetic overac-
tivity are common (e.g., pupillary dilation, tachycardia, 
and hypertension). Constipation, urinary retention, and 
incontinence can also be seen.
The CSF protein is typically normal or mildly elevated. 
Liver function tests and hematologic parameters are usu-
ally normal. Some patients are hyponatremic due to inap-
propriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone. The urine 
may appear brownish in color secondary to the high 
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
577
concentration of porphyrin metabolites. Accumulation of 
intermediary precursors of heme (i.e., δ-aminolevulinic 
acid, porphobilinogen, uroporphobilinogen, copropor-
phyrinogen, and protoporphyrinogen) are found in urine. 
Speciﬁc enzyme activities can also be measured in erythro-
cytes and leukocytes. The primary abnormalities on EDx 
are marked reductions in CMAP amplitudes and signs of 
active axonal degeneration on needle EMG.
The porphyrias are inherited in an autosomal domi-
nant fashion. AIP is associated with porphobilinogen 
deaminase deﬁciency, HCP is caused by defects in cop-
roporphyrin oxidase, and VP is associated with proto-
porphyrinogen oxidase deﬁciency. The pathogenesis of 
the neuropathy is not completely understood. Treat-
ment with glucose and hematin may reduce the accu-
mulation of heme precursors. Intravenous glucose is 
started at a rate of 10–20 g/h. If there is no improve-
ment within 24 h, intravenous hematin 2–5 mg/kg per 
day for 3–14 days should be given.
FAMILIAL AMYLOID POLYNEUROPATHY
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is phenotypically 
and genetically heterogeneous and is caused by mutations 
in the genes for transthyretin (TTR), apolipoprotein 
A1, or gelsolin. The majority of patients with FAP have 
mutations in the TTR gene. Amyloid deposition may 
be evident in abdominal fat pad, rectal, or nerve biop-
sies. The clinical features, histopathology, and EDx reveal 
abnormalities consistent with a generalized or multifocal, 
predominantly axonal but occasionally demyelinating, 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy.
Patients with TTR-related FAP usually develop 
insidious onset of numbness and painful paresthesias in 
the distal lower limbs in the third to fourth decade of 
life, although some patients develop the disorder later 
in life. Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is common. 
Autonomic involvement can be severe, leading to pos-
tural hypotension, constipation or persistent diarrhea, 
erectile dysfunction, and impaired sweating. Amyloid 
deposition also occurs in the heart, kidneys, liver, and 
the corneas. Patients usually die 10–15 years after the 
onset of symptoms from cardiac failure or complications 
from malnutrition. Because the liver produces much of 
the body’s TTR, liver transplantation has been used to 
treat FAP related to TTR mutations. Serum TTR lev-
els decrease after transplantation, and improvement in 
clinical and EDx features have been reported.
Patients with apolipoprotein A1–related FAP (Van 
Allen type) usually present in the fourth decade with 
numbness and painful dysesthesias in the distal limbs. 
Gradually, the symptoms progress, leading to proximal 
and distal weakness and atrophy. Although autonomic 
neuropathy is not severe, some patients develop diar-
rhea, constipation, or gastroparesis. Most patients die 
from systemic complications of amyloidosis (e.g., renal 
failure) 12–15 years after the onset of the neuropathy.
Gelsolin-related amyloidosis (Finnish type) is charac-
terized by the combination of lattice corneal dystrophy 
and multiple cranial neuropathies that usually begin in 
the third decade of life. Over time, a mild generalized 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy develops. Autonomic dys-
function does not occur.
ACQUIRED NEUROPATHIES
PRIMARY OR AL AMYLOIDOSIS
Besides FAP, amyloidosis can also be acquired. In pri-
mary or AL amyloidosis, the abnormal protein deposition 
is composed of immunoglobulin light chains. AL amyloi-
dosis occurs in the setting of multiple myeloma, Walden-
ström’s macroglobulinemia, lymphoma, other plasmacy-
tomas, or lymphoproliferative disorders, or without any 
other identiﬁable disease.
Approximately 30% of patients with AL primary amy-
loidosis present with a polyneuropathy, most typically 
painful dysesthesias and burning sensations in the feet. 
However, the trunk can be involved and some manifest 
with a mononeuropathy multiplex pattern. CTS occurs in 
25% of patients and may be the initial manifestation. The 
neuropathy is slowly progressive, and eventually weakness 
develops along with large-ﬁber sensory loss. Most patients 
develop autonomic involvement with postural hyperten-
sion, syncope, bowel and bladder incontinence, constipa-
tion, impotence, and impaired sweating. Patients generally 
die from their systemic illness (renal failure, cardiac disease).
The monoclonal protein may be composed of IgG, 
IgA, IgM, or only free light chain. Lambda (λ) is more 
common than κ light chain (>2:1) in AL amyloidosis. The 
CSF protein is often increased (with normal cell count), 
and thus the neuropathy may be mistaken for CIDP 
(Chap. 46). Nerve biopsies reveal axonal degeneration 
and amyloid deposition in either a globular or diffuse pat-
tern inﬁltrating the perineurial, epineurial, and endoneurial 
connected tissue and in blood vessel walls.
The median survival of patients with primary amyloi-
dosis is less than 2 years, with death usually from progres-
sive congestive heart failure or renal failure. Chemotherapy 
with melphalan, prednisone, and colchicine, to reduce the 
concentration of monoclonal proteins, and autologous 
stem cell transplantation may prolong survival, but whether 
the neuropathy improves is controversial.
DIABETIC NEUROPATHY
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most common cause of 
peripheral neuropathy in developed countries. DM 
is associated with several types of polyneuropathy: 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
578
distal symmetric sensory or sensorimotor polyneuropathy, 
autonomic neuropathy, diabetic neuropathic cachexia, 
polyradiculoneuropathies, cranial neuropathies, and other 
mononeuropathies. Risk factors for the development of 
neuropathy include long-standing, poorly controlled DM 
and the presence of retinopathy and nephropathy.
Diabetic distal symmetric sensory and 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy (DSPN)
DSPN is the most common form of diabetic neuropathy 
and manifests as sensory loss beginning in the toes that 
gradually progresses over time up the legs and into the ﬁn-
gers and arms. When severe, a patient may develop sen-
sory loss in the trunk (chest and abdomen), initially in the 
midline anteriorly and later extending laterally. Tingling, 
burning, deep aching pains may also be apparent. NCS 
usually show reduced amplitudes and mild to moder-
ate slowing of conduction velocities (CVs). Nerve biopsy 
reveals axonal degeneration, endothelial hyperplasia, and, 
occasionally, perivascular inﬂammation. Tight control of 
glucose can reduce the risk of developing neuropathy or 
improve the underlying neuropathy. A variety of medica-
tions have been used with variable success to treat painful 
symptoms associated with DSPN, including antiepileptic 
medications, antidepressants, sodium channel blockers, and 
other analgesics (Table 45-6).
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy is typically seen in combina-
tion with DSPN. The autonomic neuropathy can mani-
fest as abnormal sweating, dysfunctional thermoregula-
tion, dry eyes and mouth, pupillary abnormalities, cardiac 
TABLE 45-6
TREATMENT OF PAINFUL SENSORY NEUROPATHIES
THERAPY
ROUTE
DOSE
SIDE EFFECTS
First-Line
Lidoderm 5% patch
Apply to painful area
Up to 3 patches qd
Skin irritation
Tricyclic antidepressants 
(e.g., amitriptylin, 
nortriptyline)
p.o.
10–100 mg qhs
Cognitive changes, sedation, dry eyes and 
mouth, urinary retention, constipation
Gabapentin
p.o.
300–1200 mg TID
Cognitive changes, sedation, peripheral 
edema
Pregabalin
p.o.
50–100 mg TID
Cognitive changes, sedation, peripheral 
edema
Duloxetine
p.o.
30–60 mg qd
Cognitive changes, sedation, dry eyes, dia-
phoresis, nausea, diarrhea, constipation
Second-Line
Carbamazepine
p.o.
200–400 mg q 6–8 h
Cognitive changes, dizziness, leukopenia, 
liver dysfunction
Phenytoin
p.o.
200–400 mg qhs
Cognitive changes, dizziness, liver 
dysfunction
Venlafaxine
po
37.5–150 mg/d
Asthenia, sweating, nausea, constipation, 
anorexia, vomiting, somnolence, dry mouth, 
dizziness, nervousness, anxiety, tremor, and 
blurred vision as well as abnormal ejacula-
tion/orgasm and impotence
Tramadol
p.o.
50 mg qid
Cognitive changes, GI upset
Third-Line
Mexiletine
p.o.
200–300 mg tid
Arrhythmias
Other Agents
EMLA cream 
 2.5% lidocaine 
 2.5% prilocaine
Apply cutaneously
q.i.d.
Local erythema
Capsaicin 0.025%–0.075% 
cream
Apply cutaneously
q.i.d.
Painful burning skin
Source: Modiﬁed from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008.
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
579
arrhythmias, postural hypotension, gastrointestinal abnor-
malities (e.g., gastroparesis, postprandial bloating, chronic 
diarrhea or constipation), and genitourinary dysfunc-
tion (e.g., impotence, retrograde ejaculation, inconti-
nence). Tests of autonomic function are generally abnor-
mal, including sympathetic skin responses and quantitative 
sudomotor axon reﬂex testing. Sensory and motor NCS 
generally demonstrate features described earlier with 
DSPN.
Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropathy (diabetic 
amyotrophy or Bruns-Garland syndrome)
Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropathy is the presenting mani-
festation of DM in approximately one-third of patients. 
Typically, patients present with severe pain in the low 
back, hip, and thigh in one leg. Rarely, the diabetic poly-
radiculoneuropathy begins in both legs at the same time. 
Atrophy and weakness of proximal and distal muscles in 
the affected leg become apparent within a few days or 
weeks. The neuropathy is often accompanied or heralded 
by severe weight loss. Weakness usually progresses over 
several weeks or months, but can continue to progress for 
18 months or more. Subsequently, there is slow recovery 
but many are left with residual weakness, sensory loss, and 
pain. In contrast to the more typical lumbosacral radiculo-
plexus neuropathy, some patients develop thoracic radicu-
lopathy or, even less commonly, a cervical polyradiculo-
neuropathy. CSF protein is usually elevated, while the 
cell count is normal. ESR is often increased. EDx reveals 
evidence of active denervation in affected proximal and 
distal muscles in the affected limbs and in paraspinal mus-
cles. Nerve biopsies may demonstrate axonal degeneration 
along with perivascular inﬂammation. Patients with severe 
pain are sometimes treated in the acute period with gluco-
corticoids, although a randomized controlled trial has yet 
to be performed, and the natural history of this neuropathy 
is gradual improvement.
Diabetic mononeuropathies or multiple 
mononeuropathies
The most common mononeuropathies are median neu-
ropathy at the wrist and ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, 
but peroneal neuropathy at the ﬁbular head, and sci-
atic, lateral femoral, cutaneous, or cranial neuropathies 
also occur. In regard to cranial mononeuropathies, sev-
enth nerve palsies are relatively common but may have 
other, nondiabetic etiologies. In diabetics, a third nerve 
palsy is most common, followed by sixth nerve, and, 
less frequently, fourth nerve palsies. Diabetic third nerve 
palsies are characteristically pupil-sparing (Chap. 21).
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Hypothyroidism is more commonly associated with 
a proximal myopathy, but some patients develop a 
neuropathy, most typically carpal tunnel syndrome. 
Rarely, a generalized sensory polyneuropathy character-
ized by painful paresthesias and numbness in both the 
legs and hands can occur. Treatment is correction of the 
hypothyroidism.
SJÖGREN’S SYNDROME
Sjögren’s syndrome, characterized by the sicca complex of 
xerophthalmia, xerostomia, and dryness of other mucous 
membranes, can be complicated by neuropathy. Most 
common is a length-dependent axonal sensorimotor neu-
ropathy characterized mainly by sensory loss in the distal 
extremities. A pure small-ﬁber neuropathy or a cranial 
neuropathy, particularly involving the trigeminal nerve, 
can also be seen. Sjögren’s syndrome is also associated 
with sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy. Patients with 
sensory ganglionopathies develop progressive numbness 
and tingling of the limbs, trunk, and face in a non-length-
dependent manner such that symptoms can involve the 
face or arms more than the legs. The onset can be acute or 
insidious. Sensory examination demonstrates severe vibra-
tory and proprioceptive loss leading to sensory ataxia.
Patients with neuropathy due to Sjögren’s syndrome 
may have antinuclear antibodies (ANA), SS-A/Ro, and 
SS-B/La antibodies in the serum but most do not. NCS 
demonstrate reduced amplitudes of sensory studies in the 
affected limbs. Nerve biopsy demonstrates axonal degen-
eration. Nonspeciﬁc perivascular inﬂammation may be 
present, but only rarely is there necrotizing vasculitis. 
There is no speciﬁc treatment for neuropathies related to 
Sjögren’s syndrome. When vasculitis is suspected, immu-
nosuppressive agents may be beneﬁcial. Occasionally, 
the sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy stabilizes or 
improves with immunotherapy, such as IVIg.
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Peripheral neuropathy occurs in at least 50% of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and may be vasculitic in 
nature. Vasculitic neuropathy can present with a mono-
neuropathy multiplex, a generalized symmetric pattern of 
involvement, or a combination of these patterns. Neuropa-
thies may also be due to drugs used to treat the RA (e.g., 
tumor necrosis blockers, leﬂunomide). Nerve biopsy often 
reveals thickening of the epineurial and endoneurial blood 
vessels as well as perivascular inﬂammation or vasculitis, 
with transmural inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration and ﬁbrinoid 
necrosis of vessel walls. The neuropathy often is responsive 
to immunomodulating therapies.
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS (SLE)
Between 2 and 27% of individuals with SLE develop 
a peripheral neuropathy. Affected patients typically 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
580
present with a slowly progressive sensory loss beginning 
in the feet. Some patients develop burning pain and 
paresthesias with normal reﬂexes, and nerve conduc-
tion studies suggest a pure small-ﬁber neuropathy. Less 
common are multiple mononeuropathies presumably 
secondary to necrotizing vasculitis. Rarely, a generalized 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy meeting clinical, labora-
tory, electrophysiologic, and histologic criteria for either 
GBS or CIDP may occur. Immunosuppressive therapy 
is beneﬁcial in SLE patients with neuropathy due to 
vasculitis. Immunosuppressive agents are less likely to be 
effective in patients with a generalized sensory or senso-
rimotor polyneuropathy without evidence of vasculitis. 
Patients with a GBS or CIDP-like neuropathy should 
be treated accordingly (Chap. 46).
SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS (SCLERODERMA)
A distal symmetric, mainly sensory, polyneuropathy 
complicates 5–67% of scleroderma cases. Cranial mono-
neuropathies can also develop, most commonly of the 
trigeminal nerve, producing numbness and dysesthesias 
in the face. Multiple mononeuropathies also occur. The 
EDx and histologic features of nerve biopsy are those of 
an axonal sensory greater than motor polyneuropathy.
MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE 
DISEASE (MCTD)
A mild distal axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy occurs 
in approximately 10% of patients with MCTD.
SARCOIDOSIS
The peripheral or central nervous systems are involved 
in about 5% of patients with sarcoidosis. The most com-
mon cranial nerve involved is the seventh nerve, which 
can be affected bilaterally. Some patients develop radic-
ulopathy or polyradiculopathy. With a generalized root 
involvement, the clinical presentation can mimic GBS 
or CIDP. Patients can also present with multiple mono-
neuropathies or a generalized, slowly progressive, sensory 
greater than motor polyneuropathy. Some have features 
of a pure small-ﬁber neuropathy. EDx reveals an axonal 
neuropathy. Nerve biopsy can reveal noncaseating gran-
ulomas inﬁltrating the endoneurium, perineurium, and 
epineurium along with lymphocytic necrotizing angiitis. 
Neurosarcoidosis may respond to treatment with gluco-
corticoids or other immunosuppressive agents.
HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME
Hypereosinophilic syndrome is characterized by eosino-
philia associated with various skin, cardiac, hematologic, 
and neurologic abnormalities. A generalized peripheral 
neuropathy or a mononeuropathy multiplex occurs in 
6–14% of patients.
CELIAC DISEASE (GLUTEN-INDUCED 
ENTEROPATHY OR NON-TROPICAL SPRUE)
Neurologic complications, particularly ataxia and periph-
eral neuropathy, are estimated to occur in 10% of patients 
with celiac disease. A generalized sensorimotor polyneu-
ropathy, pure motor neuropathy, multiple mononeu-
ropathies, autonomic neuropathy, small-ﬁber neuropathy, 
and neuromyotonia have all been reported in association 
with celiac disease or antigliadin/antiendomysial antibod-
ies. Nerve biopsy may reveal a loss of large myelinated 
ﬁbers. The neuropathy may be secondary to malabsorp-
tion of vitamins B12 and E. However, some patients have 
no appreciable vitamin deﬁciencies. The pathogenic basis 
for the neuropathy in these patients is unclear but may be 
autoimmune in etiology. The neuropathy does not appear 
to respond to a gluten-free diet. In patients with vitamin 
B12 or vitamin E deﬁciency, replacement therapy may 
improve or stabilize the neuropathy.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease may be compli-
cated by GBS, CIDP, generalized axonal sensory or sen-
sorimotor polyneuropathy, small-ﬁber neuropathy, or 
mononeuropathy. These neuropathies may be autoim-
mune, nutritional (e.g., vitamin B12 deﬁciency), treat-
ment related (e.g., metronidazole), or idiopathic in 
nature. An acute neuropathy with demyelination resem-
bling GBS may occur, particularly in patients treated with 
tumor necrosis factor α blockers.
UREMIC NEUROPATHY
Approximately 60% of patients with renal failure develop 
a polyneuropathy characterized by length-dependent 
numbness, tingling, allodynia, and mild distal weakness. 
Rarely, a rapidly progressive weakness and sensory loss 
very similar to GBS can occur that improves with an 
increase in the intensity of renal dialysis or with trans-
plantation. Mononeuropathies can also occur, the most 
common of which is carpal tunnel syndrome. Ischemic 
monomelic neuropathy (discussed later) can complicate 
arteriovenous shunts created in the arm for dialysis. EDx 
in uremic patients reveals features of a length-dependent, 
primarily axonal, sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Sural 
nerve biopsies demonstrate a loss of nerve ﬁbers (par-
ticularly large myelinated nerve ﬁbers), active axonal 
degeneration, and segmental and paranodal demyelin-
ation. The sensorimotor polyneuropathy can be stabi-
lized by hemodialysis and improved with successful renal 
transplantation.
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
581
CHRONIC LIVER DISEASE
A generalized sensorimotor neuropathy characterized 
by numbness, tingling, and minor weakness in the distal 
aspects of primarily the lower limbs commonly occurs 
in patients with chronic liver failure. EDx studies are 
consistent with a sensory greater than motor axonopa-
thy. Sural nerve biopsy reveals both segmental demy-
elination and axonal loss. It is not known if hepatic 
failure in isolation can cause peripheral neuropathy, as 
the majority of patients have liver disease secondary to 
other disorders, such as alcoholism or viral hepatitis, 
which can also cause neuropathy.
CRITICAL ILLNESS POLYNEUROPATHY
The most common causes of acute generalized weak-
ness leading to admission to a medical intensive care unit 
(ICU) are GBS and myasthenia gravis (Chap. 47). How-
ever, weakness developing in critically ill patients while in 
the ICU is usually caused by critical illness polyneuropa-
thy (CIP) or critical illness myopathy (CIM), or much less 
commonly, by prolonged neuromuscular blockade. From 
a clinical and EDx standpoint, it can be quite difﬁcult to 
distinguish these disorders. Most specialists suggest that 
CIM is more common. Both CIM and CIP develop as 
a complication of sepsis and multiple organ failure. They 
usually present as an inability to wean a patient from a 
ventilator. A coexisting encephalopathy may limit the 
neurologic exam, in particular the sensory examination. 
Muscle stretch reﬂexes are absent or reduced.
Serum creatine kinase (CK) is usually normal; an 
elevated serum CK would point to CIM as opposed to 
CIP. NCS reveal absent or markedly reduced ampli-
tudes of motor and sensory studies in CIP, while sen-
sory studies are relatively preserved in CIM. Needle 
EMG usually reveals profuse positive sharp waves and 
ﬁbrillation potentials, and it is not unusual in patients 
with severe weakness to be unable to recruit motor unit 
action potentials. The pathogenic basis of CIP is not 
known. Perhaps circulating toxins and metabolic abnor-
malities associated with sepsis and multiorgan failure 
impair axonal transport or mitochondrial function, lead-
ing to axonal degeneration.
LEPROSY (HANSEN DISEASE)
Leprosy, caused by the acid-fast bacteria Mycobacterium 
leprae, is the most common cause of peripheral neu-
ropathy in Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America. 
Clinical manifestations range from tuberculoid leprosy at 
one end to lepromatous leprosy at the other end of the 
spectrum, with borderline leprosy in between. Neu-
ropathies are most common in patients with borderline 
leprosy. Superﬁcial cutaneous nerves of the ears and dis-
tal limbs are commonly affected. Mononeuropathies, 
multiple mononeuropathies, or a slowly progressive sym-
metric sensorimotor polyneuropathy may develop. Sen-
sory NCS are usually absent in the lower limb and are 
reduced in amplitude in the arms. Motor NCS may 
demonstrate reduced amplitudes in affected nerves but 
occasionally can reveal demyelinating features. Leprosy is 
usually diagnosed by skin lesion biopsy. Nerve biopsy can 
also be diagnostic, particularly when there are no appar-
ent skin lesions. The tuberculoid form is characterized 
by granulomas, and bacilli are not seen. In contrast, with 
lepromatous leprosy, large numbers of inﬁltrating bacilli, 
TH2 lymphocytes, and organism-laden, foamy macro-
phages with minimal granulomatous inﬁltration are evi-
dent. The bacilli are best appreciated using the Fite stain, 
where they can be seen as red-staining rods often in clus-
ters free in the endoneurium, within macrophages, or 
within Schwann cells.
Patients are generally treated with multiple drugs: dap-
sone, rifampin, and clofazimine. Other medications that 
are employed include thalidomide, peﬂoxacin, oﬂoxacin, 
sparﬂoxacin, minocycline, and clarithromycin. Patients 
are generally treated for 2 years. Treatment is some-
times complicated by the so-called reversal reaction, par-
ticularly in borderline leprosy. The reversal reaction can 
occur at any time during treatment and develops because 
of a shift to the tuberculoid end of the spectrum, with an 
increase in cellular immunity during treatment. The cel-
lular response is upregulated as evidenced by an increased 
release of tumor necrosis factor α, interferon γ, and 
interleukin 2, with new granuloma formation. This can 
result in an exacerbation of the rash and the neuropathy 
as well as in appearance of new lesions. High-dose glu-
cocorticoids blunt this adverse reaction and may be used 
prophylactically at treatment onset in high-risk patients. 
Erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL) is also treated with 
glucocorticoids or thalidomide.
LYME DISEASE
Lyme disease is caused by infection with Borrelia burg-
dorferi, a spirochete usually transmitted by the deer tick 
Ixodes dammini. Neurologic complications may develop 
during the second and third stages of infection. Facial 
neuropathy is most common and is bilateral in about 
half of cases, which is rare for idiopathic Bell’s palsy. 
Involvement of nerves is frequently asymmetric. Some 
patients present with a polyradiculoneuropathy or mul-
tiple mononeuropathies. EDx is suggestive of a primary 
axonopathy. Nerve biopsies can reveal axonal degenera-
tion with perivascular inﬂammation. Treatment is with 
antibiotics.
DIPHTHERITIC NEUROPATHY
Diphtheria is caused by the bacteria Corynebacterium diph-
theriae. Infected individuals present with ﬂulike symptoms 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
582
of generalized myalgias, headache, fatigue, low-grade 
fever, and irritability within a week to 10 days of the 
exposure. About 20–70% of patients develop a periph-
eral neuropathy caused by a toxin released by the bacte-
ria. Three to 4 weeks after infection, patients may note 
decreased sensation in their throat and begin to develop 
dysphagia, dysarthria, hoarseness, and blurred vision due 
to impaired accommodation. A generalized polyneu-
ropathy may manifest 2 or 3 months following the initial 
infection, characterized by numbness, paresthesias, and 
weakness of the arms and legs and occasionally ventila-
tory failure. CSF protein can be elevated with or without 
lymphocytic pleocytosis. EDx suggests a diffuse axonal 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Antitoxin and antibiotics 
should be given within 48 h of symptom onset. Although 
early treatment reduces the incidence and severity of 
some complications (i.e., cardiomyopathy), it does 
not appear to alter the natural history of the associated 
peripheral neuropathy. The neuropathy usually resolves 
after several months.
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV)
HIV infection can result in a variety of neurologic com-
plications, including peripheral neuropathies. Approxi-
mately 20% of HIV-infected individuals develop a neu-
ropathy either as a direct result of the virus itself, other 
associated viral infections (e.g., cytomegalovirus), or 
neurotoxicity secondary to antiviral medications (dis-
cussed later). The major presentations of peripheral 
neuropathy associated with HIV infection include (1) 
distal symmetric polyneuropathy (DSP), (2) inﬂamma-
tory demyelinating polyneuropathy (including both 
GBS and CIDP), (3) multiple mononeuropathies (e.g., 
vasculitis, CMV-related), (4) polyradiculopathy (usually 
CMV-related), (5) autonomic neuropathy, and (6) sen-
sory ganglionitis.
HIV-related distal symmetric 
polyneuropathy (DSP)
DSP is the most common form of peripheral neuropa-
thy associated with HIV infection and usually is seen in 
patients with AIDS. It is characterized by numbness and 
painful paresthesias involving the distal extremities. The 
pathogenic basis for DSP is unknown but is not due to 
actual infection of the peripheral nerves. The neuropathy 
may be immune mediated, perhaps caused by the release 
of cytokines from surrounding inﬂammatory cells. Vita-
min B12 deﬁciency may contribute in some instances but 
is not a major cause of most cases of DSP. Some anti-
retroviral agents (e.g., dideoxycytidine, dideoxyinosine, 
stavudine) are also neurotoxic and can cause a painful 
sensory neuropathy.
HIV-related inﬂammatory demyelinating 
polyradiculoneuropathy
Both AIDP and CIDP can occur as a complication of 
HIV infection. AIDP usually develops at the time of 
seroconversion, while CIDP can occur any time in the 
course of the infection. Clinical and EDx features are 
indistinguishable from idiopathic AIDP or CIDP (dis-
cussed in next chapter). In addition to elevated protein 
levels, lymphocytic pleocytosis is evident in the CSF, a 
ﬁnding that helps distinguish this HIV-associated poly-
radiculoneuropathy from idiopathic AIDP/CIDP.
HIV-related progressive polyradiculopathy
An acute, progressive lumbosacral polyradiculoneuropa-
thy usually secondary to cytomegalovirus (CMV) infec-
tion can develop in patients with AIDS. Patients present 
with severe radicular pain, numbness, and weakness in 
the legs, which is usually asymmetric. CSF is abnormal, 
demonstrating an increased protein along with reduced 
glucose concentration and notably a neutrophilic pleocy-
tosis. EDx studies reveal features of active axonal degen-
eration. The polyradiculoneuropathy may improve with 
antiviral therapy.
HIV-related multiple mononeuropathies
Multiple mononeuropathies can also develop in patients 
with HIV infection, usually in the context of AIDS. 
Weakness, numbness, paresthesias, and pain occur in the 
distribution of affected nerves. Nerve biopsies can reveal 
axonal degeneration with necrotizing vasculitis or peri-
vascular inﬂammation. Glucocorticoid treatment is indi-
cated for vasculitis directly due to HIV infection.
HIV-related sensory neuronopathy/
ganglionopathy
Dorsal root ganglionitis is a very rare complication of 
HIV infection, and neuronopathy can be the presenting 
manifestation. Patients develop sensory ataxia similar to 
idiopathic sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy. NCS 
reveal reduced amplitudes or absence of SNAPs.
HERPES VARICELLA-ZOSTER VIRUS
Peripheral neuropathy from herpes varicella-zoster 
(HVZ) infection results from reactivation of latent virus 
or from a primary infection. Two-thirds of infections 
in adults are characterized by dermal zoster in which 
severe pain and paresthesias develop in a dermatomal 
region followed within a week or two by a vesicu-
lar rash in the same distribution. Weakness in muscles 
innervated by roots corresponding to the dermatomal 
distribution of skin lesions occurs in 5–30% of patients. 
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
583
Approximately 25% of affected patients have continued 
pain (postherpetic neuralgia, or PHN). A large clini-
cal trial demonstrated that vaccination against zoster 
reduces the incidence of HZ among vaccine recipients 
by 51% and reduces the incidence of PHN by 67%. 
Treatment of postherpetic neuralgia is symptomatic 
(Table 45-6).
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS
CMV can cause an acute lumbosacral polyradiculopathy 
and multiple mononeuropathies in patients with HIV 
infection and in other immune deﬁciency conditions.
EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection has been associated 
with GBS, cranial neuropathies, mononeuropathy mul-
tiplex, brachial plexopathy, lumbosacral radiculoplexop-
athy, and sensory neuronopathies.
HEPATITIS VIRUSES
Hepatitis B and C can cause multiple mononeuropa-
thies related to vasculitis, AIDP, or CIDP.
NEUROPATHIES ASSOCIATED WITH 
MALIGNANCY
Patients with malignancy can develop neuropathies 
due to (1) a direct effect of the cancer by invasion or 
compression of the nerves, (2) remote or paraneoplastic 
effect, (3) a toxic effect of treatment, or (4) as a con-
sequence of immune compromise caused by immuno-
suppressive medications. The most common associated 
malignancy is lung cancer, but neuropathies also com-
plicate carcinoma of the breast, ovaries, stomach, colon, 
rectum, and other organs, including the lymphoprolif-
erative system.
PARANEOPLASTIC SENSORY 
NEURONOPATHY/GANGLIONOPATHY
Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis/sensory neuronopathy 
(PEM/SN) usually complicates small cell lung carcinoma 
(Chap. 44). Patients usually present with numbness and 
paresthesias in the distal extremities that are often asym-
metric. The onset can be acute or insidiously progres-
sive. Prominent loss of proprioception leads to sensory 
ataxia. Weakness can be present, usually secondary to an 
associated myelitis, motor neuronopathy, or concurrent 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS). Many 
patients also develop confusion, memory loss, depression, 
hallucinations or seizures, or cerebellar ataxia. Polyclonal 
antineuronal antibodies (IgG) directed against a 35- to 
40-kD protein or complex of proteins, the so-called Hu 
antigen, are found in the sera or CSF in the majority of 
patients with paraneoplastic PEM/SN. CSF may be nor-
mal or may demonstrate mild lymphocytic pleocytosis 
and elevated protein. PEM/SN is probably the result of 
antigenic similarity between proteins expressed in the 
tumor cells and neuronal cells, leading to an immune 
response directed against both cell types. Treatment of 
the underlying cancer generally does not affect the course 
of PEM/SN. However, occasional patients may improve 
following treatment of the tumor. Unfortunately, plasma-
pheresis, intravenous immunoglobulin, and immunosup-
pressive agents have not shown beneﬁt.
NEUROPATHY SECONDARY TO TUMOR 
INFILTRATION
Malignant cells, in particular leukemia and lymphoma, 
can inﬁltrate cranial and peripheral nerves, leading to 
mononeuropathy, mononeuropathy multiplex, polyra-
diculopathy, plexopathy, or even a generalized symmetric 
distal or proximal and distal polyneuropathy. Neuropa-
thy related to tumor inﬁltration is often painful; it can be 
the presenting manifestation of the cancer or the herald-
ing symptom of a relapse. The neuropathy may improve 
with treatment of the underlying leukemia or lymphoma 
or with glucocorticoids.
NEUROPATHY AS A COMPLICATION OF 
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Neuropathies may develop in patients who undergo 
bone marrow transplantation (BMT) because of the 
toxic effects of chemotherapy, radiation, infection, or 
an autoimmune response directed against the peripheral 
nerves. Peripheral neuropathy in BMT is often associ-
ated with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Chronic 
GVHD shares many features with a variety of auto-
immune disorders, and it is possible that an immune-
mediated response directed against peripheral nerves is 
responsible. Patients with chronic GVHD may develop 
cranial neuropathies, sensorimotor polyneuropathies, 
multiple mononeuropathies, and severe generalized 
peripheral neuropathies resembling AIDP or CIDP. 
The neuropathy may improve by increasing the inten-
sity of immunosuppressive or immunomodulating ther-
apy and resolution of the GVHD.
LYMPHOMA
Lymphomas may cause neuropathy by inﬁltration or 
direct compression of nerves or by a paraneoplastic pro-
cess. The neuropathy can be purely sensory or motor, 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
584
but most commonly is sensorimotor. The pattern of 
involvement may be symmetric, asymmetric, or multi-
focal, and the course may be acute, gradually progres-
sive, or relapsing and remitting. EDx can be compatible 
with either an axonal or demyelinating process. CSF 
may reveal lymphocytic pleocytosis and an elevated 
protein. Nerve biopsy may demonstrate endoneurial 
inﬂammatory cells in both the inﬁltrative and the para-
neoplastic etiologies. A monoclonal population of cells 
favors lymphomatous invasion. The neuropathy may 
respond to treatment of the underlying lymphoma or 
immunomodulating therapies.
MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Multiple myeloma (MM) usually presents in the ﬁfth to 
seventh decade of life with fatigue, bone pain, anemia, 
and hypercalcemia. Clinical and EDx features of neu-
ropathy occur in as many as 40% of patients. The most 
common pattern is that of a distal, axonal, sensory, or 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Less frequently, a chronic 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy may develop (see 
POEMS, Chap. 46). MM can be complicated by amy-
loid polyneuropathy and should be considered in patients 
with painful paresthesias, loss of pinprick and temperature 
discrimination, and autonomic dysfunction (suggestive 
of a small-ﬁber neuropathy) and carpal tunnel syndrome. 
Expanding plasmacytomas can compress cranial nerves 
and spinal roots as well. A monoclonal protein, usually 
composed of γ or μ heavy chains or κ light chains, may 
be identiﬁed in the serum or urine. EDx usually shows 
reduced amplitudes with normal or only mildly abnormal 
distal latencies and conduction velocities. A superimposed 
median neuropathy at the wrist is common. Abdominal 
fat pad, rectal, or sural nerve biopsy can be performed to 
look for amyloid deposition. Unfortunately, the treat-
ment of the underlying MM does not usually affect the 
course of the neuropathy.
NEUROPATHIES ASSOCIATED WITH 
MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF 
UNCERTAIN SIGNIFICANCE (SEE CHAP. 33)
Toxic neuropathies secondary to 
chemotherapy
Many of the commonly used chemotherapy agents can 
cause a toxic neuropathy (Table 45-7). The mechanisms 
by which these agents cause toxic neuropathies vary as 
can the speciﬁc type of neuropathy produced. The risk 
of developing a toxic neuropathy or more severe neurop-
athy appears to be greater in patients with a preexisting 
neuropathy (e.g., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, diabetic 
neuropathy) and those who also take other potentially 
neurotoxic drugs (e.g., nitrofurantoin, isoniazid, disulﬁ-
ram, pyridoxine). Chemotherapeutic agents usually cause 
a sensory greater than motor length-dependent axonal 
neuropathy or neuronopathy/ganglionopathy.
TABLE 45-7
TOXIC NEUROPATHIES SECONDARY TO CHEMOTHERAPY
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE 
HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Vinca alkaloids 
(vincristine, vin-
blastine, vindesine, 
vinorelbine)
Interfere with axonal 
microtubule assembly; 
impairs axonal trans-
port
Symmetric, S-M, 
large-/small-ﬁber 
PN; autonomic 
symptoms common; 
infrequent cranial 
neuropathies
Axonal degeneration 
of myelinated and 
unmyelinated ﬁbers; 
regenerating clusters, 
minimal segmental 
demyelination
Axonal sensorimotor 
PN; distal denervation 
on EMG; abnormal 
QST, particularly vibra-
tory perception
Cisplatin
Preferential damage to 
dorsal root ganglia:
?binds to and cross-
links DNA 
?inhibits protein syn-
thesis 
?impairs axonal transport
Predominant large-
ﬁber sensory neu-
ronopathy; sensory 
ataxia
Loss of large > small 
myelinated and unmy-
elinated ﬁbers; axonal 
degeneration with small 
clusters of regenerating 
ﬁbers; secondary seg-
mental demyelination
Low-amplitude or unob-
tainable SNAPs with 
normal CMAPs and 
EMG; abnormal QST, 
particularly vibratory 
perception
Taxanes (paclitaxel, 
docetaxel)
Promotes axonal 
microtubule assembly; 
interferes with axonal 
transport
Symmetric, predomi-
nantly sensory, PN; 
large-ﬁber modalities 
affected more than 
small-ﬁber
Loss of large > small 
myelinated and 
unmyelinated ﬁbers; 
axonal degeneration 
with small clusters of 
regenerating ﬁbers; 
secondary segmental 
demyelination
Axonal sensorimotor 
PN; distal denervation 
on EMG; abnormal 
QST, particularly vibra-
tory perception
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
585
OTHER TOXIC NEUROPATHIES
Neuropathies can develop as complications of toxic 
effects of various drugs and other environmental expo-
sures (Table 45-8). The more common neuropathies 
associated with these agents are discussed here.
CHLOROQUINE AND 
HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can cause a toxic 
myopathy characterized by slowly progressive, pain-
less, proximal weakness and atrophy, which is worse 
in the legs than the arms. In addition, neuropathy can 
also develop with or without the myopathy leading to 
sensory loss and distal weakness. The “neuromyopa-
thy” usually appears in patients taking 500 mg daily for 
a year or more but has been reported with doses as low 
as 200 mg/d. Serum CK levels are usually elevated due 
to the superimposed myopathy. NCS reveal mild slow-
ing of motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities 
with a mild to moderate reduction in the amplitudes, 
although NCS may be normal in patients with only 
the myopathy. EMG demonstrates myopathic muscle 
action potentials (MUAPs), increased insertional activity 
in the form of positive sharp waves, ﬁbrillation poten-
tials, and occasionally myotonic potentials, particu-
larly in the proximal muscles. Neurogenic MUAPs and 
reduced recruitment are found in more distal muscles. 
Nerve biopsy demonstrates autophagic vacuoles within 
Schwann cells. Vacuoles may also be evident in muscle 
biopsies. The pathogenic basis of the neuropathy is not 
known but may be related to the amphiphilic proper-
ties of the drug. These agents contain both hydropho-
bic and hydrophilic regions that allow them to interact 
with the anionic phospholipids of cell membranes and 
organelles. The drug-lipid complexes may be resis-
tant to digestion by lysosomal enzymes, leading to the 
TABLE 45-7
TOXIC NEUROPATHIES SECONDARY TO CHEMOTHERAPY
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE 
HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Suramin 
Axonal PN
Unknown; 
? inhibition of neuro-
trophic growth factor 
binding; 
?neuronal lysosomal 
storage
Symmetric, length-
dependent, sensory-
predominant, PN
None described
Abnormalities consistent 
with an axonal S-M PN
Demyelinating PN
Unknown;
?immunomodulating 
effects
Subacute, S-M PN 
with diffuse proximal 
and distal weakness; 
areﬂexia; increased 
CSF protein
Loss of large and small 
myelinated ﬁbers with 
primary demyelination 
and secondary axonal 
degeneration; occa-
sional epi- and endo-
neurial inﬂammatory 
cell inﬁltrates
Features suggestive of 
an acquired demyelin-
ating sensorimotor PN 
(e.g., slow CVs, pro-
longed distal latencies 
and F-wave latencies, 
conduction block, tem-
poral dispersion)
Ara-C
Unknown;  
? selective Schwann  
cell toxicity; 
?immunomodulating 
effects
GBS-like syndrome; 
pure sensory neu-
ropathy; brachial 
plexopathy
Loss of myelinated 
nerve ﬁbers; axonal 
degeneration; segmen-
tal demyelination; no 
inﬂammation
Axonal, demyelinat-
ing, or mixed S-M PN; 
denervation on EMG
Etoposide (VP-16)
Unknown; 
? selective dorsal root 
ganglia toxicity
Length-dependent, 
sensory predominant 
PN; autonomic neu-
ropathy
None described
Abnormalities consistent 
with an axonal S-M PN
Bortezomib (Vel-
cade)
Unknown
Length-dependent, 
sensory, predomi-
nantly small-ﬁber, PN
Not reported
Abnormalities consistent 
with an axonal sensory 
neuropathy with early 
small-ﬁber involvement 
(abnormal autonomic 
studies)
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; CVs, conduction velocities; EMG, electromyography; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; NCS, nerve con-
duction studies; PN, polyneuropathy; QST, quantitative sensory testing; S-M, sensorimotor.
Source: From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008.
 (CONTINUED)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
586
TABLE 45-8
TOXIC NEUROPATHIES
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE 
HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Misonidazole
Unknown
Painful paresthesias 
and loss of large- and 
small-ﬁber sensory 
modalities and some-
times distal weakness 
in length-dependent 
pattern
Axonal degeneration 
of large myelinated 
ﬁbers; axonal swell-
ings; segmental 
demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal 
or only slightly reduced 
CMAPs amplitudes
Metronidazole
Unknown
Painful paresthesias 
and loss of large- and 
small-ﬁber sensory 
modalities and some-
times distal weakness 
in length-dependent 
pattern
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal 
CMAPs
Chloroquine and 
hydroxychloro-
quine
Amphiphilic properties 
may lead to drug-lipid 
complexes that are 
indigestible and result 
in accumulation of 
autophagic vacuoles
Loss of large- and 
small-ﬁber sensory 
modalities and distal 
weakness in length-
dependent pattern; 
superimposed myopa-
thy may lead to proxi-
mal weakness
Axonal degeneration 
with autophagic 
vacuoles in nerves 
as well as muscle 
ﬁbers
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal 
or reduced CMAPs ampli-
tudes; distal denervation on 
EMG; irritability and  
myopathic-appearing 
MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed 
toxic myopathy
Amiodarone
Amphiphilic properties 
may lead to drug-lipid 
complexes that are 
indigestible and result 
in accumulation of 
autophagic vacuoles
Paresthesias and pain 
with loss of large- and 
small-ﬁber sensory 
modalities and distal 
weakness in length-
dependent pattern; 
superimposed myopa-
thy may lead to proxi-
mal weakness
Axonal degenera-
tion and segmental 
demyelination with 
myeloid inclusions in 
nerves and muscle 
ﬁbers
Low-amplitude or unob-
tainable SNAPs with nor-
mal or reduced CMAPs 
amplitudes; can also have 
prominent slowing of 
CVs; distal denervation on 
EMG; irritability and myo-
pathic-appearing MUAPs 
proximally in patients 
with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Colchicine
Inhibits polymerization 
of tubulin in micro-
tubules and impairs 
axoplasmic ﬂow
Numbness and pares-
thesias with loss of 
large-ﬁber modalities 
in a length-dependent 
fashion; superimposed 
myopathy may lead to 
proximal in addition to 
distal weakness
Nerve biopsy dem-
onstrates axonal 
degeneration; mus-
cle biopsy reveals 
ﬁbers with vacuoles
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes; 
irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proxi-
mally in patients with super-
imposed toxic myopathy
Podophyllin
Binds to microtubules 
and impairs axoplas-
mic ﬂow
Sensory loss, tingling, 
muscle weakness, and 
diminished muscle 
stretch reﬂexes in 
length-dependent pat-
tern; autonomic  
neuropathy
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Thalidomide
Unknown
Numbness, tingling, 
and burning pain and 
weakness in a length-
dependent pattern
Axonal degeneration; 
autopsy studies 
reveal degenera-
tion of dorsal root 
ganglia
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
587
TABLE 45-8
TOXIC NEUROPATHIES
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE 
HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Disulﬁram
Accumulation of 
neuroﬁlaments and 
impaired axoplasmic 
ﬂow
Numbness, tingling, 
and burning pain in a 
length-dependent  
pattern
Axonal degeneration 
with accumulation of 
neuroﬁlaments in the 
axons
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Dapsone
Unknown
Distal weakness that 
may progress to proxi-
mal muscles; sensory 
loss
Axonal degenera-
tion and segmental 
demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able CMAPs with normal or 
reduced SNAP amplitudes
Leﬂunomide
Unknown
Paresthesias and 
numbness in a length-
dependent pattern
Unknown
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Nitrofurantoin
Unknown
Numbness, painful par-
esthesias, and severe 
weakness that may 
resemble GBS
Axonal degeneration; 
autopsy studies 
reveal degenera-
tion of dorsal root 
ganglia and anterior 
horn cells
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Pyridoxine (vita-
min B6)
Unknown
Dysesthesias and sen-
sory ataxia; impaired 
large-ﬁber sensory 
modalities on exami-
nation
Marked loss of sen-
sory axons and cell 
bodies in dorsal root 
ganglia
Reduced amplitudes or 
absent SNAPs
Isoniazid
Inhibits pyridoxal 
phosphokinase lead-
ing to pyridoxine deﬁ-
ciency
Dysesthesias and sen-
sory ataxia; impaired 
large-ﬁber sensory 
modalities on  
examination
Marked loss of sen-
sory axons and cell 
bodies in dorsal root 
ganglia and degen-
eration of the dorsal 
columns
Reduced amplitudes or 
absent SNAPs and to lesser 
extent CMAPs
Ethambutol
Unknown
Numbness with loss of 
large-ﬁber modalities 
on examination
Axonal degeneration
Reduced amplitudes or 
absent SNAPs
Antinucleosides
Unknown
Dysesthesia and sen-
sory ataxia; impaired 
large-ﬁber sensory 
modalities on exami-
nation
Axonal degeneration
Reduced amplitudes or 
absent SNAPs
Phenytoin
Unknown
Numbness with loss of 
large-ﬁber modalities 
on examination
Axonal degenera-
tion and segmental 
demyelination
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Lithium
Unknown
Numbness with loss of 
large-ﬁber modalities 
on examination
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Acrylamide
Unknown; may be 
caused by impaired 
axonal transport
Numbness with loss of 
large-ﬁber modalities 
on examination; sen-
sory ataxia; mild distal 
weakness
Degeneration of sen-
sory axons in periph-
eral nerves and 
posterior columns, 
spinocerebellar 
tracts, mammillary 
bodies, optic tracts, 
and corticospinal 
tracts in the CNS
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
 (CONTINUED)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
588
TABLE 45-8
TOXIC NEUROPATHIES
DRUG
MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
CLINICAL FEATURES
NERVE 
HISTOPATHOLOGY
EMG/NCS
Carbon disulﬁde
Unknown
Length-dependent 
numbness and tingling 
with mild distal weak-
ness
Axonal swellings with 
accumulation of neu-
roﬁlaments
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Ethylene oxide
Unknown; may act as 
alkylating agent and 
bind DNA
Length-dependent 
numbness and tingling; 
may have mild distal 
weakness
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Organophos-
phates
Bind and inhibit neu-
ropathy target ester-
ase
Early features are those 
of neuromuscular 
blockade with general-
ized weakness; later 
axonal sensorimotor 
PN ensues
Axonal degeneration 
along with degen-
eration of gracile 
fasciculus and corti-
cospinal tracts
Early: repetitive ﬁring of 
CMAPs and decrement with 
repetitive nerve stimulation; 
late: axonal sensorimotor PN
Hexacarbons
Unknown; may lead to 
covalent cross-linking 
between neuroﬁla-
ments
Acute, severe senso-
rimotor PN that may 
resemble GBS
Axonal degenera-
tion and giant axons 
swollen with neuro-
ﬁlaments
Features of a mixed axonal 
and/or demyelinating senso-
rimotor axonal PN—reduced 
amplitudes, prolonged distal 
latencies, conduction block, 
and slowing of CVs
Lead
Unknown; may inter-
fere with mitochondria
Encephalopathy; motor 
neuropathy (often 
resembles radial neu-
ropathy with wrist and 
ﬁnger drop); autonomic 
neuropathy; bluish-
black discoloration of 
gums
Axonal degeneration 
of motor axons
Reduction of CMAP ampli-
tudes with active denerva-
tion on EMG
Mercury
Unknown; may com-
bine with sulfhydryl 
groups
Abdominal pain and 
nephrotic syndrome; 
encephalopathy; 
ataxia; paresthesias
Axonal degenera-
tion; degeneration of 
dorsal root ganglia, 
calcarine, and cer-
ebellar cortex
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Thallium
Unknown
Encephalopathy; pain-
ful sensory symptoms; 
mild loss of vibration; 
distal or generalized 
weakness may also 
develop; autonomic 
neuropathy; alopecia
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes
Arsenic
Unknown; may com-
bine with sulfhydryl 
groups
Abdominal discomfort, 
burning pain and par-
esthesias; generalized 
weakness; autonomic 
insufﬁciency; can 
resemble GBS
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs with normal or 
reduced CMAPs amplitudes; 
may have demyelinating fea-
tures: prolonged distal laten-
cies and slowing of CVs
Gold
Unknown
Distal paresthesias and 
reduction of all sensory 
modalities
Axonal degeneration
Low-amplitude or unobtain-
able SNAPs
Abbreviations: CMAP, compound motor action potential; CVs, conduction velocities; EMG, electromyography; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; 
MUAP, muscle action potential; NCS, nerve conduction studies; PN, polyneuropathy; S-M, sensorimotor; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.
Source: From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008.
 (CONTINUED)
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
589
formation of autophagic vacuoles ﬁlled with myeloid 
debris that may in turn cause degeneration of nerves 
and muscle ﬁbers. The signs and symptoms of the neu-
ropathy and myopathy are usually reversible following 
discontinuation of medication.
AMIODARONE
Amiodarone can cause a neuromyopathy similar to 
chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. The neuromy-
opathy typically appears after patients have taken the 
medication for 2–3 years. Nerve biopsy demonstrates 
a combination of segmental demyelination and axo-
nal loss. Electron microscopy reveals lamellar or dense 
inclusions in Schwann cells, pericytes, and endothelial 
cells. The inclusions in muscle and nerve biopsies have 
persisted as long as 2 years following discontinuation of 
the medication.
COLCHICINE
Colchicine can also cause a neuromyopathy. Patients 
usually present with proximal weakness and numb-
ness and tingling in the distal extremities. EDx reveals 
features of an axonal polyneuropathy. Muscle biopsy 
reveals a vacuolar myopathy, while sensory nerves dem-
onstrate axonal degeneration. Colchicine inhibits the 
polymerization of tubulin into microtubules. The dis-
ruption of the microtubules probably leads to defective 
intracellular movement of important proteins, nutrients, 
and waste products in muscle and nerves.
THALIDOMIDE
Thalidomide is an immunomodulating agent used to 
treat multiple myeloma, GVHD, leprosy, and other 
autoimmune disorders. Thalidomide is associated with 
severe teratogenic effects as well as peripheral neu-
ropathy that can be dose-limiting. Patients develop 
numbness, painful tingling, and burning discomfort in 
the feet and hands and less commonly muscle weak-
ness and atrophy. Even after stopping the drug for 4–6 
years, as many as 50% patients continue to have signiﬁ-
cant symptoms. NCS demonstrate reduced amplitudes 
or complete absence of sensory nerve action potentials 
(SNAPs), with preserved conduction velocities when 
obtainable. Motor NCS are usually normal. Nerve 
biopsy reveals a loss of large-diameter myelinated ﬁbers 
and axonal degeneration. Degeneration of dorsal root 
ganglion cells has been reported at autopsy.
PYRIDOXINE (VITAMIN B6) TOXICITY
Pyridoxine is an essential vitamin that serves as a coen-
zyme for transamination and decarboxylation. However, 
at high doses (116 mg/d), patients can develop a severe 
sensory neuropathy with dysesthesias and sensory ataxia. 
NCS reveal absent or markedly reduced SNAP ampli-
tudes with relatively preserved CMAPs. Nerve biopsy 
reveals axonal loss of ﬁber at all diameters. Loss of dor-
sal root ganglion cells with subsequent degeneration of 
both the peripheral and central sensory tracts have been 
reported in animal models.
ISONIAZID
One of the most common side effects of isonia-
zid (INH) is peripheral neuropathy. Standard doses of 
INH (3–5 mg/kg per d) are associated with a 2% inci-
dence of neuropathy, while neuropathy develops in at 
least 17% of patients taking in excess of 6 mg/kg per 
d. The elderly, malnourished, and “slow acetylators” are 
at increased risk for developing the neuropathy. INH 
inhibits pyridoxal phosphokinase, resulting in pyridox-
ine deﬁciency and the neuropathy. Prophylactic admin-
istration of pyridoxine 100 mg/d can prevent the neu-
ropathy from developing.
ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENTS
The nucleoside analogues zalcitabine (dideoxycytidine 
or ddC), didanosine (dideoxyinosine or ddI), stavudine 
(d4T), lamivudine (3TC), and antiretroviral nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) are used to treat 
HIV infection. One of the major dose-limiting side 
effects of these medications is a predominantly sensory, 
length-dependent, symmetrically painful neuropathy. 
Zalcitabine (ddC) is the most extensively studied of the 
nucleoside analogues and at doses greater than 0.18 mg/
kg per d is associated with a subacute onset of severe 
burning and lancinating pains in the feet and hands. 
NCS reveal decreased amplitudes of the SNAPs with 
normal motor studies. The nucleoside analogues inhibit 
mitochondrial DNA polymerase, which is the sus-
pected pathogenic basis for the neuropathy. Because 
of a “coasting effect,” patients can continue to worsen 
even 2–3 weeks after stopping the medication. Follow-
ing dose reduction, improvement in the neuropathy is 
seen in most patients after several months (mean time 
about 10 weeks).
HEXACARBONS (n-HEXANE, METHYL 
n-BUTYL KETONE)/GLUE SNIFFER’S 
NEUROPATHY
n-Hexane and methyl n-butyl ketone are water-insol-
uble industrial organic solvents that are also present in 
some glues. Exposure through inhalation, accidentally 
or intentionally (glue snifﬁng), or through skin absorp-
tion can lead to a profound subacute sensory and motor 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
590
polyneuropathy. NCS demonstrate decreased ampli-
tudes of the SNAPs and CMAPs with slightly slow 
CVs. Nerve biopsy reveals a loss of myelinated ﬁbers 
and giant axons that are ﬁlled with 10-nm neuroﬁla-
ments. Hexacarbon exposure leads to covalent cross-
linking between axonal neuroﬁlaments that result in 
their aggregation, impaired axonal transport, swelling of 
the axons, and eventual axonal degeneration.
LEAD
Lead neuropathy is uncommon, but it can be seen in 
children who accidentally ingest lead-based paints in 
older buildings and in industrial workers exposed to 
lead-containing products. The most common presenta-
tion of lead poisoning is an encephalopathy; however, 
symptoms and signs of a primarily motor neuropa-
thy can also occur. The neuropathy is characterized by 
an insidious and progressive onset of weakness usu-
ally beginning in the arms, in particular involving the 
wrist and ﬁnger extensors, resembling a radial neu-
ropathy. Sensation is generally preserved; however, the 
autonomic nervous system can be affected. Laboratory 
investigation can reveal a microcytic hypochromic ane-
mia with basophilic stippling of erythrocytes, an ele-
vated serum lead level, and an elevated serum copro-
porphyrin level. A 24-h urine collection demonstrates 
elevated levels of lead excretion. The NCS may reveal 
reduced CMAP amplitudes, while the SNAPs are typ-
ically normal. The pathogenic basis may be related to 
abnormal porphyrin metabolism. The most important 
principle of management is to remove the source of the 
exposure. Chelation therapy with calcium disodium 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), British anti-
Lewisite (BAL), and penicillamine also demonstrates 
variable efﬁcacy.
MERCURY
Mercury toxicity may occur as a result of exposure to 
either organic or inorganic mercurials. Mercury poi-
soning presents with paresthesias in hands and feet 
that progress proximally and may involve the face and 
tongue. Motor weakness can also develop. CNS symp-
toms often overshadow the neuropathy. EDx shows 
features of a primarily axonal sensorimotor polyneu-
ropathy. The primary site of neuromuscular pathology 
appears to be the dorsal root ganglia. The mainstay of 
treatment is removing the source of exposure.
THALLIUM
Thallium can exist in a monovalent or trivalent form 
and is primarily used as a rodenticide. The toxic neu-
ropathy usually manifests as burning paresthesias of the 
feet, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Increased thirst, 
sleep disturbances, and psychotic behavior may be 
noted. Within the ﬁrst week, patients develop pigmen-
tation of the hair, an acne-like rash in the malar area 
of the face, and hyperreﬂexia. By the second and third 
week, autonomic instability with labile heart rate and 
blood pressure may be seen. Hyporeﬂexia and alope-
cia also occur but may not be evident until the third or 
fourth week following exposure. With severe intoxica-
tion, proximal weakness and involvement of the cranial 
nerves can occur. Some patients require mechani-
cal ventilation due to respiratory muscle involvement. 
The lethal dose of thallium is variable, ranging from 8 
to 15 mg/kg body weight. Death can result in less than 
48 h following a particularly large dose. NCS demon-
strate features of a primarily axonal sensorimotor poly-
neuropathy. With acute intoxication, potassium ferric 
ferrocyanide II may be effective in preventing absorp-
tion of thallium from the gut. However, there may be 
no beneﬁt once thallium has been absorbed. Unfortu-
nately, chelating agents are not very efﬁcacious. Ade-
quate diuresis is essential to help eliminate thallium 
from the body without increasing tissue availability 
from the serum.
ARSENIC
Arsenic is another heavy metal that can cause a toxic 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. The neuropathy mani-
fests 5–10 days after ingestion of arsenic and progresses 
for several weeks, sometimes mimicking GBS. The 
pre senting symptoms are typically an abrupt onset of 
abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, pain, and 
diarrhea followed within several days by burning pain 
in the feet and hands. Examination of the skin can be 
helpful in the diagnosis as the loss of the superﬁcial epi-
dermal layer results in patchy regions of increased or 
decreased pigmentation on the skin several weeks after 
an acute exposure or with chronic low levels of inges-
tion. Mee’s lines, which are transverse lines at the base 
of the ﬁngernails and toenails, do not become evident 
until 1 or 2 months after the exposure. Multiple Mee’s 
lines may be seen in patients with long ﬁngernails who 
have had chronic exposure to arsenic. Mee’s lines are 
not speciﬁc for arsenic toxicity as they can also be seen 
following thallium poisoning. Because arsenic is cleared 
from blood rapidly, the serum concentration of arse-
nic is not diagnostically helpful. However, arsenic lev-
els are increased in the urine, hair, and ﬁngernails of 
patients exposed to arsenic. Anemia with stippling of 
erythrocytes is common, and occasionally pancyto-
penia and aplastic anemia can develop. Increased CSF 
protein levels without pleocytosis can be seen; this can 
lead to misdiagnosis as GBS. NCS are usually suggestive 
of an axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy; however, 
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
591
demyelinating features can be present. Chelation ther-
apy with BAL has yielded inconsistent results; therefore, 
it is not generally recommended.
NUTRITIONAL NEUROPATHIES
COBALAMIN (VITAMIN B12)
Pernicious anemia is the most common cause of cobala-
min deﬁciency. Other causes include dietary avoidance 
(vegetarians), gastrectomy, gastric bypass surgery, inﬂam-
matory bowel disease, pancreatic insufﬁciency, bacte-
rial overgrowth, and possibly histamine-2 blockers and 
proton-pump inhibitors. An underappreciated cause of 
cobalamin deﬁciency is food-cobalamin malabsorption. 
This typically occurs in older individuals and results from 
an inability to adequately absorb cobalamin in food pro-
tein. No apparent cause of deﬁciency is identiﬁed in a 
signiﬁcant number of patients with cobalamin deﬁciency. 
The use of nitrous oxide as an anesthetic agent or from 
recreational use can produce acute cobalamin deﬁciency 
neuropathy and subacute combined degeneration.
Complaints of numb hands typically appear before 
lower extremity paresthesias are noted. A preferential 
large-ﬁber sensory loss affecting proprioception and 
vibration with sparing of small-ﬁber modalities is pres-
ent; an unsteady gait reﬂects sensory ataxia. These fea-
tures, coupled with diffuse hyperreﬂexia and absent 
Achilles reﬂexes, should always focus attention on the 
possibility of cobalamin deﬁciency. Optic atrophy and, 
in severe cases, behavioral changes ranging from mild 
irritability and forgetfulness to severe dementia and 
frank psychosis may appear. The full clinical picture of 
subacute combined degeneration is uncommon. CNS 
manifestations, especially pyramidal tract signs, may 
be missing, and in fact some patients may only exhibit 
symptoms of peripheral neuropathy.
EDx shows an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. 
CNS involvement produces abnormal somatosensory 
and visual evoked potential latencies. The diagnosis is 
conﬁrmed by ﬁnding reduced serum cobalamin levels. 
In up to 40% of patients, anemia and macrocytosis are 
lacking. Serum methylmalonic acid and homocyste-
ine, the metabolites that accumulate when cobalamin-
dependent reactions are blocked, are elevated. Antibod-
ies to intrinsic factor are present in approximately 60%, 
and antiparietal cell antibodies in about 90%, of individ-
uals with pernicious anemia.
Cobalamin deﬁciency can be treated with various 
regimens of cobalamin. One typical regimen consists of 
1000 μg cyanocobalamin IM weekly for 1 month and 
monthly thereafter. Patients with food cobalamin mal-
absorption can absorb free cobalamin and therefore can 
be treated with oral cobalamin supplementation. An oral 
cobalamin dose of 1000 μg per day should be sufﬁcient. 
Treatment for cobalamin deﬁciency usually does not com-
pletely reverse the clinical manifestations, and at least 50% 
of patients exhibit some permanent neurologic deﬁcit.
THIAMINE DEFICIENCY
Thiamine (vitamin B1) deﬁciency is an uncommon cause 
of peripheral neuropathy in developed countries. It is 
now most often seen as a consequence of chronic alcohol 
abuse, recurrent vomiting, total parenteral nutrition, and 
bariatric surgery. Thiamine deﬁciency polyneuropathy 
can occur in normal, healthy young adults who do not 
abuse alcohol but who engage in inappropriately restric-
tive diets. Thiamine is water-soluble. It is present in most 
animal and plant tissues, but the greatest sources are unre-
ﬁned cereal grains, wheat germ, yeast, soybean ﬂour, and 
pork. Beriberi means “I can’t, I can’t” in Singhalese, the 
language of natives of what was once part of the Dutch 
East Indies (now Sri Lanka). Dry beriberi refers to neuro-
pathic symptoms. The term wet beriberi is used when car-
diac manifestations predominate (in reference to edema). 
Beriberi was relatively uncommon until the late 1800s 
when it became widespread among people for whom 
rice was a dietary mainstay. This epidemic was due to a 
new technique of processing rice that removed the germ 
from the rice shaft, rendering the so-called polished rice 
deﬁcient in thiamine and other essential nutrients.
Symptoms of neuropathy follow prolonged deﬁ-
ciency. These begin with mild sensory loss and/or 
burning dysesthesias in the toes and feet and aching and 
cramping in the lower legs. Pain may be the predomi-
nant symptom. With progression, patients develop fea-
tures of a nonspeciﬁc generalized polyneuropathy, with 
distal sensory loss in the feet and hands.
Blood and urine assays for thiamine are not reli-
able for diagnosis of deﬁciency. Erythrocyte transketo-
lase activity and the percentage increase in activity (in 
vitro) following the addition of thiamine pyrophosphate 
(TPP) may be more accurate and reliable. EDx shows 
nonspeciﬁc ﬁndings of an axonal sensorimotor poly-
neuropathy. When a diagnosis of thiamine deﬁciency 
is made or suspected, thiamine replacement should be 
provided until proper nutrition is restored. Thiamine is 
usually given intravenously or intramuscularly at a dose 
of 100 mg/d. Although cardiac manifestations show a 
striking response to thiamine replacement, neurologic 
improvement is usually more variable and less dramatic.
VITAMIN E DEFICIENCY
The term vitamin E is usually used for α-tocopherol, the 
most active of the four main types of vitamin E. Because 
vitamin E is present in animal fat, vegetable oils, and 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
592
various grains, deﬁciency is usually due to factors other 
than insufﬁcient intake. Vitamin E deﬁciency usually 
occurs secondary to lipid malabsorption or in uncommon 
disorders of vitamin E transport. One hereditary disorder 
is abetalipoproteinemia, a rare autosomal dominant disor-
der characterized by steatorrhea, pigmentary retinopathy, 
acanthocytosis, and progressive ataxia. Patients with cys-
tic ﬁbrosis may also have vitamin E deﬁciency secondary 
to steatorrhea. There are genetic forms of isolated vita-
min E deﬁciency not associated with lipid malabsorption. 
Vitamin E deﬁciency may also occur as a consequence of 
various cholestatic and hepatobiliary disorders as well as 
short-bowel syndromes resulting from the surgical treat-
ment of intestinal disorders.
Clinical features may not appear until many years after 
the onset of deﬁciency. The onset of symptoms tends to 
be insidious, and progression is slow. The main clinical 
features are spinocerebellar ataxia and polyneuropathy, 
thus resembling Friedreich ataxia or other spinocerebel-
lar ataxias. Patients manifest progressive ataxia and signs of 
posterior column dysfunction, such as impaired joint posi-
tion and vibratory sensation. Because of the polyneurop-
athy, there is hyporeﬂexia, but plantar responses may be 
extensor as a result of the spinal cord involvement. Other 
neurologic manifestations may include ophthalmoplegia, 
pigmented retinopathy, night blindness, dysarthria, pseu-
doathetosis, dystonia, and tremor. Vitamin E deﬁciency 
may present as an isolated polyneuropathy, but this is 
very rare. The yield of checking serum vitamin E levels 
in patients with isolated polyneuropathy is extremely low, 
and this test should not be part of routine practice.
Diagnosis is made by measuring α-tocopherol levels 
in the serum. EDx shows features of an axonal neuropa-
thy. Treatment is replacement with oral vitamin E, but 
high doses are not needed. For patients with isolated 
vitamin E deﬁciency, treatment consists of 1500–6000 
IU/d in divided doses.
VITAMIN B6 DEFICIENCY
Vitamin B6, or pyridoxine, can produce neuropathic 
manifestations from both deﬁciency and toxicity. Vita-
min B6 toxicity was discussed earlier. Vitamin B6 deﬁ-
ciency is most commonly seen in patients treated with 
isoniazid or hydralazine. The polyneuropathy of vitamin 
B6 is nonspeciﬁc, manifesting as a generalized axonal 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Vitamin B6 deﬁciency can 
be detected by direct assay. Vitamin B6 supplementation 
with 50–100 mg/d is suggested for patients being treated 
with isoniazid or hydralazine. This same dose is appro-
priate for replacement in cases of nutritional deﬁciency.
PELLAGRA (NIACIN DEFICIENCY)
Pellagra is produced by deﬁciency of niacin. Although 
pellagra may be seen in alcoholics, this disorder has 
essentially been eradicated in most Western countries by 
means of enriching bread with niacin. Nevertheless, pel-
lagra continues to be a problem in a number of under-
developed regions, particularly in Asia and Africa, where 
corn is the main source of carbohydrate. Neurologic 
manifestations are variable; abnormalities can develop 
in the brain and spinal cord as well as peripheral nerves. 
When peripheral nerves are involved, the neuropathy is 
usually mild and resembles beriberi. Treatment is with 
niacin 40–250 mg/d.
COPPER DEFICIENCY
A syndrome that has only recently been described is 
myeloneuropathy secondary to copper deﬁciency. Most 
patients present with lower limb paresthesias, weakness, 
spasticity, and gait difﬁculties. Large-ﬁber sensory func-
tion is impaired, reﬂexes are brisk, and plantar responses 
are extensor. In some cases, light touch and pinprick 
sensation are affected, and nerve conduction studies 
indicate sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy in addi-
tion to myelopathy.
Hematologic abnormalities are a known complication 
of copper deﬁciency; these can include microcytic ane-
mia, neutropenia, and occasionally pancytopenia. Because 
copper is absorbed in the stomach and proximal jejunum, 
many cases of copper deﬁciency are in the setting of prior 
gastric surgery. Excess zinc is an established cause of cop-
per deﬁciency. Zinc upregulates enterocyte production 
of metallothionine, which results in decreased absorption 
of copper. Excessive dietary zinc supplements or den-
ture cream containing zinc can produce this clinical pic-
ture. Other potential causes of copper deﬁciency include 
malnutrition, prematurity, total parenteral nutrition, and 
ingestion of copper chelating agents.
Following oral or IV copper replacement, some 
patients show neurologic improvement, but this may 
take many months or not occur at all. Replacement 
consists of oral copper sulfate or gluconate 2 mg one 
to three times a day. If oral copper replacement is not 
effective, elemental copper in the copper sulfate or cop-
per chloride forms can be given as 2 mg IV daily for 
3–5 days, then weekly for 1–2 months until copper lev-
els normalize. Thereafter, oral daily copper therapy can 
be resumed. In contrast to the neurologic manifesta-
tions, most of the hematologic indices completely nor-
malize in response to copper replacement therapy.
NEUROPATHY ASSOCIATED WITH 
GASTRIC SURGERY
Polyneuropathy may occur following gastric surgery for 
ulcer, cancer, or weight reduction. This usually occurs 
in the context of rapid, signiﬁcant weight loss and recur-
rent, protracted vomiting. The clinical picture is one of 
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
593
acute or subacute sensory loss and weakness. Neuropathy 
following weight loss surgery usually occurs in the ﬁrst 
several months after surgery. Weight reduction surgical 
procedures include gastrojejunostomy, gastric stapling, 
vertical banded gastroplasty, and gastrectomy with Roux-
en-Y anastomosis. The initial manifestations are usually 
numbness and paresthesias in the feet. In many cases, no 
speciﬁc nutritional deﬁciency factor is identiﬁed.
Management consists of parenteral vitamin supple-
mentation, especially including thiamine. Improvement 
has been observed following supplementation, parenteral 
nutritional support, and reversal of the surgical bypass. 
The duration and severity of deﬁcits before identiﬁcation 
and treatment of neuropathy are important predictors of 
ﬁnal outcome.
CRYPTOGENIC (IDIOPATHIC) 
SENSORY AND SENSORIMOTOR 
POLYNEUROPATHY
CSPN is a diagnosis of exclusion, established after a 
careful medical, family, and social history; neurologic 
examination; and directed laboratory testing. Despite 
extensive evaluation, the cause of polyneuropathy in as 
many as 50% of all patients is idiopathic. CSPN should 
be considered a distinct diagnostic subset of periph-
eral neuropathy. The onset of CSPN is predominantly 
in the sixth and seventh decades. Patients complain of 
distal numbness, tingling, and often burning pain that 
invariably begins in the feet and may eventually involve 
the ﬁngers and hands. Patients exhibit a distal sensory 
loss to pinprick, touch, and vibration in the toes and 
feet, and occasionally in the ﬁngers. It is uncommon 
to see signiﬁcant proprioception deﬁcits, even though 
patients may complain of gait unsteadiness. However, 
tandem gait may be abnormal in a minority of cases. 
Neither subjective nor objective evidence of weakness 
is a prominent feature. Most patients have evidence of 
both large- and small-ﬁber loss on neurologic exam and 
EDx. Approximately 10% of patients have only evi-
dence of small-ﬁber involvement. The ankle muscle 
stretch reﬂex is frequently absent, but in cases with pre-
dominantly small-ﬁber loss, this may be preserved. The 
EDx ﬁndings range from isolated sensory nerve action 
potential abnormalities (usually with loss of amplitude), 
to evidence for an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, to 
a completely normal study (if primarily small ﬁbers are 
involved). Therapy primarily involves the control of 
neuropathic pain (Table 45-6) if present. These drugs 
should not be used if the patient has only numbness and 
tingling but no pain.
Although no treatment is available that can reverse an 
idiopathic distal peripheral neuropathy, the prognosis is 
good. Progression often does not occur or is minimal, with 
sensory symptoms and signs progressing proximally up to 
the knees and elbows. The disorder does not lead to sig-
niﬁcant motor disability over time. The relatively benign 
course of this disorder should be explained to patients.
MONONEUROPATHIES/PLEXOPATHIES/
RADICULOPATHIES
MEDIAN NEUROPATHY
CTS is a compression of the median nerve in the carpal 
tunnel at the wrist. The median nerve enters the hand 
through the carpal tunnel by coursing under the trans-
verse carpal ligament. The symptoms of CTS consist of 
numbness and paresthesias variably in the thumb, index, 
middle, and half of the ring ﬁnger. At times, the pares-
thesias can include the entire hand and extend into the 
forearm or upper arm or can be isolated to one or two 
ﬁngers. Pain is another common symptom and can be 
located in the hand and forearm and, at times, in the 
proximal arm. CTS is common and often misdiagnosed 
as thoracic outlet syndrome. The signs of CTS are 
decreased sensation in the median nerve distribution; 
reproduction of the sensation of tingling when a per-
cussion hammer is tapped over the wrist (Tinel’s sign) 
or the wrist is ﬂexed for 30–60 s (Phalen’s sign); and 
weakness of thumb opposition and abduction. EDx is 
extremely sensitive and shows slowing of sensory and, 
to a lesser extent, motor median potentials across the 
wrist. Treatment options consist of avoidance of pre-
cipitating activities; control of underlying systemic-asso-
ciated conditions if present; nonsteroidal anti-inﬂamma-
tory medications; neutral (volar) position wrist splints, 
especially for night use; glucocorticoid/anesthetic injec-
tion into the carpal tunnel; and surgical decompression 
by dividing the transverse carpal ligament. The surgical 
option should be considered if there is a poor response 
to nonsurgical treatments; if there is thenar muscle atro-
phy and/or weakness; and if there are signiﬁcant dener-
vation potentials on EMG.
Other proximal median neuropathies are very uncom-
mon and include the pronator teres syndrome and ante-
rior interosseous neuropathy. These often occur as a par-
tial form of brachial plexitis.
ULNAR NEUROPATHY AT THE ELBOW—
“CUBITAL TUNNEL SYNDROME”
The ulnar nerve passes through the condylar groove 
between the medial epicondyle and the olecranon. 
Symptoms consist of paresthesias, tingling, and numb-
ness in the medial hand and half of the fourth and the 
entire ﬁfth ﬁngers, pain at the elbow or forearm, and 
weakness. Signs consist of decreased sensation in an 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
594
ulnar distribution, Tinel’s sign at the elbow, and weak-
ness and atrophy of ulnar-innervated hand muscles. The 
Froment sign indicates thumb adductor weakness and 
consists of ﬂexion of the thumb at the interphalangeal 
joint when attempting to oppose the thumb against the 
lateral border of the second digit. EDx may show slow-
ing of ulnar motor nerve conduction velocity across the 
elbow with prolonged ulnar sensory latencies. Treat-
ment consists of avoiding aggravating factors, using 
elbow pads, and surgery to decompress the nerve in the 
cubital tunnel. Ulnar neuropathies can also rarely occur 
at the wrist in the ulnar (Guyon) canal or in the hand, 
usually after trauma.
RADIAL NEUROPATHY
The radial nerve winds around the proximal humerus in 
the spiral groove and proceeds down the lateral arm and 
enters the forearm, dividing into the posterior interos-
seous nerve and superﬁcial nerve. The symptoms and 
signs consist of wristdrop; ﬁnger extension weakness; 
thumb abduction weakness; and sensory loss in the dor-
sal web between the thumb and index ﬁnger. Triceps 
and brachioradialis strength is often normal, and triceps 
reﬂex is often intact. Most cases of radial neuropathy are 
transient compressive (neuropraxic) injuries that recover 
spontaneously in 6–8 weeks. If there has been pro-
longed compression and severe axonal damage, it may 
take several months to recover. Treatment consists of 
cock-up wrist and ﬁnger splints, avoiding further com-
pression, and physical therapy to avoid ﬂexion contrac-
ture. If there is no improvement in 2–3 weeks, an EDx 
study is recommended to conﬁrm the clinical diagnosis 
and determine the degree of severity.
LATERAL FEMORAL CUTANEOUS 
NEUROPATHY (MERALGIA PARESTHETICA)
The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve arises from the upper 
lumbar plexus (spinal levels L2/3), crosses through the 
inguinal ligament near its attachment to the iliac bone, 
and supplies sensation to the anterior lateral thigh. The 
neuropathy affecting this nerve is also known as meral-
gia paresthetica. Symptoms and signs consist of paresthe-
sias, numbness, and occasionally pain in the lateral thigh. 
Symptoms are increased by standing or walking and are 
relieved by sitting. There is normal strength and knee 
reﬂexes are intact. The diagnosis is clinical, and further 
tests usually are not performed. EDx is only needed to 
rule out lumbar plexopathy, radiculopathy, or femoral 
neuropathy. If the symptoms and signs are classic, elec-
tromyography is not necessary. Symptoms often resolve 
spontaneously over weeks or months, but the patient 
may be left with permanent numbness. Treatment con-
sists of weight loss and avoiding tight belts. Analgesics in 
the form of a lidocaine patch, nonsteroidal agents, and 
occasionally medications for neuropathic pain, can be 
used (Table 45-6). Rarely, locally injecting the nerve 
with an anesthetic can be tried. There is no role for 
surgery.
FEMORAL NEUROPATHY
Femoral neuropathies can arise as complications of ret-
roperitoneal hematoma, lithotomy positioning, hip 
arthroplasty or dislocation, iliac artery occlusion, femo-
ral arterial procedures, inﬁltration by hematogenous 
malignancy, penetrating groin trauma, pelvic surgery 
including hysterectomy and renal transplantation, and 
diabetes (a partial form of lumbosacral diabetic plexop-
athy); some cases are idiopathic. Patients with femoral 
neuropathy have difﬁculty extending their knee and 
ﬂexing the hip. Sensory symptoms occurring either on 
the anterior thigh and/or medial leg occur in only half 
of reported cases. A prominent painful component is 
the exception rather than the rule, may be delayed, and 
is often self-limited in nature. The quadriceps (patellar) 
reﬂex is diminished.
SCIATIC NEUROPATHY
Sciatic neuropathies commonly complicate hip arthro-
plasty, pelvic procedures in which patients are placed 
in a prolonged lithotomy position, trauma, hematomas, 
tumor inﬁltration, and vasculitis. In addition, many sci-
atic neuropathies are idiopathic. Weakness may involve 
all motions of the ankles and toes as well as ﬂexion of 
the leg at the knee; abduction and extension of the 
thigh at the hip is spared. Sensory loss occurs in the 
entire foot and the distal lateral leg. The ankle jerk and 
on occasion the internal hamstring reﬂex are diminished 
or more typically absent on the affected side. The pero-
neal subdivision of the sciatic nerve is typically involved 
disproportionately to the tibial counterpart. Thus, 
patients may have only ankle dorsiﬂexion and eversion 
weakness with sparing of knee ﬂexion, ankle inversion, 
and plantar ﬂexion; these features can lead to misdiag-
nosis of a common peroneal neuropathy.
PERONEAL NEUROPATHY
The sciatic nerve divides at the distal femur into the 
tibial and peroneal nerve. The common peroneal nerve 
passes posterior and laterally around the ﬁbular head, 
under the ﬁbular tunnel. It then divides into the super-
ﬁcial peroneal nerve, which supplies the ankle evertor 
muscles and sensation over the anterolateral distal leg 
and dorsum of the foot, and the deep peroneal nerve, 
which supplies ankle dorsiﬂexors and toe extensor mus-
cles and a small area of sensation dorsally in the area of 
the ﬁrst and second toes.
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
595
Symptoms and signs consist of footdrop (ankle dor-
siﬂexion, toe extension, and ankle eversion weak-
ness) and variable sensory loss, which may involve the 
superﬁcial and deep peroneal pattern. There is usually 
no pain. Onset may be on awakening in the morning. 
Peroneal neuropathy needs to be distinguished from 
L5 radiculopathy. In L5 radiculopathy, ankle invertors 
and evertors are weak and needle electromyography 
reveals denervation. EDx can help localize the lesion. 
Peroneal motor conduction velocity shows slowing 
and amplitude drop across the ﬁbular head. Manage-
ment consists of rapid weight loss and avoiding leg 
crossing. Footdrop is treated with an ankle brace. A 
knee pad can be worn over the lateral knee to avoid 
further compression. Most cases spontaneously resolve 
over weeks or months.
RADICULOPATHIES
Radiculopathies are most often due to compression 
from degenerative joint disease and herniated disks, but 
there are a number of unusual etiologies (Table 45-9). 
Degenerative spine disease affects a number of differ-
ent structures, which narrow the diameter of the neu-
ral foramen or canal of the spinal column and compro-
mise nerve root integrity; these are discussed in detail in 
Chap. 9.
PLEXOPATHIES
BRACHIAL PLEXUS
The brachial plexus is composed of three trunks (upper, 
middle, and lower), with two divisions (anterior and 
posterior) per trunk (Fig. 45-2). Subsequently, the 
trunks divide into three cords (medial, lateral, and pos-
terior), and from these arise the multiple terminal nerves 
innervating the arm. The anterior primary rami of C5 
and C6 fuse to form the upper trunk; the anterior pri-
mary ramus of C7 continues as the middle trunk, while 
the anterior rami of C8 and T1 join to form the lower 
trunk. There are several disorders commonly associated 
with brachial plexopathy.
Immune-mediated brachial plexus neuropathy
Immune-mediated brachial plexus neuropathy (IBPN) 
goes by various terms, including acute brachial plexi-
tis, neuralgic amyotrophy, and Parsonage-Turner syndrome. 
IBPN usually presents with an acute onset of severe 
pain in the shoulder region. The intense pain usually 
lasts several days to a few weeks, but a dull ache can 
persist. Individuals who are affected may not appreci-
ate weakness of the arm early in the course because the 
pain limits movement. However, as the pain dissipates, 
weakness and often sensory loss are appreciated. Attacks 
can occasionally recur.
Clinical ﬁndings are dependent on the distribution 
of involvement (e.g., speciﬁc trunk, divisions, cords, or 
terminal nerves). The most common pattern of IBPN 
involves the upper trunk or a single or multiple mono-
neuropathies primarily involving the suprascapular, long 
thoracic, or axillary nerves. Additionally, the phrenic 
and anterior interosseous nerves may be concomitantly 
affected. Any of these nerves may also be affected in iso-
lation. EDx is useful to conﬁrm and localize the site(s) 
of involvement. Empirical treatment of severe pain with 
glucocorticoids is often used in the acute period.
Brachial plexopathies associated with 
neoplasms
Neoplasms involving the brachial plexus may be pri-
mary nerve tumors, local cancers expanding into the 
plexus (e.g., Pancoast lung tumor or lymphoma), and 
metastatic tumors. Primary brachial plexus tumors are 
less common than the secondary tumors and include 
schwannomas, neurinomas, and neuroﬁbromas. Sec-
ondary tumors affecting the brachial plexus are more 
common and are always malignant. These may arise 
from local tumors, expanding into the plexus. For 
example, a Pancoast tumor of the upper lobe of the 
lung may invade or compress the lower trunk, while 
TABLE 45-9
CAUSES OF RADICULOPATHY
• Herniated nucleus pulposus
• Degenerative joint disease
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Trauma
• Vertebral body compression fracture
• Pott’s disease
• Compression by extradural mass (e.g., meningioma, 
metastatic tumor, hematoma, abscess)
• Primary nerve tumor (e.g., neuroﬁbroma, schwannoma, 
neurinoma)
• Carcinomatous meningitis
• Perineurial spread of tumor (e.g., prostate cancer)
• Acute inﬂammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy
• Chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy
• Sarcoidosis
• Amyloidoma
• Diabetic radiculopathy
• Infection (Lyme disease, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus, 
syphilis, schistosomiasis, strongyloides)
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
596
a primary lymphoma arising from the cervical or axil-
lary lymph nodes may also inﬁltrate the plexus. Pancoast 
tumors typically present as an insidious onset of pain in 
the upper arm, sensory disturbance in the medial aspect 
of the forearm and hand, and weakness and atrophy 
of the intrinsic hand muscles along with an ipsilateral 
Horner syndrome. Chest CT scans or MRI can demon-
strate extension of the tumor into the plexus. Metastatic 
involvement of the brachial plexus may occur with 
spread of breast cancer into the axillary lymph nodes 
with local spread into the nearby nerves.
Perioperative plexopathies (median 
sternotomy)
The most common surgical procedures associated with 
brachial plexopathy as a complication are those that 
involve median sternotomies (e.g., open-heart surger-
ies and thoracotomies). Brachial plexopathies occur in as 
many as 5% of patients following a median sternotomy 
and typically affect the lower trunk. Thus, individuals 
manifest with sensory disturbance affecting the medial 
aspect of forearm and hand along with weakness of the 
intrinsic hand muscles. The mechanism is related to the 
stretch of the lower trunk, so most individuals who are 
affected recover within a few months.
LUMBOSACRAL PLEXUS
The lumbar plexus arises from the ventral primary 
rami of the ﬁrst to the fourth lumbar spinal nerves 
(Fig. 45-3). These nerves pass downward and laterally 
from the vertebral column within the psoas major mus-
cle. The femoral nerve derives from the dorsal branches 
of the second to the fourth lumbar ventral rami. The 
obturator nerve arises from the ventral branches of the 
same lumbar rami. The lumbar plexus communicates 
with the sacral plexus by the lumbosacral trunk, which 
contains some ﬁbers from the fourth and all of those 
from the ﬁfth lumbar ventral rami (Fig. 45-4).
The sacral plexus is the part of the lumbosacral plexus 
that is formed by the union of the lumbosacral trunk 
with the ventral rami of the ﬁrst to fourth sacral nerves. 
T12
Lateral femoral
cutaneous n.
Femoral n.
T12
Iliohypogastric n.
Ilioinguinal n.
Genitofemoral n.
Obturator n.
Lumbosacral trunk
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
FIGURE 45-3 
Lumbar plexus. Posterior divisions are in orange, anterior 
divisions are in yellow. (From J Goodgold: Anatomical Cor-
relates of Clinical Electromyography. Baltimore, Williams and 
Wilkins, 1974, p. 126, with permission.)
FIGURE 45-2 
Brachial plexus anatomy. L, lateral; M, medial; P, poste-
rior. (From J Goodgold: Anatomical Correlates of Clinical 
Electromyography. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1974, p. 
126, with permission.)
Dorsal scapular
Long thoracic
Medial
anterior
thoracic
Anterior
Posterior
CORDS
PERIPHERAL NERVES
DIVISIONS
TRUNKS
ROOTS
Upper
subscapular
Axillary
Musculocutaneous
Radial
Median
Ulnar
Medial
antibrachial
cutaneous
Medial
brachial
cutaneous
M
P
L
Lateral
anterior
thoracic
Thoracodorsal
Lower
subscapular
Suprascapular
Subclavius
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
 
CHAPTER 45
Peripheral Neuropathy
597
The plexus lies on the posterior and posterolateral wall 
of the pelvis with its components converging toward 
the sciatic notch. The lateral trunk of the sciatic nerve 
(which forms the common peroneal nerve) arises from 
the union of the dorsal branches of the lumbosacral 
trunk (L4, L5) and the dorsal branches of the S1 and 
S2 spinal nerve ventral rami. The medial trunk of the 
sciatic nerve (which forms the tibial nerve) derives from 
the ventral branches of the same ventral rami (L4-S2).
LUMBOSACRAL PLEXOPATHIES
Plexopathies are typically recognized when motor, 
sensory, and if applicable, reﬂex deﬁcits occur in mul-
tiple nerve and segmental distributions conﬁned to one 
extremity. If localization within the lumbosacral plexus 
can be accomplished, designation as a lumbar plexopa-
thy, a sacral plexopathy, a lumbosacral trunk lesion, or 
a pan-plexopathy is the best localization that can be 
expected. Although lumbar plexopathies may be bilat-
eral, usually occurring in a stepwise and chronologically 
dissociated manner, sacral plexopathies are more likely 
to behave in this manner due to their closer anatomic 
proximity. The differential diagnosis of plexopathy 
includes disorders of the conus medullaris and cauda 
equina (polyradiculopathy). If there is a paucity of pain 
and sensory involvement, motor neuron disease should 
be considered as well.
The causes of lumbosacral plexopathies are listed in 
Table 45-10. Diabetic radiculopathy (discussed ear-
lier) is a fairly common cause of painful leg weakness. 
Lumbosacral plexopathies are a well-recognized compli-
cation of retroperitoneal hemorrhage. Various primary 
and metastatic malignancies can affect the lumbosacral 
plexus as well; these include carcinoma of the cervix, 
endometrium, and ovary; osteosarcoma; testicular can-
cer; multiple myeloma; lymphoma; acute myelogenous 
leukemia; colon cancer; squamous cell carcinoma of the 
rectum; adenocarcinoma of unknown origin; and intra-
neural spread of prostate cancer.
RECURRENT NEOPLASTIC DISEASE OR 
RADIATION-INDUCED PLEXOPATHY
The treatment for various malignancies is often radia-
tion therapy, the ﬁeld of which may include parts of the 
brachial plexus. It can be difﬁcult in such situations to 
determine if a new brachial or lumbosacral plexopathy 
is related to tumor within the plexus or from radiation-
induced nerve damage. Radiation can be associated with 
microvascular abnormalities and ﬁbrosis of surrounding 
tissues, which can damage the axons and the Schwann 
cells. Radiation-induced plexopathy can develop months 
or years following therapy and is dose dependent.
Tumor invasion is usually painful and more com-
monly affects the lower trunk, while radiation injury 
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
To sphincter
ani externus
Pudendal
Inferior gluteal
Superior gluteal
Sciatic
Common
peroneal
Tibial
FIGURE 45-4 
Lumbosacral plexus. Posterior divisions are in orange, 
anterior divisions are in yellow. (From J Goodgold: Anatomi-
cal Correlates of Clinical Electromyography. Baltimore, Wil-
liams and Wilkins, 1974, p. 126, with permission.)
TABLE 45-10
LUMBOSACRAL PLEXOPATHIES: ETIOLOGIES
• Retroperitoneal hematoma
• Psoas abscess
• Malignant neoplasm
• Benign neoplasm
• Radiation
• Amyloid
• Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropathy
• Idiopathic radiculoplexus neuropathy
• Sarcoidosis
• Aortic occlusion/surgery
• Lithotomy positioning
• Hip arthroplasty
• Pelvic fracture
• Obstetric injury
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
598
is often painless and affects the upper trunk. Imag-
ing studies such as MRI and CT scans are useful but 
can be misleading with small microscopic invasion of 
the plexus. EMG can be informative if myokymic dis-
charges are appreciated, as this ﬁnding strongly suggests 
radiation-induced damage.
EVALUATION AND TREATMENT  
OF PLEXOPATHIES
Most patients with plexopathies will undergo both 
imaging with MRI and EDx evaluations. Severe pain 
from acute idiopathic lumbosacral plexopathy may 
respond to a short course of glucocorticoids.
 Stephen L. Hauser  ■   Anthony A. Amato 
599
 GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute, frequently 
severe, and fulminant polyradiculoneuropathy that is 
autoimmune in nature. It occurs year-round at a rate 
of between 1 and 4 cases per 100,000 annually; in the 
United States, ∼5000–6000 cases occur per year. Males 
are at slightly higher risk for GBS than females, and in 
Western countries adults are more frequently affected 
than children. 
 Clinical manifestations 
 GBS manifests as a rapidly evolving areﬂ exic motor 
paralysis with or without sensory disturbance. The usual 
pattern is an ascending paralysis that may be ﬁ rst noticed 
as rubbery legs. Weakness typically evolves over hours 
to a few days and is frequently accompanied by tin-
gling dysesthesias in the extremities. The legs are usu-
ally more affected than the arms, and facial diparesis is 
present in 50% of affected individuals. The lower cra-
nial nerves are also frequently involved, causing bulbar 
weakness with difﬁ culty handling secretions and main-
taining an airway; the diagnosis in these patients may 
initially be mistaken for brainstem ischemia. Pain in the 
neck, shoulder, back, or diffusely over the spine is also 
common in the early stages of GBS, occurring in ∼50% 
of patients. Most patients require hospitalization, and in 
different series up to 30% require ventilatory assistance 
at some time during the illness. The need for mechani-
cal ventilation is associated with more severe weakness 
on admission, a rapid tempo of progression, and the 
presence of facial and/or bulbar weakness during the 
ﬁ rst week of symptoms. Fever and constitutional symp-
toms are absent at the onset and, if present, cast doubt 
on the diagnosis. Deep tendon reﬂ exes attenuate or 
disappear within the ﬁ rst few days of onset. Cutaneous 
sensory deﬁ cits (e.g., loss of pain and temperature sensa-
tion) are usually relatively mild, but functions subserved 
by large sensory ﬁ bers, such as deep tendon reﬂ exes and 
proprioception, are more severely affected. Bladder dys-
function may occur in severe cases but is usually tran-
sient. If bladder dysfunction is a prominent feature and 
comes early in the course, diagnostic possibilities other 
than GBS should be considered, particularly spinal cord 
disease. Once clinical worsening stops and the patient 
reaches a plateau (almost always within 4 weeks of 
onset), further progression is unlikely. 
 Autonomic involvement is common and may occur 
even in patients whose GBS is otherwise mild. The 
usual manifestations are loss of vasomotor control with 
wide ﬂ uctuation in blood pressure, postural hypoten-
sion, and cardiac dysrhythmias. These features require 
close monitoring and management and can be fatal. 
Pain is another common feature of GBS; in addition 
to the acute pain described earlier, a deep aching pain 
may be present in weakened muscles that patients liken 
to having overexercised the previous day. Other pains 
in GBS include dysesthetic pain in the extremities as a 
manifestation of sensory nerve ﬁ ber involvement. These 
pains are self-limited and often respond to standard 
analgesics ( Chap. 7 ). 
 Several subtypes of GBS are recognized, as deter-
mined primarily by electrodiagnostic (Edx) and patho-
logic distinctions  ( Table 46-1 ) . The most common 
variant is acute inﬂ ammatory demyelinating polyneurop-
athy (AIDP). Additionally, there are two axonal variants, 
which are often clinically severe—the acute motor axo-
nal neuropathy (AMAN) and acute motor sensory axo-
nal neuropathy (AMSAN) subtypes. In addition, a range 
of limited or regional GBS syndromes are also encoun-
tered. Notable among these is the Miller Fisher syndrome 
(MFS), which presents as rapidly evolving ataxia and are-
ﬂ exia of limbs without weakness, and ophthalmoplegia, 
 GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME AND OTHER 
IMMUNE-MEDIATED NEUROPATHIES 
 CHAPTER 46 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
600
often with pupillary paralysis. The MFS variant accounts 
for ∼5% of all cases and is strongly associated with anti-
bodies to the ganglioside GQ1b (see “Immunopatho-
genesis”). Other regional variants of GBS include (1) 
pure sensory forms; (2) ophthalmoplegia with anti-GQ1b 
antibodies as part of severe motor-sensory GBS; (3) GBS 
with severe bulbar and facial paralysis, sometimes associ-
ated with antecedent cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection 
and anti-GM2 antibodies; and (4) acute pandysautonomia 
(Chap. 33).
Antecedent events
Approximately 70% of cases of GBS occur 1–3 weeks 
after an acute infectious process, usually respiratory or 
gastrointestinal. Culture and seroepidemiologic tech-
niques show that 20–30% of all cases occurring in 
North America, Europe, and Australia are preceded 
by infection or reinfection with Campylobacter jejuni. 
A similar proportion is preceded by a human her-
pes virus infection, often CMV or Epstein-Barr virus. 
Other viruses and also Mycoplasma pneumoniae have 
been identiﬁed as agents involved in antecedent infec-
tions, as have recent immunizations. The swine inﬂu-
enza vaccine, administered widely in the United States 
in 1976, is the most notable example. Inﬂuenza vaccines 
in use from 1992 to 1994, however, resulted in only 
one additional case of GBS per million persons vacci-
nated, and the more recent seasonal inﬂuenza vaccines 
appear to confer a GBS risk of <1 per million. A recent 
study demonstrated that there does not appear to be an 
increased risk of GBS with meningococcal vaccinations 
(Menactra) contrary to early reports. Older-type rabies 
vaccine, prepared in nervous system tissue, is impli-
cated as a trigger of GBS in developing countries where 
it is still used; the mechanism is presumably immuni-
zation against neural antigens. GBS also occurs more 
frequently than can be attributed to chance alone in 
patients with lymphoma (including Hodgkin’s disease), 
in HIV-seropositive individuals, and in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). C. jejuni has also 
been implicated in summer outbreaks of AMAN among 
children and young adults exposed to chickens in rural 
China.
Immunopathogenesis
Several lines of evidence support an autoimmune basis 
for acute inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
(AIDP), the most common and best-studied type of 
GBS; the concept extends to all of the subtypes of GBS 
(Table 46-1).
It is likely that both cellular and humoral immune 
mechanisms contribute to tissue damage in AIDP. T 
cell activation is suggested by the ﬁnding that elevated 
levels of cytokines and cytokine receptors are present 
in serum (interleukin [IL] 2, soluble IL-2 receptor) and 
in cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) (IL-6, tumor necrosis fac-
tor α, interferon-γ). AIDP is also closely analogous to 
an experimental T cell–mediated immunopathy desig-
nated experimental allergic neuritis (EAN). EAN is induced 
in laboratory animals by immune sensitization against 
protein fragments derived from peripheral nerve pro-
teins, and in particular against the P2 protein. Based 
on analogy to EAN, it was initially thought that AIDP 
was likely to be primarily a T cell–mediated disorder; 
TABLE 46-1
SUBTYPES OF GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME (GBS)
SUBTYPE
FEATURES
ELECTRODIAGNOSIS
PATHOLOGY
Acute inﬂammatory 
demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP)
Adults affected more than children; 
90% of cases in Western world; 
recovery rapid; anti-GM1 antibodies 
(<50%)
Demyelinating
First attack on Schwann cell surface; 
widespread myelin damage, 
macrophage activation, and 
lymphocytic inﬁltration; variable 
secondary axonal damage
Acute motor axonal 
neuropathy (AMAN)
Children and young adults; prevalent 
in China and Mexico; may be 
seasonal; recovery rapid; anti-GD1a 
antibodies
Axonal
First attack at motor nodes of 
Ranvier; macrophage activation, 
few lymphocytes, frequent 
periaxonal macrophages; extent of 
axonal damage highly variable
Acute motor sensory 
axonal neuropathy 
(AMSAN)
Mostly adults; uncommon; recovery 
slow, often incomplete; closely 
related to AMAN
Axonal
Same as AMAN, but also affects 
sensory nerves and roots; axonal 
damage usually severe
Miller Fisher syndrome 
(MFS)
Adults and children; uncommon; 
ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and 
areﬂexia; anti-GQ1b antibodies (90%)
Demyelinating
Few cases examined; resembles 
AIDP
 
CHAPTER 46
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
601
however, abundant data now suggest that autoantibod-
ies directed against nonprotein determinants may be 
central to many cases.
Circumstantial evidence suggests that all GBS results 
from immune responses to nonself antigens (infectious 
agents, vaccines) that misdirect to host nerve tissue 
through a resemblance-of-epitope (molecular mimicry) 
mechanism (Fig. 46-1). The neural targets are likely 
to be glycoconjugates, speciﬁcally gangliosides (Table 
46-2; Fig. 46-2). Gangliosides are complex glycosphin-
golipids that contain one or more sialic acid residues; 
various gangliosides participate in cell-cell interactions 
(including those between axons and glia), modulation 
of receptors, and regulation of growth. They are typi-
cally exposed on the plasma membrane of cells, render-
ing them susceptible to an antibody-mediated attack. 
Gangliosides and other glycoconjugates are present in 
large quantity in human nervous tissues and in key sites, 
such as nodes of Ranvier. Antiganglioside antibodies, 
most frequently to GM1, are common in GBS (20–50% 
of cases), particularly in those preceded by C. jejuni 
infection. Furthermore, isolates of C. jejuni from stool 
cultures of patients with GBS have surface glycolipid 
structures that antigenically cross react with gangliosides, 
including GM1, concentrated in human nerves. Sialic 
acid residues from pathogenic C. jejuni strains can also 
trigger activation of dendritic cells via signaling through 
a toll-like receptor (TLR4), promoting B-cell differen-
tiation and further amplifying humoral autoimmunity. 
Another line of evidence is derived from experience 
in Europe with parenteral use of puriﬁed bovine brain 
gangliosides for treatment of various neuropathic dis-
orders. Between 5 and 15 days after injection, some 
recipients developed acute motor axonal GBS with high 
titers of anti-GM1 antibodies that recognized epitopes at 
nodes of Ranvier and motor endplates. Experimentally, 
anti-GM1 antibodies can trigger complement-mediated 
injury at paranodal axon-glial junctions, disrupting the 
clustering of sodium channels and likely contributing to 
conduction block (see “Pathophysiology”).
Anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies are found in >90% of 
patients with MFS (Table 46-2; Fig. 46-2), and titers 
Cj
Cj
Cj
C
Gut/Peyer's Patches
Regional Nodes/
Circulation
Peripheral Nerves/
Roots/Ganglia
IL 3,4,5,10
CD4
Antigen
presenting cell
B cell
TCR
MHC II
B cell
Schwann cell
plasmalemma
Blood/nerve
barrier
Ganglioside
(GM-1 and others)
Myelin
sheath
Plasma cell
lgG
Cj
Cj
Cj
O
A
FIGURE 46-1
Postulated immunopathogenesis of GBS associated 
with C. jejuni infection. B cells recognize glycoconjugates 
on C. jejuni (Cj) (triangles) that cross-react with ganglioside 
present on Schwann cell surface and subjacent peripheral 
nerve myelin. Some B cells, activated via a T cell–indepen-
dent mechanism, secrete primarily IgM (not shown). Other 
B cells (upper left side) are activated via a partially T cell–
dependent route and secrete primarily IgG; T cell help is pro-
vided by CD4 cells activated locally by fragments of Cj pro-
teins that are presented on the surface of antigen-presenting 
cells (APCs). A critical event in the development of GBS is 
the escape of activated B cells from Peyer’s patches into 
regional lymph nodes. Activated T cells probably also func-
tion to assist in opening of the blood-nerve barrier, facilitat-
ing penetration of pathogenic autoantibodies. The earliest 
changes in myelin (right) consist of edema between myelin 
lamellae and vesicular disruption (shown as circular blebs) 
of the outermost myelin layers. These effects are associated 
with activation of the C5b-C9 membrane attack complex and 
probably mediated by calcium entry; it is possible that the 
macrophage cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) also par-
ticipates in myelin damage. B, B cell; MHC II, class II major 
histocompatibility complex molecule; TCR, T cell receptor; A, 
axon; O, oligodendrocyte.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
602
of IgG are highest early in the course. Anti-GQ1b anti-
bodies are not found in other forms of GBS unless there 
is extraocular motor nerve involvement. A possible 
explanation for this association is that extraocular motor 
nerves are enriched in GQ1b gangliosides in compari-
son to limb nerves. In addition, a monoclonal anti-
GQ1b antibody raised against C. jejuni isolated from a 
patient with MFS blocked neuromuscular transmission 
experimentally.
Taken together, these observations provide strong 
but still inconclusive evidence that autoantibodies play 
an important pathogenic role in GBS. Although anti-
ganglioside antibodies have been studied most inten-
sively, other antigenic targets may also be important. 
One report identiﬁed IgG antibodies against Schwann 
cells and neurons (nerve growth cone region) in some 
GBS cases. Proof that these antibodies are pathogenic 
requires that they be capable of mediating disease fol-
lowing direct passive transfer to naïve hosts; this has not 
yet been demonstrated, although one case of possible 
maternal-fetal transplacental transfer of GBS has been 
described.
In AIDP, an early step in the induction of tissue 
damage appears to be complement deposition along the 
outer surface of the Schwann cell. Activation of com-
plement initiates a characteristic vesicular disintegration 
of the myelin sheath, and also leads to recruitment of 
activated macrophages, which participate in damage 
TABLE 46-2
PRINCIPAL ANTI-GLYCOLIPID ANTIBODIES IMPLICATED IN IMMUNE NEUROPATHIES
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
ANTIBODY TARGET
USUAL ISOTYPE
Acute Immune Neuropathies (Guillain-Barré Syndrome)
Acute inﬂammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP)
No clear patterns
IgG (polyclonal)
GM1 most common
Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN)
GD1a, GM1, GM1b, GalNAc–GD1a (<50% 
for any)
IgG (polyclonal)
Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS)
GQ1b (>90%)
IgG (polyclonal)
Acute pharyngeal cervicobrachial neuropathy 
(APCBN)
GT1a (? Most)
IgG (polyclonal)
Chronic Immune Neuropathies
Chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (CIDP) (75%)
Po in some
No clear pattern
CIDPa (MGUS associated) (25%)
Neural binding sites
IgG, IgA (monoclonal)
Chronic sensory > motor neuropathy
SPGP, SGLPG (on MAG) (50%)
IgM (monoclonal)
Uncertain (50%)
IgM (monoclonal)
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN)
GM1, GalNAc–GD1a, others (25–50%)
IgM (polyclonal, monoclonal)
Chronic sensory ataxic neuropathy
GD1b, GQ1b, and other b-series gangliosides
IgM (monoclonal)
Abbreviations: MAG, myelin-associated glycoprotein; MGUS, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined signiﬁcance.
Source: Modiﬁed from HJ Willison, N Yuki: Brain 125:2591, 2002.
GM1
GD1a
GaINAc-GD1a
GT1a
GM1b
GD1b
GQ1b
SGPG
LM1
N-acetylneuraminic acid
N-acetylglucosamine
Glucuronic acid
Galactose
Ceramide
N-acetylgalactosamine
Glucose
SO3
SGLPG
SO3
FIGURE 46-2
Glycolipids implicated as antigens in immune-mediated neu-
ropathies. (Modiﬁed from HJ Willison, N Yuki: Brain 125:2591, 
2002.)
 
CHAPTER 46
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
603
to myelin and axons. In AMAN, the pattern is differ-
ent in that complement is deposited along with IgG at 
the nodes of Ranvier along large motor axons. Inter-
estingly, in cases of AMAN antibodies against GD1a 
appear to have a ﬁne speciﬁcity that favors binding to 
motor rather than sensory nerve roots, even though this 
ganglioside is expressed on both ﬁber types.
Pathophysiology
In the demyelinating forms of GBS, the basis for ﬂac-
cid paralysis and sensory disturbance is conduction 
block. This ﬁnding, demonstrable electrophysiologi-
cally, implies that the axonal connections remain intact. 
Hence, recovery can take place rapidly as remyelination 
occurs. In severe cases of demyelinating GBS, second-
ary axonal degeneration usually occurs; its extent can be 
estimated electrophysiologically. More secondary axo-
nal degeneration correlates with a slower rate of recov-
ery and a greater degree of residual disability. When a 
severe primary axonal pattern is encountered electro-
physiologically, the implication is that axons have degen-
erated and become disconnected from their targets, spe-
ciﬁcally the neuromuscular junctions, and must therefore 
regenerate for recovery to take place. In motor axonal 
cases in which recovery is rapid, the lesion is thought 
to be localized to preterminal motor branches, allow-
ing regeneration and reinnervation to take place quickly. 
Alternatively, in mild cases, collateral sprouting and rein-
nervation from surviving motor axons near the neuro-
muscular junction may begin to reestablish physiologic 
continuity with muscle cells over a period of several 
months.
Laboratory features
CSF ﬁndings are distinctive, consisting of an elevated 
CSF protein level (1–10 g/L [100–1000 mg/dL]) with-
out accompanying pleocytosis. The CSF is often nor-
mal when symptoms have been present for f48 h; by 
the end of the ﬁrst week, the level of protein is usu-
ally elevated. A transient increase in the CSF white 
cell count (10–100/μL) occurs on occasion in other-
wise typical GBS; however, a sustained CSF pleocyto-
sis suggests an alternative diagnosis (viral myelitis) or a 
concurrent diagnosis such as unrecognized HIV infec-
tion, leukemia or lymphoma with inﬁltration of nerves, 
or neurosarcoidosis. Edx features are mild or absent 
in the early stages of GBS and lag behind the clini-
cal evolution. In AIDP, the earliest features are pro-
longed F-wave latencies, prolonged distal latencies and 
reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action poten-
tials (CMAPs), probably owing to the predilection for 
involvement of nerve roots and distal motor nerve ter-
minals early in the course. Later, slowing of conduction 
velocity, conduction block, and temporal dispersion 
may be appreciated (Table  46-1). Occasionally, sen-
sory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) may be normal in 
the feet (e.g., sural nerve) when abnormal in the arms. 
This is also a sign that the patient does not have one of 
the more typical “length-dependent” polyneuropathies. 
In cases with primary axonal pathology, the principal 
Edx ﬁnding is reduced amplitude of CMAPs (and also 
SNAPS with AMSAN) without conduction slowing or 
prolongation of distal latencies.
Diagnosis
GBS is a descriptive entity. The diagnosis of AIDP is 
made by recognizing the pattern of rapidly evolving 
paralysis with areﬂexia, absence of fever or other sys-
temic symptoms, and characteristic antecedent events 
(Table 46-3). Other disorders that may enter into the 
differential diagnosis include acute myelopathies (espe-
cially with prolonged back pain and sphincter distur-
bances); diphtheria (early oropharyngeal disturbances); 
Lyme polyradiculitis and other tick-borne paralyses; 
porphyria (abdominal pain, seizures, psychosis); vascu-
litic neuropathy (check erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 
described later); poliomyelitis (fever and meningismus 
common); West Nile virus; CMV polyradiculitis (in 
immunocompromised patients); critical illness neurop-
athy or myopathy; neuromuscular junction disorders 
such as myasthenia gravis and botulism (pupillary reac-
tivity lost early); poisonings with organophosphates, 
thallium, or arsenic; paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning; or 
severe hypophosphatemia (rare). Laboratory tests are 
helpful primarily to exclude mimics of GBS. Edx fea-
tures may be minimal, and the CSF protein level may 
not rise until the end of the ﬁrst week. If the diagno-
sis is strongly suspected, treatment should be initiated 
without waiting for evolution of the characteristic Edx 
and CSF ﬁndings to occur. Both tau and 14-3-3 pro-
tein levels are reported to be elevated early (during the 
ﬁrst few days of symptoms) in some cases of GBS. Tau 
increases in CSF may reﬂect axonal damage and pre-
dict a residual deﬁcit. GBS patients with risk factors for 
HIV or with CSF pleocytosis should have a serologic 
test for HIV.
TREATMENT 
Guillain-Barré Syndrome
In the vast majority of patients with GBS, treatment 
should be initiated as soon after diagnosis as pos-
sible. Each day counts; ∼2 weeks after the first motor 
symptoms, it is not known whether immunotherapy 
is still effective. If the patient has already reached the 
plateau stage, then treatment probably is no longer 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
604
indicated, unless the patient has severe motor weak-
ness and one cannot exclude the possibility that an 
immunologic attack is still ongoing. Either high-dose 
intravenous immune globulin (IVIg) or plasmapheresis 
can be initiated, as they are equally effective for typical 
GBS. A combination of the two therapies is not signifi-
cantly better than either alone. IVIg is often the initial 
therapy chosen because of its ease of administration 
and good safety record. Anecdotal data has also sug-
gested that IVIg may be preferable to PE for the AMAN 
and MFS variants of GBS. IVIg is administered as five 
daily infusions for a total dose of 2 g/kg body weight. 
There is some evidence that GBS autoantibodies are 
neutralized by anti-idiotypic antibodies present in IVIg 
preparations, perhaps accounting for the therapeutic 
effect. A course of plasmapheresis usually consists of 
∼40–50 mL/kg plasma exchange (PE) four to five times 
over a week. Meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials 
indicates that treatment reduces the need for mechani-
cal ventilation by nearly half (from 27% to 14% with PE) 
and increases the likelihood of full recovery at 1 year 
(from 55% to 68%). Functionally significant improve-
ment may occur toward the end of the first week of 
treatment, or may be delayed for several weeks. The 
lack of noticeable improvement following a course of 
IVIg or PE is not an indication to treat with the alternate 
treatment. However, there are occasional patients who 
are treated early in the course of GBS and improve, who 
then relapse within a month. Brief retreatment with 
the original therapy is usually effective in such cases. 
Glucocorticoids have not been found to be effective in 
GBS. Occasional patients with very mild forms of GBS, 
especially those who appear to have already reached a 
plateau when initially seen, may be managed conserva-
tively without IVIg or PE.
In the worsening phase of GBS, most patients 
require monitoring in a critical care setting, with par-
ticular attention to vital capacity, heart rhythm, blood 
pressure, nutrition, deep vein thrombosis prophy-
laxis, cardiovascular status, early consideration (after 
2 weeks of intubation) of tracheotomy, and chest 
physiotherapy. As noted, ∼30% of patients with GBS 
require ventilatory assistance, sometimes for pro-
longed periods of time (several weeks or longer). Fre-
quent turning and assiduous skin care are important, 
as are daily range-of-motion exercises to avoid joint 
contractures and daily reassurance as to the generally 
good outlook for recovery.
Prognosis and recovery
Approximately 85% of patients with GBS achieve 
a full functional recovery within several months to a 
year, although minor ﬁndings on examination (such 
TABLE 46-3
DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES OF ACUTE INFLAMMATORY 
DEMYELINATING POLYNEUROPATHY (AIDP)
 I. Required for Diagnosis
1.  Progressive weakness of variable degree from mild 
paresis to complete paralysis
2. Generalized hypo- or areﬂexia
 II. Supportive of Diagnosis
1. Clinical Features
a.  Symptom progression: Motor weakness rapidly 
progresses initially but ceases by 4 weeks. Nadir 
attained by 2 weeks in 50%, 3 weeks 80%, and 
90% by 4 weeks.
b.  Demonstration of relative limb symmetry regard-
ing paresis.
c. Mild to moderate sensory signs.
d.  Frequent cranial nerve involvement: Facial (cranial 
nerve VII) 50% and typically bilateral but asym-
metric; occasional involvement of cranial nerves 
XII, X, and occasionally III, IV, and VI as well as XI.
e.  Recovery typically begins 2–4 weeks following 
plateau phase.
f.  Autonomic dysfunction can include tachycardia, 
other arrhythmias, postural hypotension, hyper-
tension, other vasomotor symptoms.
g.  A preceding gastrointestinal illness (e.g., diarrhea) 
or upper respiratory tract infection is common.
2. Cerebrospinal Fluid Features Supporting Diagnosis
a. Elevated or serial elevation of CSF protein.
b. CSF cell counts are <10 mononuclear cell/mm3.
3.  Electrodiagnostic Medicine Findings Supportive of 
Diagnosis
a.  80% of patients have evidence of NCV slowing/
conduction block at some time during disease 
process.
b.  Patchy reduction in NCV attaining values less 
than 60% of normal.
c.  Distal motor latency increase may reach 3 times 
normal values.
d.  F-waves indicate proximal NCV slowing.
e.  About 15–20% of patients have normal NCV 
ﬁndings.
f.  No abnormalities on nerve conduction studies 
may be seen for several weeks.
 III. Findings Reducing Possibility of Diagnosis
1. Asymmetric weakness
2. Failure of bowel/bladder symptoms to resolve
3.  Severe bowel/bladder dysfunction at initiation of 
disease
4.  Greater than 50 mononuclear cells/mm3 in CSF
5.  Well-demarcated sensory level
 IV. Exclusionary Criteria
1.  Diagnosis of other causes of acute neuromuscular 
weakness (e.g., myasthenia gravis, botulism, polio-
myelitis, toxic neuropathy).
2.  Abnormal CSF cytology suggesting carcinomatous 
invasion of the nerve roots
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; NCV, nerve conduction 
velocity.
Source: AA Amato, D Dumitru, in D Dumitru et al (eds): Electrodiag-
nostic Medicine, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Hanley & Belfus, 2002.
 
CHAPTER 46
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
605
as areﬂexia) may persist and patients often complain of 
continued symptoms, including fatigue. The mortal-
ity rate is <5% in optimal settings; death usually results 
from secondary pulmonary complications. The out-
look is worst in patients with severe proximal motor 
and sensory axonal damage. Such axonal damage may 
be either primary or secondary in nature (see “Patho-
physiology,” earlier in the chapter), but in either case 
successful regeneration cannot occur. Other factors 
that worsen the outlook for recovery are advanced 
age, a fulminant or severe attack, and a delay in the 
onset of treatment. Between 5 and 10% of patients 
with typical GBS have one or more late relapses; such 
cases are then classiﬁed as chronic inﬂammatory demy-
elinating polyneuropathy (CIDP).
CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY 
DEMYELINATING POLYNEUROPATHY
CIDP is distinguished from GBS by its chronic course. 
In other respects, this neuropathy shares many features 
with the common demyelinating form of GBS, includ-
ing elevated CSF protein levels and the Edx ﬁnd-
ings of acquired demyelination. Most cases occur in 
adults, and males are affected slightly more often than 
females. The incidence of CIDP is lower than that of 
GBS, but due to the protracted course the prevalence is 
greater.
Clinical manifestations
Onset is usually gradual over a few months or longer, 
but in a few cases the initial attack is indistinguish-
able from that of GBS. An acute-onset form of CIDP 
should be considered when GBS deteriorates >9 weeks 
after onset or relapses at least three times. Symptoms are 
both motor and sensory in most cases. Weakness of the 
limbs is usually symmetric but can be strikingly asym-
metric in multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory 
and motor (MADSAM) neuropathy variant (Lewis-
Sumner syndrome) in which discrete peripheral nerves 
are involved. There is considerable variability from case 
to case. Some patients experience a chronic progressive 
course, whereas others, usually younger patients, have a 
relapsing and remitting course. Some have only motor 
ﬁndings, and a small proportion present with a rela-
tively pure syndrome of sensory ataxia. Tremor occurs 
in ∼10% and may become more prominent during 
periods of subacute worsening or improvement. A small 
proportion have cranial nerve ﬁndings, including exter-
nal ophthalmoplegia. CIDP tends to ameliorate over 
time with treatment; the result is that many years after 
onset, nearly 75% of patients have reasonable functional 
status. Death from CIDP is uncommon.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis rests on characteristic clinical, CSF, and 
electrophysiologic ﬁndings. The CSF is usually acellular 
with an elevated protein level, sometimes several times 
normal. As with GBS, a CSF pleocytosis should lead to 
the consideration of HIV infection, leukemia or lym-
phoma, and neurosarcoidosis. Edx ﬁndings reveal variable 
degrees of conduction slowing, prolonged distal latencies, 
distal and temporal dispersion of CMAPs, and conduc-
tion block as the principal features. In particular, the pres-
ence of conduction block is a certain sign of an acquired 
demyelinating process. Evidence of axonal loss, presum-
ably secondary to demyelination, is present in >50% of 
patients. Serum protein electrophoresis with immunoﬁx-
ation is indicated to search for monoclonal gammopathy 
and associated conditions (see “Monoclonal Gammopa-
thy of Undetermined Signiﬁcance,” later in the chapter). 
In all patients with presumptive CIDP, it is also reason-
able to exclude vasculitis, collagen vascular disease (espe-
cially SLE), chronic hepatitis, HIV infection, amyloidosis, 
and diabetes mellitus. Other associated conditions include 
inﬂammatory bowel disease and lymphoma.
Pathogenesis
Although there is evidence of immune activation in 
CIDP, the precise mechanisms of pathogenesis are 
unknown. Biopsy typically reveals little inﬂammation 
and onion-bulb changes (imbricated layers of attenu-
ated Schwann cell processes surrounding an axon) that 
result from recurrent demyelination and remyelination 
(Fig. 46-1). The response to therapy suggests that CIDP 
is immune-mediated; CIDP responds to glucocorticoids, 
whereas GBS does not. Passive transfer of demyelin-
ation into experimental animals has been accomplished 
using IgG puriﬁed from the serum of some patients 
with CIDP, lending support for a humoral autoimmune 
pathogenesis. Although the target antigen or antigens 
in CIDP have not yet been identiﬁed, the myelin pro-
tein Po has been implicated as a potential autoantigen in 
some patients. It is also of interest that a CIDP-like ill-
ness developed spontaneously in the nonobese diabetic 
(NOD) mouse when the immune co-stimulatory mol-
ecule B7-2 (CD86) was genetically deleted; this suggests 
that CIDP can result from altered triggering of T cells by 
antigen-presenting cells.
Approximately 25% of patients with clinical features 
of CIDP also have a monoclonal gammopathy of unde-
termined signiﬁcance (MGUS). Cases associated with 
monoclonal IgA or IgG kappa usually respond to treat-
ment as favorably as cases without a monoclonal gam-
mopathy. Patients with IgM monoclonal gammopathy 
tend to have more sensory ﬁndings and a more pro-
tracted course, and usually have a less satisfactory response 
to treatment.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
606
TREATMENT 
 Chronic Inﬂammatory Demyelinating 
Polyneuropathy
Most authorities initiate treatment for CIDP when pro-
gression is rapid or walking is compromised. If the dis-
order is mild, management can be expectant, awaiting 
spontaneous remission. Controlled studies have shown 
that high-dose IVIg, PE, and glucocorticoids are all more 
effective than placebo. Initial therapy is usually with 
IVIg, administered as 2.0 g/kg body weight given in 
divided doses over 2–5 days; three monthly courses are 
generally recommended before concluding a patient 
is a treatment failure. If the patient responds, the infu-
sion intervals can be gradually increased or the dosage 
decreased (e.g., 1 g/kg per month). PE, which appears to 
be as effective as IVIg, is initiated at two to three treat-
ments per week for 6 weeks; periodic re-treatment 
may also be required. Treatment with glucocorticoids is 
another option (60–80 mg prednisone PO daily for 1–2 
months, followed by a gradual dose reduction of 10 mg 
per month as tolerated), but long-term adverse effects 
including bone demineralization, gastrointestinal bleed-
ing, and cushingoid changes are problematic. As many 
as one-third of patients with CIDP fail to respond ade-
quately to the initial therapy chosen; a different treat-
ment should then be tried. Patients who fail therapy 
with IVIg, PE, and glucocorticoids may benefit from 
treatment with immunosuppressive agents such as aza-
thioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporine, and cyclophos-
phamide, either alone or as adjunctive therapy. Early 
experience with anti-CD20 (rituximab) has also shown 
promise. Use of these therapies requires periodic reas-
sessment of their risks and benefits. In patients with a 
CIDP-like neuropathy who fail to respond to treatment it 
is important to evaluate for POEMS syndrome (polyneu-
ropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal 
gammopathy, skin changes; discussed later).
MULTIFOCAL MOTOR NEUROPATHY
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is a distinctive 
but uncommon neuropathy that presents as slowly 
progressive motor weakness and atrophy evolving 
over years in the distribution of selected nerve trunks, 
associated with sites of persistent focal motor conduc-
tion block in the same nerve trunks. Sensory ﬁbers 
are relatively spared. The arms are affected more fre-
quently than the legs, and >75% of all patients are 
male. Some cases have been confused with lower 
motor neuron forms of amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis (Chap. 32). Less than 50% of patients present with 
high titers of polyclonal IgM antibody to the ganglio-
side GM1. It is uncertain how this ﬁnding relates to 
the discrete foci of persistent motor conduction block, 
but high concentrations of GM1 gangliosides are nor-
mal constituents of nodes of Ranvier in peripheral 
nerve ﬁbers. Pathology reveals demyelination and 
mild inﬂammatory changes at the sites of conduction 
block.
Most patients with MMN respond to high-dose 
IVIg (dosages as for CIDP, discussed earlier); peri-
odic re-treatment is required (usually at least monthly) 
to maintain the beneﬁt. Some refractory patients have 
responded to rituximab or cyclophosphamide. Gluco-
corticoids and PE are not effective.
NEUROPATHIES WITH MONOCLONAL 
GAMMOPATHY
MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Clinically overt polyneuropathy occurs in ∼5% of 
patients with the commonly encountered type of mul-
tiple myeloma, which exhibits either lytic or diffuse 
osteoporotic bone lesions. These neuropathies are sen-
sorimotor, are usually mild and slowly progressive but 
may be severe, and generally do not reverse with suc-
cessful suppression of the myeloma. In most cases, Edx 
and pathologic features are consistent with a process of 
axonal degeneration.
In contrast, myeloma with osteosclerotic features, 
although representing only 3% of all myelomas, is asso-
ciated with polyneuropathy in one-half of cases. These 
neuropathies, which may also occur with solitary plas-
macytoma, are distinct because they (1) are usually 
demyelinating in nature and resemble CIDP; (2) often 
respond to radiation therapy or removal of the pri-
mary lesion; (3) are associated with different monoclo-
nal proteins and light chains (almost always lambda as 
opposed to primarily kappa in the lytic type of mul-
tiple myeloma); (4) are typically refractory to standard 
treatments of CIDP; and (5) may occur in association 
with other systemic ﬁndings including thickening of the 
skin, hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, organomeg-
aly, endocrinopathy, anasarca, and clubbing of ﬁngers. 
These are features of the POEMS syndrome (polyneu-
ropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and 
skin changes). Levels of vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor (VEGF) are increased in the serum, and this factor 
is felt to somehow play a pathogenic role in this syn-
drome. Treatment of the neuropathy is best directed at 
the osteosclerotic myeloma using surgery, radiotherapy, 
chemotherapy, or autologous peripheral blood stem cell 
transplantation.
Neuropathies are also encountered in other systemic 
conditions with gammopathy, including Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinemia, primary systemic amyloidosis, and 
cryoglobulinemic states (mixed essential cryoglobuline-
mia, some cases of hepatitis C).
 
CHAPTER 46
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other Immune-Mediated Neuropathies
607
MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF 
UNDETERMINED SIGNIFICANCE
Chronic polyneuropathies occurring in association with 
MGUS are usually associated with the immunoglobu-
lin isotypes IgG, IgA, and IgM. Most patients present 
with isolated sensory symptoms in their distal extremi-
ties and have Edx features of an axonal sensory or sen-
sorimotor polyneuropathy. These patients otherwise 
resemble idiopathic sensory polyneuropathy and the 
MGUS might just be coincidental. They usually do 
not respond to immunotherapies designed to reduce 
the concentration of the monoclonal protein. Some 
patients, however, present with generalized weakness 
and sensory loss and Edx studies indistinguishable from 
CIDP without monoclonal gammopathy (see “Chronic 
Inﬂammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy,” earlier 
in the chapter), and their response to immunosuppres-
sive agents is also similar. An exception is the syndrome 
of IgM kappa monoclonal gammopathy associated with 
an indolent, longstanding, sometimes static sensory 
neuropathy, frequently with tremor and sensory ataxia. 
Most patients are male and older than age 50 years. In 
the majority, the monoclonal IgM immunoglobulin 
binds to a normal peripheral nerve constituent, myelin-
associated glycoprotein (MAG), found in the paranodal 
regions of Schwann cells. Binding appears to be speciﬁc 
for a polysaccharide epitope that is also found in other 
normal peripheral nerve myelin glycoproteins, P0 and 
PMP22, and also in other normal nerve-related glyco-
sphingolipids (Fig. 46-1). In the MAG-positive cases, 
IgM paraprotein is incorporated into the myelin sheaths 
of affected patients and widens the spacing of the myelin 
lamellae, thus producing a distinctive ultrastructural pat-
tern. Demyelination and remyelination are the hallmarks 
of the lesions. The chronic demyelinating neuropathy 
appears to result from a destabilization of myelin metabo-
lism rather than activation of an immune response. Ther-
apy with chlorambucil, or cyclophosphamide combined 
with glucocorticoids or PE, often results in improvement 
of the neuropathy associated with a prolonged reduc-
tion in the levels in the circulating paraprotein; chronic 
use of these alkylating agents is associated with signiﬁcant 
risks. In a small proportion of patients (30% at 10 years), 
MGUS will in time evolve into frankly malignant condi-
tions such as multiple myeloma or lymphoma.
VASCULITIC NEUROPATHY
Peripheral nerve involvement is common in polyarteri-
tis nodosa (PAN), appearing in half of all cases clinically 
and in 100% of cases at postmortem studies. The most 
common pattern is multifocal (asymmetric) motor-sen-
sory neuropathy (mononeuropathy multiplex) due to 
ischemic lesions of nerve trunks and roots; however, 
some cases of vasculitic neuropathy present as a distal, 
symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Symptoms 
of neuropathy are a common presenting complaint in 
patients with PAN. The Edx ﬁndings are those of an 
axonal process. Small- to medium-sized arteries of the 
vasa nervorum, particularly the epineural vessels, are 
affected in PAN, resulting in a widespread ischemic 
neuropathy. A high frequency of neuropathy occurs 
in allergic angiitis and granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss 
syndrome).
Systemic vasculitis should always be considered when 
a subacute or chronically evolving mononeuropathy 
multiplex occurs in conjunction with constitutional 
symptoms (fever, anorexia, weight loss, loss of energy, 
malaise, and nonspeciﬁc pains). Diagnosis of suspected 
vasculitic neuropathy is made by a combined nerve 
and muscle biopsy, with serial section or skip-serial 
techniques.
Approximately one-third of biopsy-proven cases of 
vasculitic neuropathy are “nonsystemic” in that the vas-
culitis appears to affect only peripheral nerves. Consti-
tutional symptoms are absent, and the course is more 
indolent than that of PAN. The erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate may be elevated, but other tests for sys-
temic disease are negative. Nevertheless, clinically silent 
involvement of other organs is likely, and vasculitis is 
frequently found in muscle biopsied at the same time as 
nerve.
Vasculitic neuropathy may also be seen as part of the 
vasculitis syndrome occurring in the course of other con-
nective tissue disorders. The most frequent is rheumatoid 
arthritis, but ischemic neuropathy due to involvement 
of vasa nervorum may also occur in mixed cryoglobuli-
nemia, Sjögren’s syndrome, granulomatosis with poly-
angiitis (Wegener’s), hypersensitivity angiitis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, and progressive systemic sclerosis. 
Management of these neuropathies, including the “non-
systemic” vasculitic neuropathy, consists of treatment of 
the underlying condition as well as the aggressive use of 
glucocorticoids and other immunosuppressant drugs. Use 
of these regimens has resulted in dramatic improvements 
in outcome, with 5-year survival rates now greater than 
80%. One reasonable starting regimen is daily prednisone 
(initial dose 1 mg/kg per day PO with a gradual taper 
after 1 month) plus IV pulse (or daily oral) cyclophospha-
mide for 3–6 months.
ANTI-HU PARANEOPLASTIC 
NEUROPATHY
This uncommon immune-mediated disorder mani-
fests as a sensory neuronopathy (i.e., selective dam-
age to sensory nerve bodies in dorsal root ganglia). 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
608
The onset is often asymmetric with dysesthesias and 
sensory loss in the limbs that soon progress to affect 
all limbs, the torso, and face. Marked sensory ataxia, 
pseudoathetosis, and inability to walk, stand, or even 
sit unsupported are frequent features and are second-
ary to the extensive deafferentation. Subacute sen-
sory neuronopathy may be idiopathic, but more 
than half of cases are paraneoplastic, primarily related 
to lung cancer, and most of those are small cell lung 
cancer (SCLC). Diagnosis of the underlying SCLC 
requires awareness of the association, paraneoplastic 
testing, and often PET scanning for the tumor. The 
target antigens are a family of RNA-binding proteins 
(HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1) that in normal tissues are 
only expressed by neurons. The same proteins are usu-
ally expressed by SCLC, triggering in some patients 
an immune response characterized by antibodies and 
cytotoxic T cells that cross-react with the Hu pro-
teins of the dorsal root ganglion neurons, resulting in 
immune-mediated neuronal destruction. An encepha-
lomyelitis may accompany the sensory neuronopathy 
and presumably has the same pathogenesis. Neurologic 
symptoms usually precede, by ≤6 months, the identi-
ﬁcation of SCLC. The sensory neuronopathy runs its 
course in a few weeks or months and stabilizes, leav-
ing the patient disabled. Most cases are unresponsive 
to treatment with glucocorticoids, IVIg, PE, or immu-
nosuppressant drugs.
 Daniel B.  Drachman 
609
 Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular disorder 
characterized by weakness and fatigability of skeletal mus-
cles. The underlying defect is a decrease in the number 
of available acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) at neuro-
muscular junctions due to an antibody-mediated autoim-
mune attack. Treatment now available for MG is highly 
effective, although a speciﬁ c cure has remained elusive. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 At the neuromuscular junction  ( Fig. 47-1 ) , acetylcho-
line (ACh) is synthesized in the motor nerve terminal 
and stored in vesicles (quanta). When an action poten-
tial travels down a motor nerve and reaches the nerve 
terminal, ACh from 150 to 200 vesicles is released 
and combines with AChRs that are densely packed at 
the peaks of postsynaptic folds. The structure of the 
AChR has been fully elucidated; it consists of ﬁ ve sub-
units (2α, 1β, 1δ, and 1γ or ε) arranged around a cen-
tral pore. When ACh combines with the binding sites 
on the α subunits of the AChR, the channel in the 
AChR opens, permitting the rapid entry of cations, 
chieﬂ y sodium, which produces depolarization at the 
end-plate region of the muscle ﬁ ber. If the depolariza-
tion is sufﬁ ciently large, it initiates an action potential 
that is propagated along the muscle ﬁ ber, triggering 
muscle contraction. This process is rapidly terminated 
by hydrolysis of ACh by acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 
which is present within the synaptic folds, and by diffu-
sion of ACh away from the receptor. 
 In MG, the fundamental defect is a decrease in the 
number of available AChRs at the postsynaptic muscle 
membrane. In addition, the postsynaptic folds are ﬂ attened, 
 MYASTHENIA GRAVIS AND OTHER DISEASES 
OF THE NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION 
 CHAPTER 47 
Axon
Release site
AChR
AChE
Vesicle
Muscle
A  Normal  
B  MG
Mitochondria
Nerve
terminal
 FIGURE 47-1 
 Diagrams of ( A ) normal and ( B ) myasthenic neuromus-
cular junctions. AChE, acetylcholinesterase. See text for 
description of normal neuromuscular transmission. The 
MG junction demonstrates a normal nerve terminal; a 
reduced number of AChRs (stippling); ﬂ attened, simpliﬁ ed 
postsynaptic folds; and a widened synaptic space.  (Modi-
ﬁ ed from DB Drachman: N Engl J Med 330:1797, 1994; 
with permission.) 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
610
or “simpliﬁed.” These changes result in decreased efﬁ-
ciency of neuromuscular transmission. Therefore, although 
ACh is released normally, it produces small end-plate 
potentials that may fail to trigger muscle action potentials. 
Failure of transmission at many neuromuscular junctions 
results in weakness of muscle contraction.
The amount of ACh released per impulse normally 
declines on repeated activity (termed presynaptic run-
down). In the myasthenic patient, the decreased efﬁ-
ciency of neuromuscular transmission combined with 
the normal rundown results in the activation of fewer 
and fewer muscle ﬁbers by successive nerve impulses 
and hence increasing weakness, or myasthenic fatigue. 
This mechanism also accounts for the decremental 
response to repetitive nerve stimulation seen on electro-
diagnostic testing.
The neuromuscular abnormalities in MG are brought 
about by an autoimmune response mediated by spe-
ciﬁc anti-AChR antibodies. The anti-AChR antibodies 
reduce the number of available AChRs at neuromuscu-
lar junctions by three distinct mechanisms: (1) accelerated 
turnover of AChRs by a mechanism involving cross-
linking and rapid endocytosis of the receptors; (2) damage 
to the postsynaptic muscle membrane by the antibody in 
collaboration with complement; and (3) blockade of the 
active site of the AChR, i.e., the site that normally binds 
ACh. An immune response to muscle-speciﬁc kinase 
(MuSK), a protein involved in AChR clustering at neu-
romuscular junctions, can also result in myasthenia gravis, 
with reduction of AChRs demonstrated experimentally. 
The pathogenic antibodies are IgG, and are T cell-
dependent. Thus, immunotherapeutic strategies directed 
against either the antibody-producing B cells or helper T 
cells are effective in this antibody-mediated disease.
How the autoimmune response is initiated and main-
tained in MG is not completely understood, but the thy-
mus appears to play a role in this process. The thymus is 
abnormal in ∼75% of patients with MG; in ∼65% the 
thymus is “hyperplastic,” with the presence of active ger-
minal centers detected histologically, though the hyper-
plastic thymus is not necessarily enlarged. An additional 
10% of patients have thymic tumors (thymomas). Mus-
cle-like cells within the thymus (myoid cells), which bear 
AChRs on their surface, may serve as a source of auto-
antigen and trigger the autoimmune reaction within the 
thymus gland.
CLINICAL FEATURES
MG is not rare, having a prevalence of 2–7 in 10,000. 
It affects individuals in all age groups, but peaks of inci-
dence occur in women in their twenties and thirties 
and in men in their ﬁfties and sixties. Overall, women 
are affected more frequently than men, in a ratio of 
∼3:2. The cardinal features are weakness and fatigability 
of muscles. The weakness increases during repeated use 
(fatigue) or late in the day, and may improve following 
rest or sleep. The course of MG is often variable. Exac-
erbations and remissions may occur, particularly during 
the ﬁrst few years after the onset of the disease. Remis-
sions are rarely complete or permanent. Unrelated 
infections or systemic disorders can lead to increased 
myasthenic weakness and may precipitate “crisis” (dis-
cussed later).
The distribution of muscle weakness often has a 
characteristic pattern. The cranial muscles, particularly 
the lids and extraocular muscles, are typically involved 
early in the course of MG; diplopia and ptosis are com-
mon initial complaints. Facial weakness produces a 
“snarling” expression when the patient attempts to 
smile. Weakness in chewing is most noticeable after 
prolonged effort, as in chewing meat. Speech may have 
a nasal timbre caused by weakness of the palate, or a 
dysarthric “mushy” quality due to tongue weakness. 
Difﬁculty in swallowing may occur as a result of weak-
ness of the palate, tongue, or pharynx, giving rise to 
nasal regurgitation or aspiration of liquids or food. Bul-
bar weakness is especially prominent in MuSK anti-
body–positive MG. In ∼85% of patients, the weakness 
becomes generalized, affecting the limb muscles as well. 
If weakness remains restricted to the extraocular mus-
cles for 3 years, it is likely that it will not become gen-
eralized, and these patients are said to have ocular MG. 
The limb weakness in MG is often proximal and may 
be asymmetric. Despite the muscle weakness, deep ten-
don reﬂexes are preserved. If weakness of respiration 
becomes so severe as to require respiratory assistance, 
the patient is said to be in crisis.
DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
(Table 47-1) The diagnosis is suspected on the basis 
of weakness and fatigability in the typical distribution 
described earlier, without loss of reﬂexes or impair-
ment of sensation or other neurologic function. The 
suspected diagnosis should always be conﬁrmed deﬁni-
tively before treatment is undertaken; this is essen-
tial because (1) other treatable conditions may closely 
resemble MG and (2) the treatment of MG may involve 
surgery and the prolonged use of drugs with potentially 
adverse side effects.
Antibodies to AChR or MuSK
As noted earlier, anti-AChR antibodies are detectable 
in the serum of ∼85% of all myasthenic patients but 
in only about 50% of patients with weakness conﬁned 
to the ocular muscles. The presence of anti-AChR 
 
CHAPTER 47
Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction
611
antibodies is virtually diagnostic of MG, but a negative 
test does not exclude the disease. The measured level 
of anti-AChR antibody does not correspond well with 
the severity of MG in different patients. However, in an 
individual patient, a treatment-induced fall in the anti-
body level often correlates with clinical improvement, 
while a rise in the level may occur with exacerbations. 
Antibodies to MuSK have been found to be present in 
∼40% of AChR antibody–negative patients with gen-
eralized MG, and their presence is a useful diagnostic 
test in these patients. MuSK antibodies are rarely pres-
ent in AChR antibody–positive patients or in patients 
with MG limited to ocular muscles. These antibodies 
may interfere with clustering of AChRs at neuromus-
cular junctions, as MuSK is known to do during early 
development. There is also evidence that MG patients 
without antibodies demonstrable by standard AChR or 
MuSK tests may have either low-afﬁnity antibodies, or 
other—as yet undeﬁned—antibodies that impair neuro-
muscular transmission.
Electrodiagnostic testing
Repetitive nerve stimulation may provide helpful diag-
nostic evidence of MG. Anti-AChE medication is 
stopped 6–24 h before testing. It is best to test weak 
muscles or proximal muscle groups. Electric shocks are 
delivered at a rate of two or three per second to the 
appropriate nerves, and action potentials are recorded 
from the muscles. In normal individuals, the amplitude 
of the evoked muscle action potentials does not change 
at these rates of stimulation. However, in myasthenic 
patients there is a rapid reduction of >10–15% in the 
amplitude of the evoked responses.
Anticholinesterase test
Drugs that inhibit the enzyme AChE allow ACh to 
interact repeatedly with the limited number of AChRs 
in MG, producing improvement in muscle strength. 
Edrophonium is used most commonly for diagnos-
tic testing because of the rapid onset (30 s) and short 
duration (∼5 min) of its effect. An objective end-point 
must be selected to evaluate the effect of edrophonium, 
such as weakness of extraocular muscles, impairment of 
speech, or the length of time that the patient can main-
tain the arms in forward abduction. An initial IV dose 
of 2 mg of edrophonium is given. If deﬁnite improve-
ment occurs, the test is considered positive and is ter-
minated. If there is no change, the patient is given an 
additional 8 mg IV. The dose is administered in two 
parts because some patients react to edrophonium with 
side effects such as nausea, diarrhea, salivation, fascicula-
tions, and rarely with severe symptoms of syncope or 
bradycardia. Atropine (0.6 mg) should be drawn up in 
a syringe, ready for IV administration if these symp-
toms become troublesome. The edrophonium test is 
now reserved for patients with clinical ﬁndings that are 
suggestive of MG but who have negative antibody and 
electrodiagnostic test results. False-positive tests occur 
in occasional patients with other neurologic disorders, 
such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and in placebo-
reactors. False-negative or equivocal tests may also 
occur. In some cases, it is helpful to use a longer-acting 
drug such as neostigmine (15 mg PO), since this permits 
more time for detailed evaluation of strength.
Inherited myasthenic syndromes
The congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) comprise 
a heterogeneous group of disorders of the neuromus-
cular junction that are not autoimmune but rather are 
due to genetic mutations in which virtually any com-
ponent of the neuromuscular junction may be affected. 
Alterations in function of the presynaptic nerve termi-
nal or in the various subunits of the AChR or AChE 
have been identiﬁed in the different forms of CMS. 
TABLE 47-1
DIAGNOSIS OF MYASTHENIA GRAVIS (MG)
History
 Diplopia, ptosis, weakness
 Weakness in characteristic distribution
 Fluctuation and fatigue: worse with repeated activity, 
improved by rest
 Effects of previous treatments
Physical examination
 Ptosis, diplopia
  Motor power survey: quantitative testing of muscle 
strength
 Forward arm abduction time (5 min)
 Vital capacity
 Absence of other neurologic signs
Laboratory testing
  Anti-AChR radioimmunoassay: ∼85% positive in gen-
eralized MG; 50% in ocular MG; deﬁnite diagnosis if 
positive; negative result does not exclude MG. ∼40% 
of AChR antibody–negative patients with generalized 
MG have anti-MuSK antibodies.
  Repetitive nerve stimulation: decrement of >15% at  
3 Hz: highly probable
  Single-ﬁber electromyography: blocking and jitter, with 
normal ﬁber density; conﬁrmatory, but not speciﬁc
  Edrophonium chloride (Tensilon) 2 mg + 8 mg IV; highly 
probable diagnosis if unequivocally positive
  For ocular or cranial MG: exclude intracranial lesions by 
CT or MRI
Abbreviations: AChR, acetylcholine receptor; MuSK, muscle-
speciﬁc tyrosine kinase.
Source: From RT Johnson, JW Grifﬁn (eds): Current Therapy in 
Neurologic Disease, 4th ed. St. Louis, Mosby Year Book, 1994; with 
permission.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
612
These disorders share many of the clinical features of 
autoimmune MG, including weakness and fatigability 
of skeletal muscles, in some cases involving extraocular 
muscles (EOMs), lids, and proximal muscles, similar to 
the distribution in autoimmune MG. CMS should be 
suspected when symptoms of myasthenia have begun 
in infancy or childhood and AChR antibody tests are 
consistently negative. Features of four of the most com-
mon forms of CMS are summarized in Table 47-2. 
Although clinical features and electrodiagnostic and 
pharmacologic tests may suggest the correct diagno-
sis, molecular analysis is required for precise elucida-
tion of the defect; this may lead to helpful treatment as 
well as genetic counseling. In the forms that involve the 
AChR, a wide variety of mutations have been identi-
ﬁed in each of the subunits, but the ε subunit is affected 
in ∼75% of these cases. In most of the recessively 
inherited forms of CMS, the mutations are heteroallelic; 
that is, different mutations affecting each of the two 
alleles are present.
Differential diagnosis
Other conditions that cause weakness of the cranial and/
or somatic musculature include the nonautoimmune 
CMS discussed earlier, drug-induced myasthenia, Lam-
bert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), neurasthenia, 
hyperthyroidism, botulism, intracranial mass lesions, and 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia. Treatment with 
penicillamine (used for scleroderma or rheumatoid arthri-
tis) may result in true autoimmune MG, but the weak-
ness is usually mild, and recovery occurs within weeks or 
months after discontinuing its use. Aminoglycoside anti-
biotics or procainamide can cause exacerbation of weak-
ness in myasthenic patients; very large doses can cause 
neuromuscular weakness in normal individuals.
LEMS is a presynaptic disorder of the neuromus-
cular junction that can cause weakness similar to that 
of MG. The proximal muscles of the lower limbs 
are most commonly affected, but other muscles may 
be involved as well. Cranial nerve ﬁndings, includ-
ing ptosis of the eyelids and diplopia, occur in up to 
70% of patients and resemble features of MG. How-
ever, the two conditions are usually readily distin-
guished, since patients with LEMS have depressed 
or absent reﬂexes and experience autonomic changes 
such as dry mouth and impotence. Nerve stimulation 
produces an initial low-amplitude response and, at low 
rates of repetitive stimulation (2–3 Hz), decremen-
tal responses like those of MG; however, at high rates 
(50 Hz), or following exercise, incremental responses 
occur. LEMS is caused by autoantibodies directed 
against P/Q-type calcium channels at the motor nerve 
terminals, which can be detected in ∼85% of LEMS 
patients by radioimmunoassay. These autoantibod-
ies result in impaired release of ACh from nerve ter-
minals. Most patients with LEMS have an associated 
malignancy, most commonly small cell carcinoma of 
TABLE 47-2 
THE CONGENITAL MYASTHENIC SYNDROMES
TYPE
CLINICAL FEATURES
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY
GENETICS
END-PLATE EFFECTS
TREATMENT
Slow channel
Most common; weak 
forearm extensors; 
onset 2nd to 3rd 
decade; variable 
severity
Repetitive muscle 
response on nerve 
stimulation; prolonged 
channel opening and 
MEPP duration
Autosomal 
dominant; α, β, ε 
AChR mutations
Excitotoxic end-
plate myopathy; 
decreased AChRs; 
postsynaptic 
damage
Quinidine: 
decreases end-
plate damage; 
made worse by 
anti-AChE
Low-afﬁnity 
fast channel
Onset early; 
moderately severe; 
ptosis, EOM involve-
ment; weakness and 
fatigue
Brief and infrequent 
channel openings; 
opposite of slow 
channel syndrome
Autosomal reces-
sive; may be het-
eroallelic
Normal end-plate 
structure
3,4-DAP; anti-
AChE
Severe AChR 
deﬁciencies
Early onset; variable 
severity; fatigue; 
typical MG features
Decremental response 
to repetitive 
nerve stimulation; 
decreased MEPP 
amplitudes
Autosomal reces-
sive; ε mutations 
most common; 
many different 
mutations
Increased length of 
end plates; variable 
synaptic folds
Anti-AChE; 
?3,4-DAP
AChE 
deﬁciency
Early onset; variable 
severity; scoliosis; 
may have normal 
EOM, absent 
pupillary responses
Decremental response 
to repetitive nerve 
stimulation
Mutant gene for 
AChE’s collagen 
anchor
Small nerve termi-
nals; degenerated 
junctional folds
Worse with anti-
AChE drugs
Abbreviations: AChR, acetylcholine receptor; AChE, acetylcholinesterase; EOM, extraocular muscles; MEPP, miniature end-plate potentials; 
3,4-DAP, 3,4-diaminopyridine.
 
CHAPTER 47
Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction
613
the lung, which may express calcium channels that 
stimulate the autoimmune response. The diagnosis of 
LEMS may signal the presence of a tumor long before 
it would otherwise be detected, permitting early 
removal. Treatment of LEMS involves plasmapher-
esis and immunosuppression, as for MG. 3,4-Diami-
nopyridine (3,4-DAP) and pyridostigmine may also 
be symptomatically helpful. 3,4-DAP acts by block-
ing potassium channels, which results in prolonged 
depolarization of the motor nerve terminals and thus 
enhances ACh release. Pyridostigmine prolongs the 
action of ACh, allowing repeated interactions with 
AChRs.
Botulism is due to potent bacterial toxins produced 
by any of seven different strains of Clostridium botuli-
num. The toxins enzymatically cleave speciﬁc proteins 
essential for the release of acetylcholine from the motor 
nerve terminal, thereby interfering with neuromuscu-
lar transmission. Most commonly, botulism is caused 
by ingestion of improperly prepared food containing 
toxin. Rarely, the nearly ubiquitous spores of C. botu-
linum may germinate in wounds. In infants the spores 
may germinate in the GI tract, and release toxin, caus-
ing muscle weakness. Patients present with myasthenia-
like bulbar weakness (e.g., diplopia, dysarthria, dyspha-
gia) and lack sensory symptoms and signs. Weakness 
may generalize to the limbs and may result in respira-
tory failure. Reﬂexes are present early, but they may be 
diminished as the disease progresses. Mentation is nor-
mal. Autonomic ﬁndings include paralytic ileus, con-
stipation, urinary retention, dilated or poorly reactive 
pupils, and dry mouth. The demonstration of toxin in 
serum by bioassay is deﬁnitive, but the results usually 
take a relatively long time to be completed and may 
be negative. Nerve stimulation studies reveal ﬁndings 
of presynaptic neuromuscular blockade with reduced 
compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) that 
increase in amplitude following high-frequency repeti-
tive stimulation. Treatment includes ventilatory sup-
port, and aggressive inpatient supportive care (e.g., 
nutrition, DVT prophylaxis) as needed. Antitoxin 
should be given as early as possible to be effective. A 
preventive vaccine is available for laboratory workers 
or other highly exposed individuals.
Neurasthenia is the historic term for a myasthenia-like 
fatigue syndrome without an organic basis. These patients 
may present with subjective symptoms of weakness and 
fatigue, but muscle testing usually reveals the “give-away 
weakness” characteristic of nonorganic disorders; the 
complaint of fatigue in these patients means tiredness or 
apathy rather than decreasing muscle power on repeated 
effort. Hyperthyroidism is readily diagnosed or excluded 
by tests of thyroid function, which should be carried out 
routinely in patients with suspected MG. Abnormali-
ties of thyroid function (hyper- or hypothyroidism) may 
increase myasthenic weakness. Diplopia resembling that 
in MG may occasionally be due to an intracranial mass 
lesion that compresses nerves to the EOMs (e.g., sphe-
noid ridge meningioma), but MRI of the head and orbits 
usually reveals the lesion.
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia is a rare con-
dition resulting in weakness of the EOMs, which may 
be accompanied by weakness of the proximal muscles 
of the limbs and other systemic features. Most patients 
with this condition have mitochondrial disorders that 
can be detected on muscle biopsy (Chap. 48).
Search for associated conditions
(Table 47-3) Myasthenic patients have an increased 
incidence of several associated disorders. Thymic abnor-
malities occur in ∼75% of patients, as noted earlier. 
Neoplastic change (thymoma) may produce enlarge-
ment of the thymus, which is detected by CT scanning 
of the anterior mediastinum. A thymic shadow on CT 
scan may normally be present through young adult-
hood, but enlargement of the thymus in a patient aged 
>40 years is highly suspicious of thymoma. Hyperthy-
roidism occurs in 3–8% of patients and may aggravate 
the myasthenic weakness. Thyroid function tests should 
be obtained in all patients with suspected MG. Because 
TABLE 47-3 
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH MYASTHENIA 
GRAVIS AND RECOMMENDED LABORATORY TESTS
Associated disorders
Disorders of the thymus: thymoma, hyperplasia
Other autoimmune disorders: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 
Graves’ disease, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus erythematosus, 
skin disorders, family history of autoimmune disorder
Disorders or circumstances that may exacerbate myas-
thenia gravis: hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, occult 
infection, medical treatment for other conditions (see 
Table 47-4)
Disorders that may interfere with therapy: tuberculosis, 
diabetes, peptic ulcer, gastrointestinal bleeding, renal 
disease, hypertension, asthma, osteoporosis, obesity
Recommended laboratory tests or procedures
CT or MRI of mediastinum
Tests for lupus erythematosus, antinuclear antibody, 
rheumatoid factor, antithyroid antibodies
Thyroid-function tests
PPD skin test
Chest radiography
Fasting blood glucose measurement, hemoglobin A1c
Pulmonary-function tests
Bone densitometry in older patients
Abbreviation: PPD, puriﬁed protein derivative.
Source: From RT Johnson, JW Grifﬁn (eds): Current Therapy in 
Neurologic Disease, 4th ed. St. Louis, Mosby Year Book, 1993, p 
379; with permission.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
614
of the association of MG with other autoimmune disor-
ders, blood tests for rheumatoid factor and antinuclear 
antibodies should also be carried out. Chronic infection 
of any kind can exacerbate MG and should be sought 
carefully. Finally, measurements of ventilatory function 
are valuable because of the frequency and seriousness of 
respiratory impairment in myasthenic patients.
Because of the side effects of glucocorticoids and 
other immunosuppressive agents used in the treat-
ment of MG, a thorough medical investigation should 
be undertaken, searching speciﬁcally for evidence of 
chronic or latent infection (such as tuberculosis or 
hepatitis), hypertension, diabetes, renal disease, and 
glaucoma.
TREATMENT 
Myasthenia Gravis
The prognosis has improved strikingly as a result of 
advances in treatment. Nearly all myasthenic patients 
can be returned to full productive lives with proper 
therapy. The most useful treatments for MG include 
anticholinesterase medications, 
immunosuppressive 
agents, thymectomy, and plasmapheresis or intrave-
nous immunoglobulin (IVIg) (Fig. 47-2).
ANTICHOLINESTERASE MEDICATIONS Anti-
cholinesterase medication produces at least partial 
improvement in most myasthenic patients, although 
improvement is complete in only a few. Pyridostigmine 
is the most widely used anticholinesterase drug. The 
beneficial action of oral pyridostigmine begins within 
15–30 min and lasts for 3–4 h, but individual responses 
vary. Treatment is begun with a moderate dose, e.g., 
30–60 mg three to four times daily. The frequency and 
amount of the dose should be tailored to the patient’s 
individual requirements throughout the day. For 
example, patients with weakness in chewing and swal-
lowing may benefit by taking the medication before 
meals so that peak strength coincides with mealtimes. 
Long-acting pyridostigmine may occasionally be use-
ful to get the patient through the night but should not 
be used for daytime medication because of variable 
absorption. The maximum useful dose of pyridostig-
mine rarely exceeds 120 mg every 4–6 h during day-
time. Overdosage with anticholinesterase medication 
may cause increased weakness and other side effects. In 
some patients, muscarinic side effects of the anticholin-
esterase medication (diarrhea, abdominal cramps, sali-
vation, nausea) may limit the dose tolerated. Atropine/
diphenoxylate or loperamide is useful for the treatment 
of gastrointestinal symptoms.
THYMECTOMY Two separate issues should be 
distinguished: (1) surgical removal of thymoma, and (2) 
thymectomy as a treatment for MG. Surgical removal 
of a thymoma is necessary because of the possibility 
of local tumor spread, although most thymomas are 
histologically benign. In the absence of a tumor, the 
available evidence suggests that up to 85% of patients 
experience improvement after thymectomy; of these, 
∼35% achieve drug-free remission. However, the 
improvement is typically delayed for months to years. 
The advantage of thymectomy is that it offers the 
possibility of long-term benefit, in some cases dimin-
ishing or eliminating the need for continuing medi-
cal treatment. In view of these potential benefits and 
of the negligible risk in skilled hands, thymectomy 
has gained widespread acceptance in the treatment 
of MG. It is the consensus that thymectomy should 
be carried out in all patients with generalized MG 
who are between the ages of puberty and at least 55 
years. Whether thymectomy should be recommended 
in children, in adults >55 years of age, and in patients 
with weakness limited to the ocular muscles is still 
Establish diagnosis unequivocally (see Table 47-1)
Search for associated conditions (see Table 47-3)
Ocular only
MRI of brain
  (if positive,
   reassess)
Anticholinesterase
  (pyridostigmine)
Anticholinesterase
  (pyridostigmine)
Evaluate for thymectomy
  (indications: thymoma or
  generalized MG);
  evaluate surgical risk, FVC
Crisis
Intensive care
  (tx respiratory
   infection; fluids)
Generalized
If unsatisfactory
Thymectomy
Good risk
  (good FVC)
Poor risk
  (low FVC)
If not
  improved
Immunosuppression
Evaluate clinical status; if indicated,
  go to immunosuppression
Improved
See text for short-term, intermediate,
and long-term treatments
Plasmapheresis
  or intravenous Ig
then
MANAGEMENT OF MG
FIGURE 47-2 
Algorithm for the management of myasthenia gravis. 
FVC, forced vital capacity.
 
CHAPTER 47
Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction
615
a matter of debate. There is also suggestive evidence 
that patients with MuSK antibody–positive MG may 
respond less well to thymectomy. Thymectomy must 
be carried out in a hospital where it is performed regu-
larly and where the staff is experienced in the pre- and 
postoperative management, anesthesia, and surgical 
techniques of total thymectomy.
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION Immunosuppression 
using glucocorticoids, azathioprine, and other drugs 
is effective in nearly all patients with MG. The choice 
of drugs or other immunomodulatory treatments 
should be guided by the relative benefits and risks for 
the individual patient and the urgency of treatment. It 
is helpful to develop a treatment plan based on short-
term, intermediate-term, and long-term objectives. For 
example, if immediate improvement is essential either 
because of the severity of weakness or because of the 
patient’s need to return to activity as soon as possible, 
IVIg should be administered or plasmapheresis should 
be undertaken. For the intermediate term, glucocorti-
coids and cyclosporine or tacrolimus generally produce 
clinical improvement within a period of 1–3 months. 
The beneficial effects of azathioprine and mycopheno-
late mofetil usually begin after many months (as long as 
a year), but these drugs have advantages for the long-
term treatment of patients with MG. For the occasional 
patient with MG that is genuinely refractory to opti-
mal treatment with conventional immunosuppressive 
agents, a course of high-dose cyclophosphamide may 
induce long-lasting benefit by “rebooting” the immune 
system. At high doses, cyclophosphamide eliminates 
mature lymphocytes but spares hematopoietic pre-
cursors (stem cells), because they express the enzyme 
aldehyde dehydrogenase, which hydrolyzes cyclophos-
phamide. At present, this procedure is reserved for 
refractory patients and should be administered only in a 
facility fully familiar with this approach. We recommend 
maintenance immunotherapy after rebooting, to sus-
tain the beneficial effect.
Glucocorticoid Therapy Glucocorticoids, when 
used properly, produce improvement in myasthenic 
weakness in the great majority of patients. To minimize 
adverse side effects, prednisone should be given in a 
single dose rather than in divided doses throughout 
the day. The initial dose should be relatively low (15–25 
mg/d) to avoid the early weakening that occurs in about 
one-third of patients treated initially with a high-dose 
regimen. The dose is increased stepwise, as tolerated by 
the patient (usually by 5 mg/d at 2- to 3-day intervals), 
until there is marked clinical improvement or a dose 
of 50–60 mg/d is reached. This dose is maintained for 
1–3 months and then is gradually modified to an alter-
nate-day regimen over the course of an additional 1–3 
months; the goal is to reduce the dose on the “off day” 
to zero or to a minimal level. Generally, patients begin 
to improve within a few weeks after reaching the maxi-
mum dose, and improvement continues to progress for 
months or years. The prednisone dosage may gradu-
ally be reduced, but usually months or years may be 
needed to determine the minimum effective dose, and 
close monitoring is required. Few patients are able to do 
without immunosuppressive agents entirely. Patients 
on long-term glucocorticoid therapy must be fol-
lowed carefully to prevent or treat adverse side effects. 
The most common errors in glucocorticoid treatment 
of myasthenic patients include (1) insufficient persis-
tence—improvement may be delayed and gradual; 
(2) tapering the dosage too early, too rapidly, or exces-
sively; and (3) lack of attention to prevention and treat-
ment of side effects.
Other Immunosuppressive Drugs Mycophe-
nolate mofetil, azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, 
and occasionally cyclophosphamide are effective in many 
patients, either alone or in various combinations.
Mycophenolate mofetil has become one of the most 
widely used drugs in the treatment of MG because of its 
effectiveness and relative lack of side effects. A dose of 
1–1.5 g bid is recommended. Its mechanism of action 
involves inhibition of purine synthesis by the de novo 
pathway. Since lymphocytes lack the alternative sal-
vage pathway that is present in all other cells, myco-
phenolate inhibits proliferation of lymphocytes but  
not proliferation of other cells. It does not kill or elimi-
nate preexisting autoreactive lymphocytes, and there-
fore clinical improvement may be delayed for many 
months to a year, until the preexisting autoreactive lym-
phocytes die spontaneously. The advantage of myco-
phenolate lies in its relative lack of adverse side effects, 
with only occasional production of GI symptoms, rare 
development of leukopenia, and very small risks of 
malignancy or PML inherent in all immunosuppressive 
treatments. Although two published studies did not 
have positive outcomes, most experts attribute the neg-
ative results to flaws in the trial designs, and mycophe-
nolate is widely used for long-term treatment of myas-
thenic patients. Until recently, azathioprine has been 
the most commonly used immunosuppressive agent 
for MG because of its relative safety in most patients 
and long track record. Its therapeutic effect may add to 
that of glucocorticoids and/or allow the glucocorticoid 
dose to be reduced. However, up to 10% of patients are 
unable to tolerate azathioprine because of idiosyncratic 
reactions consisting of flulike symptoms of fever and 
malaise, bone marrow suppression, or abnormalities of 
liver function. An initial dose of 50 mg/d should be used 
for several days to test for these side effects. If this dose 
is tolerated, it is increased gradually to about 2–3 mg/kg 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
616
of total body weight, or until the white blood count falls 
to 3000 to 4000/μL. The beneficial effect of azathioprine 
takes 3–6 months to begin and even longer to peak. In 
patients taking azathioprine, allopurinol should never 
be used to treat hyperuricemia. Because the two drugs 
share a common degradation pathway; the result may 
be severe bone marrow suppression due to increased 
effects of the azathioprine.
The calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacroli-
mus (FK506) are approximately as effective as azathio-
prine and are being used increasingly in the manage-
ment of MG. Their beneficial effect appears more rapidly 
than that of azathioprine. Either drug may be used 
alone, but they are usually used as an adjunct to glu-
cocorticoids to permit reduction of the glucocorticoid 
dose. The usual dose of cyclosporine is 4–5 mg/kg per 
d, and the average dose of tacrolimus is 0.07–0.1 mg/kg 
per d, given in two equally divided doses (to minimize 
side effects). Side effects of these drugs include hyper-
tension and nephrotoxicity, which must be closely mon-
itored. “Trough” blood levels are measured 12 h after the 
evening dose. The therapeutic range for the trough level 
of cyclosporine is 150–200 ng/L, and for tacrolimus it is 
5–15 ng/L.
Cyclophosphamide is reserved for occasional patients 
refractory to the other drugs (see earlier discussion of 
high-dose cyclophosphamide treatment). Rituximab, 
a monoclonal antibody that depletes CD20 B cells, has 
been used with variable—sometimes dramatic—success 
in the treatment of MG, especially in patients with anti-
MuSK antibody.
PLASMAPHERESIS 
AND 
INTRAVENOUS 
IMMU NOGLOBULIN Plasmapheresis has been 
used therapeutically in MG. Plasma, which contains the 
pathogenic antibodies, is mechanically separated from 
the blood cells, which are returned to the patient. A 
course of five exchanges (3–4 L per exchange) is gener-
ally administered over a 10- to 14-day period. Plasma-
pheresis produces a short-term reduction in anti-AChR 
antibodies, with clinical improvement in many patients. 
It is useful as a temporary expedient in seriously 
affected patients or to improve the patient’s condition 
prior to surgery (e.g., thymectomy).
The indications for the use of IVIg are the same as 
those for plasma exchange: to produce rapid improve-
ment to help the patient through a difficult period of 
myasthenic weakness or prior to surgery. This treatment 
has the advantages of not requiring special equipment 
or large-bore venous access. The usual dose is 2 g/kg, 
which is typically administered over 5 days (400 mg/kg 
per d). If tolerated, the total dose of IVIg can be given 
over a 3- to 4-day period. Improvement occurs in ∼70% 
of patients, beginning during treatment, or within a 
week, and continuing for weeks to months. The mecha-
nism of action of IVIg is not known; the treatment has 
no consistent effect on the measurable amount of cir-
culating AChR antibody. Adverse reactions are gener-
ally not serious but include headache, fluid overload, 
and rarely aseptic meningitis or renal failure. IVIg should 
rarely be used as a long-term treatment in place of ratio-
nally managed immunosuppressive therapy. Unfortu-
nately, there is a tendency for physicians unfamiliar with 
immunosuppressive treatments to rely on repeated 
IVIg infusions, which usually produce only intermittent 
benefit, do not reduce the underlying autoimmune 
response, and are costly. The intermediate and long-
term treatment of myasthenic patients requires other 
methods of therapy outlined earlier in this chapter.
MANAGEMENT OF MYASTHENIC CRISIS 
Myasthenic crisis is defined as an exacerbation of weak-
ness sufficient to endanger life; it usually consists of 
respiratory failure caused by diaphragmatic and inter-
costal muscle weakness. Crisis rarely occurs in properly 
managed patients. Treatment should be carried out in 
intensive care units staffed with teams experienced in 
the management of MG, respiratory insufficiency, infec-
tious disease, and fluid and electrolyte therapy. The pos-
sibility that deterioration could be due to excessive anti-
cholinesterase medication (“cholinergic crisis”) is best 
excluded by temporarily stopping anticholinesterase 
drugs. The most common cause of crisis is intercurrent 
infection. This should be treated immediately, because 
the mechanical and immunologic defenses of the 
patient can be assumed to be compromised. The myas-
thenic patient with fever and early infection should be 
treated like other immunocompromised patients. Early 
and effective antibiotic therapy, respiratory assistance 
(preferably noninvasive, using BiPap), and pulmonary 
physiotherapy are essentials of the treatment program. 
As discussed earlier, plasmapheresis or IVIg is frequently 
helpful in hastening recovery.
DRUGS TO AVOID IN MYASTHENIC PATI-
ENTS Many drugs have been reported to exacerbate 
weakness in patients with MG (Table 47-4), but not all 
patients react adversely to all of these. Conversely, not all 
“safe” drugs can be used with impunity in patients with 
MG. As a rule, the listed drugs should be avoided when-
ever possible, and myasthenic patients should be fol-
lowed closely when any new drug is introduced.
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
To evaluate the effectiveness of treatment as well as 
drug-induced side effects, it is important to assess the 
patient’s clinical status systematically at baseline and on 
repeated interval examinations. Because of the vari-
ability of symptoms of MG, the interval history and 
 
CHAPTER 47
Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the Neuromuscular Junction
617
physical ﬁndings on examination must be taken into 
account. The most useful clinical tests include for-
ward arm abduction time (up to a full 5 min), forced 
vital capacity, range of eye movements, and time to 
development of ptosis on upward gaze. Manual muscle 
testing or, preferably, quantitative dynamometry of limb 
muscles, especially proximal muscles, is also impor-
tant. An interval form can provide a succinct summary 
of the patient’s status and a guide to treatment results; 
an abbreviated form is shown in Fig. 47-3. A progres-
sive reduction in the patient’s AChR antibody level also 
provides clinically valuable conﬁrmation of the effec-
tiveness of treatment; conversely, a rise in AChR anti-
body levels during tapering of immunosuppressive med-
ication may predict clinical exacerbation. For reliable 
quantitative measurement of AChR antibody levels, it is 
best to compare antibody levels from prior frozen serum 
aliquots with current serum samples in simultaneously 
run assays.
TABLE 47-4
DRUGS WITH INTERACTIONS IN MYASTHENIA 
GRAVIS (MG)
Drugs That May Exacerbate MG
Antibiotics
Aminoglycosides: e.g., streptomycin, tobramycin, kanamycin
Quinolones: e.g., ciproﬂoxacin, levoﬂoxacin, oﬂoxacin, 
gatiﬂoxacin
Macrolides: e.g., erythromycin, azithromycin,
Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants for surgery
D-Tubocurarine (curare), pancuronium, vecuronium, 
atracurium
Beta-blocking agents
Propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol
Local anesthetics and related agents
Procaine, Xylocaine in large amounts
Procainamide (for arrhythmias)
Botulinum toxin
Botox exacerbates weakness
Quinine derivatives
Quinine, quinidine, chloroquine, meﬂoquine (Lariam)
Magnesium
Decreases ACh release
Penicillamine
May cause MG
Drugs with Important Interactions In MG
Cyclosporine
Broad range of drug interactions, which may raise or lower 
cyclosporine levels.
Azathioprine
Avoid allopurinol—combination may result in myelosup-
pression.
Myasthenia Gravis Worksheet
General
History
Examination
Diplopia
Ptosis
Arms
Legs
Speech
Voice
Chew
Swallow
Respiration
BP
Pulse
Wt
Vital capacity
EOMS
Ptosis time
Edema
Face
Cataracts? R
L
Normal
None
None
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Good
Rare
Rare
Slightly
  limited
Walks/runs
  fatigues
Dysarthric
Fades
Fatigue on
  normal foods
Normal foods
Dyspnea on
  unusual effort
Fair
Occasional
Occasional
Some ADL
  impairment
Can walk limited
  distances
Severely
  dysarthric
Impaired
Fatigue on
  soft foods
Soft foods only
Dyspnea on
  any effort
Poor
Constant
Constant
Definitely
  limited
Minimal
  walking
Severely impaired
Unintelligible
Feeding tube
Feeding tube
Dyspnea
  at rest
Arm abduction time
Deltoids
Biceps
Triceps
Grip
Iliopsoas
Quadriceps
R
L
R
L
Hamstrings
R
L
Other
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
FIGURE 47-3
Abbreviated interval assessment form for use in evaluating 
treatment for myasthenia gravis.
 Anthony A. Amato  ■   Robert H. Brown, Jr. 
618
 Skeletal muscle diseases, or myopathies, are disorders 
with structural changes or functional impairment of 
muscle. These conditions can be differentiated from 
other diseases of the motor unit (e.g., lower motor neu-
ron or neuromuscular junction pathologies) by charac-
teristic clinical and laboratory ﬁ ndings. 
 Myasthenia gravis and related disorders are discussed 
in  Chap. 47 ; dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and inclu-
sion body myositis are discussed in  Chap. 49 . 
 CLINICAL FEATURES 
 Most myopathies present with proximal, symmetric 
limb weakness (arms or legs) with preserved reﬂ exes 
and sensation. However, asymmetric and predomi-
nantly distal weakness can be seen in some myopathies. 
An associated sensory loss suggests injury to peripheral 
nerve or the central nervous system (CNS) rather than 
myopathy. On occasion, disorders affecting the motor 
nerve cell bodies in the spinal cord (anterior horn cell 
disease), the neuromuscular junction, or peripheral 
nerves can mimic ﬁ ndings of myopathy. 
 Muscle weakness 
 Symptoms of muscle weakness can be either intermit-
tent or persistent. Disorders causing  intermittent weakness
 ( Fig. 48-1 ) include myasthenia gravis, periodic paralyses 
(hypokalemic, hyperkalemic, and paramyotonia congen-
ita), and metabolic energy deﬁ ciencies of glycolysis (espe-
cially myophosphorylase deﬁ ciency), fatty acid utiliza-
tion (carnitine palmitoyltransferase deﬁ ciency), and some 
mitochondrial myopathies. The states of energy deﬁ -
ciency cause activity-related muscle breakdown accom-
panied by myoglobinuria, appearing as light-brown- to 
dark-brown-colored urine. 
 Most muscle disorders cause  persistent weakness  ( Fig. 
48-2 ) . In the majority of these, including most types 
of muscular dystrophy, polymyositis, and dermatomy-
ositis, the proximal muscles are weaker than the distal 
and are symmetrically affected, and the facial muscles 
are spared, a pattern referred to as  limb-girdle . The dif-
ferential diagnosis is more restricted for other patterns 
of weakness. Facial weakness (difﬁ culty with eye closure 
and impaired smile) and scapular winging  ( Fig. 48-3 ) 
are characteristic of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy 
(FSHD). Facial and distal limb weakness associated with 
hand grip myotonia is virtually diagnostic of myotonic 
dystrophy type 1. When other cranial nerve muscles are 
weak, causing ptosis or extraocular muscle weakness, 
the most important disorders to consider include neu-
romuscular junction disorders, oculopharyngeal mus-
cular dystrophy, mitochondrial myopathies, or some of 
the congenital myopathies  ( Table 48-1 ) . A pathogno-
monic pattern characteristic of inclusion body myosi-
tis is atrophy and weakness of the ﬂ exor forearm (e.g., 
wrist and ﬁ nger ﬂ exors) and quadriceps muscles that is 
often asymmetric. Less frequently, but important diag-
nostically, is the presence of a dropped head syndrome 
indicative of selective neck extensor muscle weakness. 
The most important neuromuscular diseases associated 
with this pattern of weakness include myasthenia gra-
vis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, late-onset nemaline 
myopathy, hyperparathyroidism, focal myositis, and 
some forms of inclusion body myopathy. A ﬁ nal pat-
tern, recognized because of preferential distal extrem-
ity weakness, is typical of a unique category of muscular 
dystrophy, the distal myopathies. 
 It is important to examine functional capabilities 
to help disclose certain patterns of weakness  ( Table 
48-2 ) . The Gowers’ sign  ( Fig. 48-4 ) is particularly 
useful. Observing the gait of an individual may dis-
close a lordotic posture caused by combined trunk and 
 MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES AND OTHER 
MUSCLE DISEASES 
 CHAPTER 48 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
619
Intermittent weakness
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION OF INTERMITTENT WEAKNESS
Myoglobinuria
Variable weakness includes
  EOMs, ptosis, bulbar and limb muscles
Repetitive nerve
  stimulation decrement
AChR AB or MuSK
AB positive
Acquired MG
AChR AB and MuSK
AB negative
Congenital MG
Acquired MG
Lambert-Eaton
myasthenic syndrome
Yes
No
Exam normal between attacks
Proximal > distal weakness during attacks
Exam usually normal between attacks
Proximal > distal weakness during attacks
Forearm exercise
Myotonia on exam
DNA test confirms diagnosis
Low potassium
level
Normal or elevated
  potassium level
Hypokalemic PP
Hyperkalemic PP
Paramyotonia congenita
Muscle biopsy
  defines specific defect
Reduced lactic acid rise
Consider glycolytic defect
Normal lactic acid rise
Consider CPT deficiency
or other fatty acid
metabolism disorders
No
Yes
No
Yes
FIGURE 48-1
Diagnostic evaluation of intermittent weakness. AChR 
AB, acetylcholine receptor antibody; CPT, carnitine palmitoyl-
transferase; EOMs, extraocular muscles; MG, myasthenia gra-
vis; PP, periodic paralysis.
Persistent weakness
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION OF PERSISTENT WEAKNESS
Patterns of weakness on neurologic exam
Myopathic EMG confirms muscle disease and excludes ALS
Repetitive nerve stimulation indicates MG
CK elevation supports myopathy
May need DNA testing for further distinction of inherited myopathies
Muscle biopsy will help distinguish many disorders
Proximal > distal
  PM; DM; muscular
    dystrophies;
 
mitochondrial
 
and metabolic
 
myopathies;
 
toxic, endocrine
 
myopathies
Facial, distal, 
  quadriceps;
  handgrip myotonia
  Myotonic muscular
    dystrophy
Proximal & distal
(hand grip), &
quadriceps
 IBM
Ptosis, EOMs
  OPMD;
  mitochondrial
  myopathy;
  myotubular
  myopathy
Facial and
scapular winging
 (FSHD)
Dropped head
  MG; PM; ALS;
 hyperpara-
 thyroid
Distal
Distal myopathy
FIGURE 48-2
Diagnostic evaluation of persistent weakness. Examina-
tion reveals one of seven patterns of weakness. The pattern 
of weakness in combination with the laboratory evaluation 
leads to a diagnosis. EOMs, extraocular muscles; OPMD, 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; FSHD, facioscapu-
lohumeral dystrophy; IBM, inclusion body myositis; DM, 
dermatomyositis; PM, polymyositis; MG, myasthenia gra-
vis; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CK, creatine kinase; 
EMG, electromyography.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
620
hip weakness, frequently exaggerated by toe walking 
(Fig. 48-5). A waddling gait is caused by the inabil-
ity of weak hip muscles to prevent hip drop or hip dip. 
Hyperextension of the knee (genu recurvatum or back-
kneeing) is characteristic of quadriceps muscle weak-
ness; and a steppage gait, due to footdrop, accompanies 
distal weakness.
Any disorder causing muscle weakness may be accom-
panied by fatigue, referring to an inability to maintain or 
sustain a force (pathologic fatigability). This condition 
must be differentiated from asthenia, a type of fatigue 
caused by excess tiredness or lack of energy. Associated 
symptoms may help differentiate asthenia and pathologic 
fatigability. Asthenia is often accompanied by a tendency 
to avoid physical activities, complaints of daytime sleepi-
ness, necessity for frequent naps, and difﬁculty concentrat-
ing on activities such as reading. There may be feelings of 
overwhelming stress and depression. Thus, asthenia is not 
a myopathy. In contrast, pathologic fatigability occurs in 
disorders of neuromuscular transmission and in disorders 
altering energy production, including defects in glycoly-
sis, lipid metabolism, or mitochondrial energy production. 
Pathologic fatigability also occurs in chronic myopathies 
because of difﬁculty accomplishing a task with less muscle. 
Pathologic fatigability is accompanied by abnormal clinical 
or laboratory ﬁndings. Fatigue without those supportive 
features almost never indicates a primary muscle disease.
Muscle pain (myalgias), cramps, and stiffness
Muscle pain can be associated with cramps, spasms, 
contractures, and stiff or rigid muscles. In distinction, 
true myalgia (muscle aching), which can be local-
ized or generalized, may be accompanied by weakness, 
FIGURE 48-3
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy with prominent scapular 
winging.
TABLE 48-1 
NEUROMUSCULAR CAUSES OF PTOSIS OR 
OPHTHALMOPLEGIA
Peripheral Neuropathy
 Guillain-Barré syndrome
 Miller Fisher syndrome
Neuromuscular Junction
 Botulism
 Lambert-Eaton syndrome
 Myasthenia gravis
 Congenital myasthenia
Myopathy
 Mitochondrial myopathies
  Kearns-Sayre syndrome
   Progressive external ophthalmoplegia
   Oculopharyngeal and oculopharyngodistal muscular 
dystrophy
  Myotonic dystrophy (ptosis only)
 Congenital myopathy
  Myotubular
   Nemaline (ptosis only)
   Hyperthyroidism/Graves’ disease (ophthalmoplegia 
without ptosis)
  Hereditary inclusion body myopathy type 3
TABLE 48-2 
OBSERVATIONS ON EXAMINATION THAT DISCLOSE 
MUSCLE WEAKNESS
FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT
MUSCLE WEAKNESS
Inability to forcibly close eyes
Upper facial muscles
Impaired pucker
Lower facial muscles
Inability to raise head from prone 
position
Neck extensor muscles
Inability to raise head from 
supine position
Neck ﬂexor muscles
Inability to raise arms above 
head
Proximal arm muscles 
(may be only scapular 
stabilizing muscles)
Inability to walk without hyperex-
tending knee (back-kneeing or 
genu recurvatum)
Knee extensor muscles
Inability to walk with heels 
touching the ﬂoor (toe walking)
Shortening of the 
Achilles tendon
Inability to lift foot while walking 
(steppage gait or footdrop)
Anterior compartment 
of leg
Inability to walk without a wad-
dling gait
Hip muscles
Inability to get up from the 
ﬂoor without climbing up the 
extremities (Gowers’ sign)
Hip, thigh, and trunk 
muscles
Inability to get up from a chair 
without using arms
Hip muscles
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
621
tenderness to palpation, or swelling. Certain drugs cause 
true myalgia (Table 48-3).
There are two painful muscle conditions of par-
ticular importance, neither of which is associated with 
muscle weakness. Fibromyalgia is a common, yet poorly 
understood, type of myofascial pain syndrome. Patients 
complain of severe muscle pain and tenderness and have 
speciﬁc painful trigger points, sleep disturbances, and 
easy fatigability. Serum creatine kinase (CK), eryth-
rocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), electromyography 
(EMG), and muscle biopsy are normal. Polymyalgia rheu-
matica occurs mainly in patients >50 years and is char-
acterized by stiffness and pain in the shoulders, lower 
back, hips, and thighs. The ESR is elevated, while 
serum CK, EMG, and muscle biopsy are normal. Tem-
poral arteritis, an inﬂammatory disorder of medium- 
and large-sized arteries, usually involving one or more 
branches of the carotid artery, may accompany polymy-
algia rheumatica. Vision is threatened by ischemic optic 
neuritis. Glucocorticoids can relieve the myalgias and 
protect against visual loss.
Localized muscle pain is most often traumatic. A 
common cause of sudden abrupt-onset pain is a rup-
tured tendon, which leaves the muscle belly appearing 
rounded and shorter in appearance compared to the 
FIGURE 48-4
Gowers’ sign showing a patient using arms to climb up the 
legs in attempting to get up from the ﬂoor.
FIGURE 48-5
Lordotic posture, exaggerated by standing on toes, associ-
ated with trunk and hip weakness.
TABLE 48-3 
DRUGS THAT CAUSE TRUE MYALGIA
Cimetidine
Cocaine
Cyclosporine
Danazol
Emetine
Gold
Heroin
Labetalol
Methadone
D-Penicillamine
Statins and other cholesterol-lowering agents
L-Tryptophan
Zidovudine
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
622
normal side. The biceps brachii and Achilles tendons are 
particularly vulnerable to rupture. Infection or neoplas-
tic inﬁltration of the muscle is a rare cause of localized 
muscle pain.
A muscle cramp or spasm is a painful, involuntary, 
localized, muscle contraction with a visible or palpable 
hardening of the muscle. Cramps are abrupt in onset, 
short in duration, and may cause abnormal posturing 
of the joint. The EMG shows ﬁring of motor units, 
reﬂecting an origin from spontaneous neural discharge. 
Muscle cramps often occur in neurogenic disorders, 
especially motor neuron disease (Chap. 32), radicu-
lopathies, and polyneuropathies (Chap. 45), but are not 
a feature of most primary muscle diseases. Duchenne’s 
muscular dystrophy is an exception since calf muscle 
complaints are a common complaint. Muscle cramps are 
also common during pregnancy.
A muscle contracture is different from a muscle cramp. In 
both conditions, the muscle becomes hard, but a contrac-
ture is associated with energy failure in glycolytic disorders. 
The muscle is unable to relax after an active muscle con-
traction. The EMG shows electrical silence. Confusion 
is created because contracture also refers to a muscle that 
cannot be passively stretched to its proper length (ﬁxed 
contracture) because of ﬁbrosis. In some muscle disor-
ders, especially in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and 
Bethlem’s myopathy, ﬁxed contractures occur early and 
represent distinctive features of the disease.
Muscle stiffness can refer to different phenomena. 
Some patients with inﬂammation of joints and periar-
ticular surfaces feel stiff. This condition is different from 
the disorders of hyperexcitable motor nerves causing 
stiff or rigid muscles. In stiff-person syndrome, spontane-
ous discharges of the motor neurons of the spinal cord 
cause involuntary muscle contractions mainly involving 
the axial (trunk) and proximal lower extremity mus-
cles. The gait becomes stiff and labored, with hyper-
lordosis of the lumbar spine. Superimposed episodic 
muscle spasms are precipitated by sudden movements, 
unexpected noises, and emotional upset. The muscles 
relax during sleep. Serum antibodies against glutamic 
acid decarboxylase are present in approximately two-
thirds of cases. In neuromyotonia (Isaac’s syndrome) there 
is hyperexcitability of the peripheral nerves manifesting 
as continuous muscle ﬁber activity. Myokymia (groups 
of fasciculations associated with continuous undula-
tions of muscle) and impaired muscle relaxation are the 
result. Muscles of the leg are stiff, and the constant con-
tractions of the muscle cause increased sweating of the 
extremities. This peripheral nerve hyperexcitability is 
mediated by antibodies that target voltage-gated potas-
sium channels. The site of origin of the spontaneous 
nerve discharges is principally in the distal portion of 
the motor nerves.
Myotonia is a condition of prolonged muscle con-
traction followed by slow muscle relaxation. It always 
follows muscle activation (action myotonia), usually 
voluntary, but may be elicited by mechanical stimula-
tion (percussion myotonia) of the muscle. Myotonia 
typically causes difﬁculty in releasing objects after a ﬁrm 
grasp. In myotonic muscular dystrophy type 1 (DM1), 
distal weakness usually accompanies myotonia, whereas 
in DM2 proximal muscles are more affected; thus the 
related term proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM) is 
used to describe this condition. Myotonia also occurs 
with myotonia congenita (a chloride channel disorder), 
but in this condition muscle weakness is not prominent. 
Myotonia may also be seen in individuals with sodium 
channel mutations (hyperkalemic periodic paralysis or potas-
sium-sensitive myotonia). Another sodium channelopa-
thy, paramyotonia congenita, also is associated with muscle 
stiffness. In contrast to other disorders associated with 
myotonia in which the myotonia is eased by repetitive 
activity, paramyotonia congenita is named for a para-
doxical phenomenon whereby the myotonia worsens 
with repetitive activity.
Muscle enlargement and atrophy
In most myopathies muscle tissue is replaced by fat and 
connective tissue, but the size of the muscle is usually 
not affected. However, in many limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophies (and particularly the dystrophinopathies) 
enlarged calf muscles are typical. The enlargement rep-
resents true muscle hypertrophy, thus the term pseudo-
hypertrophy should be avoided when referring to these 
patients. The calf muscles remain very strong even late 
in the course of these disorders. Muscle enlargement 
can also result from inﬁltration by sarcoid granulomas, 
amyloid deposits, bacterial and parasitic infections, and 
focal myositis. In contrast, muscle atrophy is char-
acteristic of other myopathies. In dysferlinopathies 
(LGMD2B), there is a predilection for early atrophy 
of the gastrocnemius muscles, particularly the medial 
aspect. Atrophy of the humeral muscles is characteristic 
of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD).
LABORATORY EVALUATION
A limited battery of tests can be used to evaluate a sus-
pected myopathy. Nearly all patients require serum 
enzyme level measurements and electrodiagnostic studies as 
screening tools to differentiate muscle disorders from other 
motor unit diseases. The other tests described—DNA 
studies, the forearm exercise test, and muscle biopsy—are 
used to diagnose speciﬁc types of myopathies.
Serum enzymes
CK is the preferred muscle enzyme to measure in the 
evaluation of myopathies. Damage to muscle causes 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
623
the CK to leak from the muscle ﬁber to the serum. 
The MM isoenzyme predominates in skeletal muscle, 
while creatine kinase-myocardial bound (CK-MB) is 
the marker for cardiac muscle. Serum CK can be ele-
vated in normal individuals without provocation, pre-
sumably on a genetic basis or after strenuous activity, 
minor trauma (including the EMG needle), a prolonged 
muscle cramp, or a generalized seizure. Aspartate ami-
notransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 
aldolase, and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) are enzymes 
sharing an origin in both muscle and liver. Problems 
arise when the levels of these enzymes are found to 
be elevated in a routine screening battery, leading to 
the erroneous assumption that liver disease is present 
when in fact muscle could be the cause. An elevated 
γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) helps to establish a liver 
origin since this enzyme is not found in muscle.
Electrodiagnostic studies
EMG, repetitive nerve stimulation, and nerve conduc-
tion studies (Chap. 5) are essential methods for evalu-
ation of the patient with suspected muscle disease. In 
combination, they provide the information necessary to 
differentiate myopathies from neuropathies and neuro-
muscular junction diseases. Routine nerve conduction 
studies are typically normal in myopathies but reduced 
amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials may be 
seen in atrophied muscles. The needle EMG may reveal 
irritability on needle placement suggestive of a necrotiz-
ing myopathy (inﬂammatory myopathies, dystrophies, 
toxic myopathies, myotonic myopathies), whereas a lack 
of irritability is characteristic of long-standing myopathic 
disorders (muscular dystrophies, endocrine myopathies, 
disuse atrophy, and many of the metabolic myopa-
thies). In addition, the EMG may demonstrate myotonic 
discharges that will narrow the differential diagnosis 
(Table 48-4). Another important EMG ﬁnding is the 
presence of short-duration, small-amplitude, polyphasic 
motor unit action potentials (MUAPs). Such MUAPs 
can be seen in both myopathic and neuropathic disor-
ders; however, the recruitment or ﬁring pattern is differ-
ent. In myopathies, the MUAPs ﬁre early but at a nor-
mal rate to compensate for the loss of individual muscle 
ﬁbers, whereas in neurogenic disorders the MUAPs ﬁre 
faster. The EMG is usually normal in steroid or disuse 
myopathy, both of which are associated with type 2 ﬁber 
atrophy; this is because the EMG preferentially assesses 
the physiologic function of type 1 ﬁbers. The EMG can 
also be invaluable in helping to choose an appropriately 
affected muscle to sample for biopsy.
DNA analysis
This serves as an important tool for the deﬁnitive diag-
nosis of many muscle disorders. Nevertheless, there are 
a number of limitations in currently available molecu-
lar diagnostics. For example, in Duchenne’s and Beck-
er’s dystrophies, two-thirds of patients have deletion 
or duplication mutations that are easy to detect, while 
the remainder have point mutations that are much 
more difﬁcult to ﬁnd. For patients without identiﬁable 
gene defects, the muscle biopsy remains the main diag-
nostic tool.
Forearm exercise test
In myopathies with intermittent symptoms, and espe-
cially those associated with myoglobinuria, there may 
be a defect in glycolysis. Many variations of the fore-
arm exercise test exist. For safety, the test should not 
be performed under ischemic conditions to avoid an 
unnecessary insult to the muscle, causing rhabdomyol-
ysis. The test is performed by placing a small indwell-
ing catheter into an antecubital vein. A baseline blood 
sample is obtained for lactic acid and ammonia. The 
forearm muscles are exercised by asking the patient to 
vigorously open and close the hand for 1 min. Blood is 
then obtained at intervals of 1, 2, 4, 6, and 10 min for 
comparison with the baseline sample. A three- to four-
fold rise of lactic acid is typical. The simultaneous mea-
surement of ammonia serves as a control, since it should 
also rise with exercise. In patients with myophosphory-
lase deﬁciency or other glycolytic defects, the lactic acid 
rise will be absent or below normal, while the rise in 
ammonia will reach control values. If there is lack of 
effort, neither lactic acid nor ammonia will rise. Patients 
with selective failure to increase ammonia may have 
myoadenylate deaminase deﬁciency. This condition 
TABLE 48-4 
MYOTONIC DISORDERS
Myotonic dystrophy type 1
Myotonic dystrophy type 2/proximal myotonic myopathy
Myotonia congenita
Paramyotonia congenita
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Chondrodystrophic myotonia (Schwartz-Jampel syndrome)
Centronuclear/myotubular myopathya
Drug-induced
 Cholesterol-lowering agents (statin medications, 
ﬁbrates)
 Cyclosporine
 Chloroquine
Glycogen storage disordersa (Pompe’s disease, deb-
rancher deﬁciency, branching enzyme deﬁciency)
Myoﬁbrillar myopathiesa
aAssociated with myotonic discharges on EMG but no clinical 
myotonia.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
624
has been reported to be a cause of myoglobinuria, but 
deﬁciency of this enzyme in asymptomatic individuals 
makes interpretation controversial.
Muscle biopsy
Muscle biopsy is an important step in establishing the 
diagnosis of a suspected myopathy. The biopsy is usu-
ally obtained from a quadriceps or biceps brachii mus-
cle, less commonly from a deltoid muscle. Evaluation 
includes a combination of techniques—light micros-
copy, histochemistry, immunocytochemistry with a bat-
tery of antibodies, and electron microscopy. Not all 
techniques are needed for every case. A speciﬁc diag-
nosis can be established in many disorders. Endomysial 
inﬂammatory cells surrounding and invading muscle 
ﬁbers are seen in polymyositis; similar endomysial inﬁl-
trates associated with muscle ﬁbers containing rimmed 
vacuoles, amyloid deposits within ﬁbers, and TDP-43 
inclusions are characteristic of inclusion body myosi-
tis; while perivascular, perimysial inﬂammation asso-
ciated with perifascicular atrophy are features of der-
matomyositis. In addition, the congenital myopathies 
have distinctive light and electron microscopy features 
essential for diagnosis. Mitochondrial and metabolic 
(e.g., glycogen and lipid storage diseases) myopathies 
also demonstrate distinctive histochemical and electron-
microscopic proﬁles. Biopsied muscle tissue can be sent 
for metabolic enzyme or mitochondrial DNA analyses. 
A battery of antibodies is available for the identiﬁcation 
of missing components of the dystrophin-glycoprotein 
complex and related proteins to help diagnose speciﬁc 
types of muscular dystrophies. Western blot analysis 
on muscle specimens can be performed to determine 
whether speciﬁc muscle proteins are reduced in quan-
tity or are of abnormal size.
HEREDITARY MYOPATHIES
Muscular dystrophy refers to a group of hereditary pro-
gressive diseases each with unique phenotypic and 
genetic features (Tables 48-5, 48-6, and 48-7).
DUCHENNE’S MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
This X-linked recessive disorder, sometimes also called 
pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy, has an incidence of 
∼30 per 100,000 live-born males.
Clinical features
Duchenne’s dystrophy is present at birth, but the dis-
order usually becomes apparent between ages 3 and 
5 years. The boys fall frequently and have difﬁculty 
keeping up with friends when playing. Running, 
jumping, and hopping are invariably abnormal. By age 
5 years, muscle weakness is obvious by muscle test-
ing. On getting up from the ﬂoor, the patient uses 
his hands to climb up himself (Gowers’ maneuver 
[Fig. 48-4]). Contractures of the heel cords and iliotibial 
bands become apparent by age 6 years, when toe walk-
ing is associated with a lordotic posture. Loss of muscle 
strength is progressive, with predilection for proximal 
limb muscles and the neck ﬂexors; leg involvement is 
more severe than arm involvement. Between ages 8 and 
10 years, walking may require the use of braces; joint 
contractures and limitations of hip ﬂexion, knee, elbow, 
and wrist extension are made worse by prolonged sit-
ting. By age 12 years, most patients are wheelchair 
dependent. Contractures become ﬁxed, and a progres-
sive scoliosis often develops that may be associated with 
pain. The chest deformity with scoliosis impairs pulmo-
nary function, which is already diminished by muscle 
weakness. By age 16–18 years, patients are predisposed 
to serious, sometimes fatal pulmonary infections. Other 
causes of death include aspiration of food and acute gas-
tric dilation.
A cardiac cause of death is uncommon despite the 
presence of a cardiomyopathy in almost all patients. 
Congestive heart failure seldom occurs except with 
severe stress such as pneumonia. Cardiac arrhyth-
mias are rare. The typical electrocardiogram (ECG) 
shows an increased net RS in lead V1; deep, narrow Q 
waves in the precordial leads; and tall right precordial 
R waves in V1. Intellectual impairment in Duchenne’s 
dystrophy is common; the average intelligence quo-
tient (IQ) is ∼1 SD below the mean. Impairment of 
intellectual function appears to be nonprogressive and 
affects verbal ability more than performance.
Laboratory features
Serum CK levels are invariably elevated to between 20 
and 100 times normal. The levels are abnormal at birth 
but decline late in the disease because of inactivity and 
loss of muscle mass. EMG demonstrates features typical 
of myopathy. The muscle biopsy shows muscle ﬁbers 
of varying size as well as small groups of necrotic and 
regenerating ﬁbers. Connective tissue and fat replace 
lost muscle ﬁbers. A deﬁnitive diagnosis of Duchenne’s 
dystrophy can be established on the basis of dystrophin 
deﬁciency in a biopsy of muscle tissue or mutation anal-
ysis on peripheral blood leukocytes, as discussed later.
Duchenne’s dystrophy is caused by a mutation of 
the gene that encodes dystrophin, a 427-kDa protein 
localized to the inner surface of the sarcolemma of the 
muscle ﬁber. The dystrophin gene is >2000 kb in size 
and thus is one of the largest identiﬁed human genes. 
It is localized to the short arm of the X chromosome at 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
625
TABLE 48-5 
PROGRESSIVE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES
TYPE
INHERITANCE
DEFECTIVE GENE/
PROTEIN
ONSET AGE
CLINICAL FEATURES
OTHER ORGAN 
SYSTEMS INVOLVED
Duchenne’s
XR
Dystrophin
Before 5 years
Progressive weakness of 
girdle muscles
Cardiomyopathy
Unable to walk after age 12
Mental impairment
Progressive kyphoscoliosis
Respiratory failure in 2nd or 
3rd decade
Becker’s
XR
Dystrophin
Early childhood to 
adult
Progressive weakness of 
girdle muscles
Cardiomyopathy
Able to walk after age 15
Respiratory failure may 
develop by 4th decade
Limb-girdle
AD/AR
Several (Tables 
48-6, 48-7)
Early childhood to 
early adult
Slow progressive weak-
ness of shoulder and hip 
girdle muscles
± Cardiomyopathy
Emery-Dreifuss
XR/AD
Emerin/Lamins A/C
Nesprin-1, 
Nesprin 2,
TMEM43
Childhood to adult
Elbow contractures, 
humeral and peroneal 
weakness
Cardiomyopathy
Congenital
AR
Several
At birth or within 
ﬁrst few months
Hypotonia, contractures, 
delayed milestones
CNS abnormalities 
(hypomyelination, 
malformation)
Progression to respiratory 
failure in some; static 
course in others
Eye abnormalities
Myotonica 
(DM1, DM2)
AD
DM1: Expansion 
CTG repeat
Childhood to adult
Slowly progressive weak-
ness of face, shoulder gir-
dle, and foot dorsiﬂexion
Cardiac conduc-
tion defects
DM2: Expansion 
CCTG repeat
Maybe infancy if 
mother affected 
(DM1 only)
Preferential proximal weak-
ness in DM2
Mental impairment
Cataracts
Frontal baldness
Gonadal atrophy
Facioscapulo-
humeral
AD
DUX4 4q
Childhood to adult
Slowly progressive weak-
ness of face, shoulder  
girdle, and foot dorsiﬂexion
Deafness
Coats’ (eye) 
disease
Oculopharyngeal
AD
Expansion, poly-A
RNA binding  
protein
5th to 6th decade
Slowly progressive weak-
ness of extraocular, pha-
ryngeal, and limb muscles
—
aTwo forms of myotonic dystrophy, DM1 and DM2, have been identiﬁed. Many features overlap (see text).
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CNS, central nervous system; XR, X-linked recessive.
Xp21. The most common gene mutation is a deletion. 
The size varies but does not correlate with disease 
severity. Deletions are not uniformly distributed over 
the gene but rather are most common near the begin-
ning (5′ end) and middle of the gene. Less often, Duch-
enne’s dystrophy is caused by a gene duplication or 
point mutation. Identiﬁcation of a speciﬁc mutation 
allows for an unequivocal diagnosis, makes possible 
accurate testing of potential carriers, and is useful for 
prenatal diagnosis.
A diagnosis of Duchenne’s dystrophy can also be 
made by Western blot analysis of muscle biopsy spec-
imens, revealing abnormalities on the quantity and 
molecular weight of dystrophin protein. In addition, 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
626
immunocytochemical staining of muscle with dystro-
phin antibodies can be used to demonstrate absence 
or deﬁciency of dystrophin localizing to the sarco-
lemmal membrane. Carriers of the disease may dem-
onstrate a mosaic pattern, butdystrophin analysis of 
muscle biopsy specimens for carrier detection is not 
reliable.
Pathogenesis
Dystrophin is part of a large complex of sarcolemmal pro-
teins and glycoproteins (Fig. 48-6). Dystrophin binds 
to F-actin at its amino terminus and to β-dystroglycan 
at the carboxyl terminus. β-Dystroglycan complexes to 
α-dystroglycan, which binds to laminin in the extracellu-
lar matrix (ECM). Laminin has a heterotrimeric molecular 
structure arranged in the shape of a cross with one heavy 
chain and two light chains, β1 and γ1. The laminin heavy 
chain of skeletal muscle is designated laminin α2. Colla-
gen proteins IV and VI are also found in the ECM. Like 
β-dystroglycan, the transmembrane sarcoglycan proteins 
also bind to dystrophin; these ﬁve proteins (designated α- 
through ε-sarcoglycan) complex tightly with each other. 
More recently, other membrane proteins implicated in 
muscular dystrophy have been found to be loosely afﬁli-
ated with constituents of the dystrophin complex. These 
include caveolin-3, α7 integrin, and collagen VI.
Dystrophin localizes to the cytoplasmic face of 
the muscle cell membrane. It complexes with two 
transmembrane protein complexes, the dystroglycans 
and the sarcoglycans. The dystroglycans bind to the 
extracellular matrix protein merosin, which is also com-
plexed with β1 and α7 integrins (Tables 48-5, 48-6, 
48-7). Dysferlin complexes with caveolin-3 (which 
binds to neuronal nitric oxide synthase, or nNOS) 
but not with the dystrophin-associated proteins or the 
integrins. In some of the congenital dystrophies and 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs), there is 
loss of function of different enzymes that glycosylate 
α-dystroglycan, which thereby inhibits proper binding 
to merosin: POMT1, POMT2, POMGnT1, Fukutin, 
Fukutin-related protein, and LARGE.
The dystrophin-glycoprotein complex appears to 
confer stability to the sarcolemma, although the func-
tion of each individual component of the complex is 
incompletely understood. Deﬁciency of one member of 
the complex may cause abnormalities in other compo-
nents. For example, a primary deﬁciency of dystrophin 
(Duchenne’s dystrophy) may lead to secondary loss of 
the sarcoglycans and dystroglycan. The primary loss of a 
single sarcoglycan (see “Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystro-
phy,” later in the chapter) results in a secondary loss of 
other sarcoglycans in the membrane without uniformly 
affecting dystrophin. In either instance, disruption of 
the dystrophin-glycoprotein complexes weakens the 
sarcolemma, causing membrane tears and a cascade of 
events leading to muscle ﬁber necrosis. This sequence 
of events occurs repeatedly during the life of a patient 
with muscular dystrophy.
TABLE 48-6
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT LIMB-GIRDLE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES (LGMDS)
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
LOCUS OR GENE
LGMD1A
Onset 3rd to 4th decade
Muscle weakness affects distal limb muscles, 
vocal cords, and pharyngeal muscles
Serum CK 2 × normal
EMG mixed myopathy/neuropathy
NCS normal
Myotilin
LGMD1B
Onset 1st or 2nd decade
Proximal lower limb weakness and 
cardiomyopathy with conduction defects
Some cases indistinguishable from 
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy with 
joint contractures
Serum CK 3–5 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Lamin A/C
LGMD1C
Onset in early childhood
Proximal weakness
Gowers’ sign, calf hypertrophy
Exercise-related muscle cramps
Serum CK 4–25 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Caveolin-3
LGMD1D
Onset 3rd to 5th decade
Proximal muscle weakness
Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias
Serum CK 2–4 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Linked to chromosome 7q
Gene unidentiﬁed
LGMD1E
Childhood onset
Proximal muscle weakness
Serum CK usually normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Linked to chromosome 
6q23
Gene unidentiﬁed
Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; NCS, nerve conduction studies.
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
627
TABLE 48-7
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE LIMB-GIRDLE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES (LGMDS)
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
LOCUS OR GENE
LGMD2A
Onset 1st or 2nd decade
Tight heel cords
Contractures at elbows, wrists, and ﬁngers; rigid 
spine in some
Proximal and distal weakness
Serum CK 3–15 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Calpain-3
LGMD2B
Onset 2nd or 3rd decade
Proximal muscle weakness at onset, later distal  
(calf) muscles affected
Miyoshi’s myopathy is variant of LGMD2B with  
calf muscles affected at onset
Serum CK 3–100 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Inﬂammation on muscle biopsy 
may simulate polymyositis
Dysferlin
LGMD2C–F
Onset in childhood to teenage years
Clinical condition similar to Duchenne’s and  
Becker’s muscular dystrophies
Cardiomyopathy uncommon
Cognitive function normal
Serum CK 5–100 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
γ, α, β, δ sarcoglycans
LGMD2G
Onset age 10 to 15
Proximal and distal muscle weakness
Serum CK 3–17 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Telethonin
LGMD2H
Onset 1st to 3rd decade
Proximal muscle weakness
Serum CK 2–25 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
TRIM32 gene
LGMD2I
Onset 1st to 3rd decade
Clinical condition similar to Duchenne’s or  
Becker’s dystrophies
Cardiomyopathy (some not all)
Cognitive function normal
Serum CK 10–30 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Fukutin-related protein
LGMD2Ja
Onset 1st to 3rd decade
Proximal lower limb weakness
Mild distal weakness
Progressive weakness causes loss of ambulation
Serum CK 1.5–2 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Titin
LGMD2K
Usually presents in infancy as Walker-
Warburg syndrome but can present in early adult 
life with proximal weakness and only minor CNS 
abnormalities
CK 10–20 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
POMT1
LGMD2IL
Presents in childhood or adult life
May manifest with quadriceps atrophy and myalgia
Some present with early involvement of the calves 
in the second decade of life, resembling Miyoshi’s 
myopathy (dysferlinopathy)
CK normal to 50 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Anoctamin 5
LGMD2M
Usually presents in infancy as Fukuyama congeni-
tal muscular dystrophy but can present in early 
adult life with proximal weakness and only minor 
CNS abnormalities
CK 10–50 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
Fukutin
LGMD2N
Usually presents in infancy as muscle-eye-
brain disease but can present in early adult life with 
proximal weakness and only minor CNS abnormalities
CK 5–20 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
POMGnT1
LGMD2O
Usually presents in infancy as Walker-
Warburg syndrome but can present in early adult 
life with proximal weakness and only minor CNS 
abnormalities
CK 5–20 × normal
NCS normal
EMG myopathic
POMT2
aTibial muscular dystrophy is a form of titin deﬁciency with only distal muscle weakness (see Table 48-9).
Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; NCS, nerve conduction studies; POMT1, protein-O-mannosyl transferase 1; 
POMT2, protein-O-mannosyltransferase 2; POMGnT1, O-linked mannose beta 1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
628
TREATMENT 
 Duchenne’s Muscular Dystrophy
Glucocorticoids, administered as prednisone in a dose 
of 0.75 mg/kg per day, significantly slow progression of 
Duchenne’s dystrophy for up to 3 years. Some patients 
cannot tolerate glucocorticoid therapy; weight gain and 
increased risk of fractures in particular represent a sig-
nificant deterrent for some boys. As in other recessively 
inherited dystrophies presumed to arise from loss of 
function of a critical muscle gene, there is optimism that 
Duchenne’s disease may benefit from novel therapies 
that either replace the defective gene or missing protein 
or implement downstream corrections (e.g., skipping 
mutated exons or reading through mutations that intro-
duce stop codons).
BECKER’S MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
This less severe form of X-linked recessive muscular 
dystrophy results from allelic defects of the same gene 
responsible for Duchenne’s dystrophy. Becker’s mus-
cular dystrophy is ∼10 times less frequent than Duch-
enne’s, with an incidence of about 3 per 100,000 
live-born males.
Clinical features
The pattern of muscle wasting in Becker’s muscular 
dystrophy closely resembles that seen in Duchenne’s. 
Proximal muscles, especially of the lower extremities, 
are prominently involved. As the disease progresses, 
weakness becomes more generalized. Signiﬁcant facial 
muscle weakness is not a feature. Hypertrophy of mus-
cles, particularly in the calves, is an early and prominent 
ﬁnding.
Most patients with Becker’s dystrophy ﬁrst experience 
difﬁculties between ages 5 and 15 years, although onset 
in the third or fourth decade or even later can occur. By 
deﬁnition, patients with Becker’s dystrophy walk beyond 
age 15, while patients with Duchenne’s dystrophy are 
typically in a wheelchair by the age of 12. Patients with 
Becker’s dystrophy have a reduced life expectancy, but 
most survive into the fourth or ﬁfth decade.
Mental retardation may occur in Becker’s dystro-
phy, but it is not as common as in Duchenne’s. Car-
diac involvement occurs in Becker’s dystrophy and 
may result in heart failure; some patients manifest with 
only heart failure. Other less common presentations are 
asymptomatic hyper-CK-emia, myalgias without weak-
ness, and myoglobinuria.
Laboratory features
Serum CK levels, results of EMG, and muscle biopsy 
ﬁndings closely resemble those in Duchenne’s dystrophy. 
The diagnosis of Becker’s muscular dystrophy requires 
Western blot analysis of muscle biopsy samples, demon-
strating a reduced amount or abnormal size of dystrophin 
or mutation analysis of DNA from peripheral blood leu-
kocytes. Genetic testing reveals deletions or duplications 
of the dystrophin gene in 65% of patients with Beck-
er’s dystrophy, approximately the same percentage as in 
Duchenne’s dystrophy. In both Becker’s and Duchenne’s 
dystrophies, the size of the DNA deletion does not pre-
dict clinical severity; however, in ∼95% of patients with 
Becker’s dystrophy, the DNA deletion does not alter the 
translational reading frame of messenger RNA. These 
“in-frame” mutations allow for production of some dys-
trophin, which accounts for the presence of altered rather 
than absent dystrophin on Western blot analysis.
TREATMENT 
 Becker’s Muscular Dystrophy
The use of glucocorticoids has not been adequately 
studied in Becker’s dystrophy.
LIMB-GIRDLE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
The syndrome of LGMD represents more than one 
disorder. Both males and females are affected, with 
onset ranging from late in the ﬁrst decade to the fourth 
decade. The LGMDs typically manifest with progres-
sive weakness of pelvic and shoulder girdle musculature. 
Respiratory insufﬁciency from weakness of the dia-
phragm may occur, as may cardiomyopathy.
α
α
γ
δ
β
β
Extracellular
Intracelluar
F-Actin
Dystrophin
Dystoglycan
complex
β1 α7
Collagen VI
Sarcoglycan
complex
Fukutin
POMGnT1
POMT1
Fukutin-related 
protein
Golgi
Integrin
complex
Calpain
Dysferlin
Caveolin-3
nNOS
Merosin
FIGURE 48-6
Selected muscular dystrophy–associated proteins in the 
cell membrane and Golgi complex.
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
629
A systematic classiﬁcation of LGMD is based on 
autosomal dominant (LGMD1) and autosomal recessive 
(LGMD2) inheritance. Superimposed on the backbone 
of LGMD1 and LGMD2, the classiﬁcation employs 
a sequential alphabetical lettering system (LGMD1A, 
LGMD2A, etc.). Disorders receive letters in the order 
in which they are found to have chromosomal linkage. 
This results in an ever-expanding list of conditions. 
Presently there are 5 autosomal dominant and 10 auto-
somal recessive disorders, summarized in Tables 48-6 
and 48-7. None of the conditions is as common as the 
dystrophinopathies; however, prevalence data for the 
LGMDs have not been systematically gathered for any 
large heterogeneous population. In referral-based clini-
cal populations, Fukutin-related protein (FKRP) deﬁ-
ciency (LGMD2I), calpainopathies (LGMD2A), and 
to a lesser extent dysferlinopathies (LGMD2B) have 
emerged as the most common disorders.
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
There are at least ﬁve genetically distinct forms of 
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). Emerin 
mutations are the most common cause of X-linked 
EDMD, though mutations in FHL1 may also be asso-
ciated with a similar phenotype, which is X-linked 
as well. Mutations involving the gene for lamin A/C 
are the most common cause of autosomal domi-
nant EDMD (also known as LGMD1B) and is also a 
common cause of hereditary cardiomyopathy. Less 
commonly, autosomal dominant EDMD has been 
reported with mutations in nesprin-1, nesprin-2, and 
TMEM43.
Clinical features
Prominent contractures can be recognized in early 
childhood and teenage years, often preceding mus-
cle weakness. The contractures persist throughout the 
course of the disease and are present at the elbows, 
ankles, and neck. Muscle weakness affects humeral and 
peroneal muscles at ﬁrst and later spreads to a limb-
girdle distribution. The cardiomyopathy is potentially 
life threatening and may result in sudden death. A spec-
trum of atrial rhythm and conduction defects includes 
atrial ﬁbrillation and paralysis and atrioventricular heart 
block. Some patients have a dilated cardiomyopathy. 
Female carriers of the X-linked variant may have car-
diac manifestations that become clinically signiﬁcant.
Laboratory features
Serum CK may be elevated two- to tenfold. EMG is 
myopathic. Muscle biopsy usually shows nonspeciﬁc 
dystrophic features, though cases associated with FHL1 
mutations have features of myoﬁbrillar myopathy. 
Immunohistochemistry reveals absent emerin stain-
ing of myonuclei in X-linked EDMD due to emerin 
mutations. ECGs demonstrate atrial and atrioventricular 
rhythm disturbances.
X-linked EDMD usually arises from defects in the 
emerin gene encoding a nuclear envelope protein. FHL1 
mutations are also a cause of scapuloperoneal dystrophy, 
but can also present with an EDMD phenotype. The 
autosomal dominant disease can be caused by mutations 
in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A and C; in the syn-
aptic nuclear envelope protein 1 (SYNE1) or 2 (SYNE2) 
encoding nesprin-1 and nesprin-2, respectively; and most 
recently in TMEM43 encoding LUMA. These proteins 
are essential components of the ﬁlamentous network 
underlying the inner nuclear membrane. Loss of struc-
tural integrity of the nuclear envelope from defects in 
emerin, lamin A/C, nesprin-1, nesprin-2, and LUMA 
accounts for overlapping phenotypes (Fig. 48-7).
TREATMENT 
 Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy
Supportive care should be offered for neuromuscu-
lar disability, including ambulatory aids, if necessary. 
Stretching of contractures is difficult. Management of 
cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias (e.g., early use of a 
defibrillator or cardiac pacemaker) may be life saving.
α
β
Emerin
Dystroglycans
Dystrophin
Nucleus
Nuclear
pore
Actin
Nebulin
Myosin
Myotilin
α-Actinin
Telethonin
Z-band
Contractile proteins
in sarcomere
Titin
Lamin A/C
Intracellular
Extracellular
FIGURE 48-7
Selected muscular dystrophy–associated proteins in 
the nuclear membrane and sarcomere. As shown in the 
exploded view, emerin and lamin A/C are constituents of the 
inner nuclear membrane. Several dystrophy-associated pro-
teins are represented in the sarcomere including titin, nebu-
lin, calpain, telethonin, actinin, and myotilin. The position of 
the dystrophin-dystroglycan complex is also illustrated.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
630
CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 
(CMD)
This is not one entity but rather a group of disorders 
with varying degrees of muscle weakness, CNS impair-
ment, and eye abnormalities.
Clinical features
As a group, CMDs present at birth or in the ﬁrst few 
months of life with hypotonia and proximal or gen-
eralized muscle weakness. Calf muscle hypertrophy is 
seen in some patients. Facial muscles may be weak, but 
other cranial nerve–innervated muscles are spared (e.g., 
extraocular muscles are normal). Most patients have 
joint contractures of varying degrees at elbows, hips, 
knees, and ankles. Contractures present at birth are 
referred to as arthrogryposis. Respiratory failure may be 
seen in some cases.
The CNS is affected in some forms of CMD. In 
merosin and FKRP deﬁciency, cerebral hypomyelin-
ation may be seen by MRI, though only a small num-
ber of patients have mental retardation and seizures. 
Three forms of congenital muscular dystrophy have 
severe brain impairment. These include Fukuyama 
congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD), muscle-eye-
brain (MEB) disease, and Walker-Warburg syndrome 
(WWS). Patients are severely disabled in all three of 
these conditions. In MEB disease and WWS, but not 
in FCMD, ocular abnormalities impair vision. WWS is 
the most severe congenital muscular dystrophy, causing 
death by 1 year of age.
Laboratory features
Serum CK is markedly elevated in all of these con-
ditions. The EMG is myopathic and muscle biopsies 
show nonspeciﬁc dystrophic features. Merosin, or 
laminin α2 chain (a basal lamina protein), is deﬁcient 
in surrounding muscle ﬁbers in merosin deﬁciency. 
Skin biopsies can also demonstrate defects in laminin 
α2 chain. In the other disorders (FKRP deﬁciency, 
FCMD, MEB disease, WWS), there is abnormal 
α-dystroglycan staining in muscle. In merosin deﬁ-
ciency, cerebral hypomyelination is common, and a 
host of brain malformations are seen in FCMD, MEB 
disease, and WWS.
All forms of CMD are inherited as autosomal reces-
sive disorders. Chromosomal linkage and speciﬁc gene 
defects are presented in Table 48-8. With the excep-
tion of merosin, the other gene defects affect posttrans-
lational glycosylation of α-dystroglycan. This abnor-
mality is thought to impair binding with merosin and 
leads to weakening of the dystrophin-glycoprotein 
complex, instability of the muscle membrane, and/or 
abnormalities in muscle contraction. CMDs with brain 
and eye phenotypes probably involve defective glyco-
sylation of additional proteins, accounting for the more 
extensive phenotypes.
TREATMENT 
 Congenital Muscular Dystrophy
There is no specific treatment for CMD. Proper wheel-
chair seating is important. Management of epilepsy and 
cardiac manifestations is necessary for some patients.
MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY
Myotonic dystrophy is also known as dystrophia myo-
tonica (DM). The condition is composed of at least two 
clinical disorders with overlapping phenotypes and dis-
tinct molecular genetic defects: myotonic dystrophy 
type 1 (DM1), the classic disease originally described by 
Steinert, and myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2), also 
called proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM).
Clinical features
The clinical expression of DM1 varies widely and 
involves many systems other than muscle. Affected 
patients have a typical “hatchet-faced” appearance 
due to temporalis, masseter, and facial muscle atrophy 
and weakness. Frontal baldness is also characteristic of 
the disease. Neck muscles, including ﬂexors and ster-
nocleidomastoids, and distal limb muscles are involved 
early. Weakness of wrist extensors, ﬁnger extensors, and 
intrinsic hand muscles impairs function. Ankle dorsi-
ﬂexor weakness may cause footdrop. Proximal muscles 
remain stronger throughout the course, although pref-
erential atrophy and weakness of quadriceps muscles 
occur in many patients. Palatal, pharyngeal, and tongue 
involvement produce a dysarthric speech, nasal voice, 
and swallowing problems. Some patients have dia-
phragm and intercostal muscle weakness, resulting in 
respiratory insufﬁciency.
Myotonia, which usually appears by age 5 years, is 
demonstrable by percussion of the thenar eminence, the 
tongue, and wrist extensor muscles. Myotonia causes 
a slow relaxation of hand grip after a forced voluntary 
closure. Advanced muscle wasting makes myotonia 
more difﬁcult to detect.
Cardiac disturbances occur commonly in patients 
with DM1. ECG abnormalities include ﬁrst-degree heart 
block and more extensive conduction system involve-
ment. Complete heart block and sudden death can 
occur. Congestive heart failure occurs infrequently but 
may result from cor pulmonale secondary to respira-
tory failure. Mitral valve prolapse also occurs commonly. 
Other associated features include intellectual impairment, 
hypersomnia, posterior subcapsular cataracts, gonadal 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
631
atrophy, insulin resistance, and decreased esophageal and 
colonic motility.
Congenital myotonic dystrophy is a more severe form of 
DM1 and occurs in ∼25% of infants of affected moth-
ers. It is characterized by severe facial and bulbar weak-
ness, transient neonatal respiratory insufﬁciency, and 
mental retardation.
DM2, or PROMM, has a distinct pattern of muscle 
weakness affecting mainly proximal muscles. Other fea-
tures of the disease overlap with DM1, including cata-
racts, testicular atrophy, insulin resistance, constipation, 
hypersomnia, and cognitive defects. Cardiac conduction 
defects occur but are less common, and the hatchet face 
and frontal baldness are less consistent features. A very 
striking difference is the failure to clearly identify a con-
genital form of DM2.
Laboratory features
The diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy can usually be 
made on the basis of clinical ﬁndings. Serum CK lev-
els may be normal or mildly elevated. EMG evidence 
TABLE 48-8 
CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIESa
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
LOCUS OR GENE
Merosin deﬁciency
Onset at birth with hypotonia, joint con-
tractures, delayed milestones, general-
ized muscle weakness
Cerebral hypomyelination, less often 
cortical dysplasia
Normal intelligence usually, some with 
MR (∼6%) and seizures (∼8%)
Partial deﬁciency leads to milder 
phenotype (LGMD picture)
Serum CK 5–35 × normal
EMG myopathic
NCS abnormal in some cases
Laminin α2 chain
Fukitin-related 
protein deﬁciencyb
Onset at birth or shortly after
Hypotonia and feeding problems
Weakness of proximal muscles, espe-
cially shoulder girdles
Hypertrophy of leg muscles
Joint contractures
Cognition normal
Serum CK 10–50 × normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Fukutin-related protein
Fukuyama congenital 
muscular dystrophy b
Onset at birth
Hypotonia, joint contractures
Generalized muscle weakness
Hypertrophy of calf muscles
Seizures, mental retardation
Cardiomyopathy
Serum CK 10–50 × normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
MRI shows hydrocephalus and 
periventricular and frontal 
hypomyelination
Fukutin
Muscle-eye-brain 
disease
Onset at birth, hypotonia
Eye abnormalities include: progressive 
myopia, cataracts, and optic nerve, 
glaucoma, retinal pigmentary changes
Progressive muscle weakness
Joint contractures
Seizures, mental retardation
Serum CK 5–20 × normal
MRI shows hydrocephalus, 
cobblestone lissencephaly, 
corpus callosum and cer-
ebellar hypoplasia, cerebral 
hypomyelination
N-acetyl-glucosaminyl 
transferase
(POMGnT1)
Walker-Warburg 
syndromeb
Onset at birth, hypotonia
Generalized muscle weakness
Joint contractures
Microphthalmos, retinal dysplasia, 
buphthalmos, glaucoma, cataracts
Seizures, MR
Serum CK 5–20 × normal
MRI shows cobblestone 
lissencephaly, hydrocephalus, 
encephalocele, absent corpus 
callosum
O-mannoxyl-transfer-
ase-1 (POMT1)
aAll are inherited as recessive traits.
bThere is phenotypic overlap between disorders related to defective glycosylation. In muscle, this is a consequence of altered glycosylation of 
dystroglycans; in brain/eye, other glycosylated proteins are involved. Clinically, Walker-Warburg syndrome is more severe, with death by 1 year.
Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; LGMD, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy; MR, mental retardation; NCS, nerve 
conduction studies.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
632
of myotonia is present in most cases of DM1 but may 
be more patchy in DM2. Muscle biopsy shows mus-
cle atrophy, which selectively involves type 1 ﬁbers 
in 50% of cases, and ringed ﬁbers in DM1 but not in 
DM2. Typically, numerous internalized nuclei can be 
seen in individual muscle ﬁbers as well as atrophic ﬁbers 
with pyknotic nuclear clumps in both DM1 and DM2. 
Necrosis of muscle ﬁbers and increased connective tis-
sue, common in other muscular dystrophies, are less 
apparent in myotonic dystrophy.
DM1 and DM2 are both autosomal dominant 
disorders. New mutations do not appear to contribute 
to the pool of affected individuals. DM1 is transmit-
ted by an intronic mutation consisting of an unstable 
expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in a serine-
threonine protein kinase gene (named DMPK) on chro-
mosome 19q13.3. An increase in the severity of the 
disease phenotype in successive generations (genetic 
anticipation) is accompanied by an increase in the num-
ber of trinucleotide repeats. A similar type of mutation 
has been identiﬁed in fragile X syndrome. The unsta-
ble triplet repeat in myotonic dystrophy can be used 
for prenatal diagnosis. Congenital disease occurs almost 
exclusively in infants born to affected mothers; it is pos-
sible that sperm with greatly expanded triplet repeats do 
not function well.
DM2 is caused by a DNA expansion mutation con-
sisting of a CCTG repeat in intron 1 of the ZNF9 gene 
located at chromosome 3q13.3-q24. The gene is believed 
to encode an RNA-binding protein expressed in many 
different tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscle.
The DNA expansions in DM1 and DM2 almost cer-
tainly impair muscle function by a toxic gain of func-
tion of the mutant mRNA. In both DM1 and DM2, 
the mutant RNA appears to form intranuclear inclu-
sions composed of aberrant RNA. These RNA inclu-
sions sequester RNA-binding proteins essential for 
proper splicing of a variety of other mRNAs. This leads 
to abnormal transcription of multiple proteins in a vari-
ety of tissues/organ systems, in turn causing the systemic 
manifestations of DM1 and DM2.
TREATMENT 
 Myotonic Dystrophy
The myotonia in DM1 rarely warrants treatment, though 
some patients with DM2 are significantly bothered 
by the discomfort related to the associated muscle 
stiffness. Phenytoin and mexiletine are the preferred 
agents for the occasional patient who requires an anti-
myotonia drug; other agents, particularly quinine and 
procainamide, may worsen cardiac conduction. A car-
diac pacemaker should be considered for patients with 
unexplained syncope, advanced conduction system 
abnormalities with evidence of second-degree heart 
block, or trifascicular conduction disturbances with 
marked prolongation of the PR interval. Molded ankle-
foot orthoses help stabilize gait in patients with foot 
drop. Excessive daytime somnolence with or without 
sleep apnea is not uncommon. Sleep studies, noninva-
sive respiratory support (biphasic positive airway pres-
sure, BiPAP), and treatment with modafinil may be ben-
eficial.
FACIOSCAPULOHUMERAL (FSH) 
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
This form of muscular dystrophy has a prevalence of 
∼1 in 20,000. There are two forms of FSHD that have 
similar pathogenesis, as will be discussed. Most patients 
have FSHD type 1 (95%), while approximately 5% have 
FSHD2. FSHD1 and FSHD2 are clinically and his-
topathologically identical. FSHD is not to be confused 
with the genetically distinct scapuloperoneal dystrophies.
Clinical features
The condition typically has an onset in childhood or 
young adulthood. In most cases, facial weakness is the 
initial manifestation, appearing as an inability to smile, 
whistle, or fully close the eyes. Weakness of the shoul-
der girdles, rather than the facial muscles, usually brings 
the patient to medical attention. Loss of scapular stabi-
lizer muscles makes arm elevation difﬁcult. Scapular 
winging (Fig. 48-3) becomes apparent with attempts at 
abduction and forward movement of the arms. Biceps 
and triceps muscles may be severely affected, with rela-
tive sparing of the deltoid muscles. Weakness is invari-
ably worse for wrist extension than for wrist ﬂexion, 
and weakness of the anterior compartment muscles of 
the legs may lead to footdrop.
In most patients, the weakness remains restricted to 
facial, upper extremity, and distal lower extremity mus-
cles. In 20% of patients, weakness progresses to involve 
the pelvic girdle muscles, and severe functional impair-
ment and possible wheelchair dependency result.
Characteristically, patients with FSHD do not have 
involvement of other organ systems, although labile 
hypertension is common, and there is an increased 
incidence of nerve deafness. Coats’ disease, a disor-
der consisting of telangiectasia, exudation, and retinal 
detachment, also occurs.
Laboratory features
The serum CK level may be normal or mildly elevated. 
EMG usually indicates a myopathic pattern. The mus-
cle biopsy shows nonspeciﬁc features of a myopathy. 
A prominent inﬂammatory inﬁltrate, which is often 
multifocal in distribution, is present in some biopsy 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
633
samples. The cause or signiﬁcance of this ﬁnding is 
unknown.
An autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with 
almost complete penetrance has been established, but 
each family member should be examined for the pres-
ence of the disease, since ∼30% of those affected are 
unaware of involvement. FSHD1 is associated with 
deletions of tandem 3.3-kb repeats at 4q35. The dele-
tion reduces the number of repeats to a fragment of 
<35 kb in most patients. Within these repeats lies the 
DUX4 gene, which usually is not expressed. In patients 
with FSHD1 these deletions in the setting of a speciﬁc 
polymorphism leads to hypomethylation of the region 
and toxic expression of the DUX 4 gene. Interest-
ingly, in patients with FSHD2, there is no deletion but 
in the setting of the same polymorphism there again is 
seen hypomethylation of the region and the permissive 
expression of the DUX4 gene. In either instance, the 
permissive polymorphism introduces a polyadenylation 
signal that results in an aberrant, toxic DUX4 transcript.
TREATMENT 
 Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy
No specific treatment is available; ankle-foot orthoses 
are helpful for footdrop. Scapular stabilization proce-
dures improve scapular winging but may not improve 
function.
OCULOPHARYNGEAL DYSTROPHY
This form of muscular dystrophy represents one of 
several disorders characterized by progressive exter-
nal ophthalmoplegia, which consists of slowly progres-
sive ptosis and limitation of eye movements with spar-
ing of pupillary reactions for light and accommodation. 
Patients usually do not complain of diplopia, in contrast 
to patients having conditions with a more acute onset of 
ocular muscle weakness (e.g., myasthenia gravis).
Clinical features
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy has a late onset; it 
usually presents in the fourth to sixth decade with ptosis 
and/or dysphagia. The extraocular muscle impairment 
is less prominent in the early phase but may be severe 
later. The swallowing problem may become debilitating 
and result in pooling of secretions and repeated episodes 
of aspiration. Mild weakness of the neck and extremities 
also occurs.
Laboratory features
The serum CK level may be two to three times normal. 
Myopathic EMG ﬁndings are typical. On biopsy, mus-
cle ﬁbers are found to contain rimmed vacuoles, which 
by electron microscopy are shown to contain membra-
nous whorls, accumulation of glycogen, and other non-
speciﬁc debris related to lysosomes. A distinct feature 
of oculopharyngeal dystrophy is the presence of tubular 
ﬁlaments, 8.5 nm in diameter, in muscle cell nuclei.
Oculopharyngeal dystrophy has an autosomal domi-
nant inheritance pattern with complete penetrance. The 
incidence is high in French-Canadians and in Spanish-
American families of the southwestern United States. 
Large kindreds of Italian and of eastern European Jew-
ish descent have been reported. The molecular defect in 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy is a subtle expan-
sion of a modest polyalanine repeat tract in a poly-
RNA-binding protein (PABP2) in muscle.
TREATMENT 
 Oculopharyngeal Dystrophy
Dysphagia can lead to significant undernourishment 
and inanition, making oculopharyngeal muscular dys-
trophy a potentially life-threatening disease. Cricopha-
ryngeal myotomy may improve swallowing, although 
it does not prevent aspiration. Eyelid crutches can 
improve vision when ptosis obstructs vision; candidates 
for ptosis surgery must be carefully selected—those 
with severe facial weakness are not suitable.
DISTAL MYOPATHIES
A group of muscle diseases, the distal myopathies, are 
notable for their preferential distal distribution of muscle 
weakness in contrast to most muscle conditions associ-
ated with proximal weakness. The major distal myopa-
thies are summarized in Table 48-9.
Clinical features
Welander’s, Udd’s, and Markesbery-Griggs distal myopathies 
are all late onset, dominantly inherited disorders of dis-
tal limb muscles, usually beginning after age 40 years. 
Welander’s distal myopathy preferentially involves 
the wrist and ﬁnger extensors, whereas the others are 
associated with anterior tibial weakness leading to pro-
gressive footdrop. Laing’s distal myopathy is also a domi-
nantly inherited disorder heralded by tibial weakness; 
however, it is distinguished by onset in childhood or 
early adult life. Nonaka’s distal myopathy and Miyoshi’s 
myopathy are distinguished by autosomal recessive inher-
itance and onset in the late teens or twenties. Nonaka’s 
myopathy entails anterior tibial weakness, whereas Miy-
oshi’s myopathy is unique in that gastrocnemius muscles 
are preferentially affected at onset. Finally, the myoﬁbril-
lar myopathies (MFMs) are a clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous group of disorders that can be associated 
with prominent distal weakness; they can be inherited 
in an autosomal dominant or recessive pattern. Of note, 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
634
TABLE 48-9 
DISTAL MYOPATHIES
DISEASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
LABORATORY FEATURES
INHERITANCE/LOCUS OR GENE
Welander’s distal 
myopathy
Onset in 5th decade
Weakness begins in hands
Slow progression with spread to 
distal lower extremities
Lifespan normal
Serum CK 2–3 × normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows 
dystrophic features
AD
Chromosome 2p13
Tibial muscular 
dystrophy (Udd’s)
Onset 4th to 8th decade
Distal lower extremity weakness 
(tibial distribution)
Upper extremities usually normal
Lifespan normal
Serum CK 2–4 × normal EMG 
myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows 
dystrophic features
Titin absent in M-line of 
muscle
AD
Titin
AR (associated with more 
proximal weakness—
LGMD2J)
Markesbery-Griggs 
distal myopathy
Onset 4th to 8th decade
Distal lower extremity weakness 
(tibial distribution) with progres-
sion to distal arms and proximal 
muscles
Serum CK is usually mildly 
elevated
EMG reveals irritative myopathy
Muscle biopsies demonstrate 
rimmed vacuoles and features 
of myoﬁbrillar myopathy
AD
Z-band alternatively spliced 
PDX motif-containing protein 
(ZASP)
Laing’s distal 
myopathy
Onset childhood to 3rd decade
Distal lower extremity weakness 
(tibial distribution) and neck ﬂex-
ors affected early
May have cardiomyopathy
Serum CK is normal or slightly 
elevated
Muscle biopsies do not show 
rimmed vacuoles
Large deposits of myosin heavy 
chain are seen in type 1 mus-
cle ﬁbers
AD
Myosin heavy chain 7
Nonaka’s distal 
myopathy (auto-
somal recessive 
hereditary inclusion 
body myopathy)
Onset: 2nd to 3rd decade
Lower extremity distal weakness
Mild distal upper limb weakness 
may be present early
Progression to other muscles spar-
ing quadriceps
Ambulation may be lost in 10–15 y
Serum CK 3–10 × normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Dystrophic features on muscle 
biopsy plus rimmed vacuoles 
and 15- to 19-nm ﬁlaments 
within vacuoles
AR
GNE gene: UDP-N-
acetylglucosamine 
2-epimerase/N-
acetylmannosamine kinase
Allelic to hereditary inclusion 
body myopathy
Miyoshi’s myopathy
Onset: 2nd to 3rd decade
Lower extremity weakness in pos-
terior compartment muscles
Progression leads to weakness in 
other muscle groups
Ambulation lost after 10–15 y in 
about one-third of cases
Serum CK 20–100 × normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows nonspe-
ciﬁc dystrophic features often 
with prominent inﬂammatory 
cell inﬁltration; no rimmed 
vacuoles
AR
Allelic to LGMD2B (see Table 
48-7)
Dysferlin
Myoﬁbrillar 
myopathies
Onset from early childhood to late 
adult life
Weakness may be distal, proximal, 
or generalized
Cardiomyopathy and respiratory 
involvement is not uncommon
Serum CKs can be normal or 
moderately elevated
EMG is myopathic and often 
associated with myotonic dis-
charges
Muscle biopsy demonstrates 
abnormal accumulation 
of desmin and other pro-
teins, rimmed vacuoles, and 
myoﬁbrillar degeneration
Genetically heterogeneous
AD
  Myotilin (also known as 
LGMD 1A)
  ZASP (see Markesbery-
Griggs distal myopathy)
  Filamin-C
  Desmin
  Alpha B crystallin
  Bag3
  FHL-1
AR
  Desmin
  Selenoprotein N1
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
635
Markesbery-Griggs myopathy (caused by mutations in 
ZASP) and LGMD1B (caused by mutations in myotilin) 
are in fact subtypes of myoﬁbrillar myopathy.
Laboratory features
Serum CK level is particularly helpful in diagnosing 
Miyoshi’s myopathy since it is very elevated. In the 
other conditions, serum CK is only slightly increased. 
EMGs are myopathic. In the MFMs, myotonic or pseu-
domyotonic discharges are common. Muscle biopsy 
shows nonspeciﬁc dystrophic features and, with the 
exception of Laing’s and Miyoshi’s myopathies, often 
shows rimmed vacuoles. MFM is associated with the 
accumulation of dense inclusions, as well as amorphous 
material best seen on Gomori’s trichrome and myo-
ﬁbrillar disruption on electron microscopy. Immune 
staining sometimes demonstrates accumulation of des-
min and other proteins in MFM, large deposits of myo-
sin heavy chain in the subsarcolemmal region of type 
1 muscle ﬁbers in Laing’s myopathy, and reduced or 
absent dysferlin in Miyoshi’s myopathy.
The affected genes and their gene products are listed 
in Table 48-9. The gene for Welander’s disease awaits 
identiﬁcation.
TREATMENT 
Distal Myopathies
Occupational therapy is offered for loss of hand func-
tion; ankle-foot orthoses can support distal lower limb 
muscles. The MFMs can be associated with cardiomyop-
athy (congestive heart failure or arrhythmias) and respi-
ratory failure that may require medical management. 
Laing’s-type distal myopathy can also be associated with 
a cardiomyopathy.
CONGENITAL MYOPATHIES
These rare disorders are distinguished from muscular 
dystrophies by the presence of speciﬁc histochemical 
and structural abnormalities in muscle. Although pri-
marily disorders of infancy or childhood, three forms 
that may present in adulthood are described here: cen-
tral core disease, nemaline (rod) myopathy, and centro-
nuclear (myotubular) myopathy. Sarcotubular myopathy 
is caused by mutations in TRIM-32 and is identical to 
LGMD2H. Other types, such as minicore myopathy 
(multi-minicore disease), ﬁngerprint body myopathy, 
and cap myopathy, are not discussed.
CENTRAL CORE DISEASE
Patients with central core disease may have decreased 
fetal movements and breech presentation. Hypotonia 
and delay in motor milestones, particularly in walk-
ing, are common. Later in childhood, patients develop 
problems with stair climbing, running, and getting up 
from the ﬂoor. On examination, there is mild facial, 
neck-ﬂexor, and proximal-extremity muscle weakness. 
Legs are more affected than arms. Skeletal abnormali-
ties include congenital hip dislocation, scoliosis, and pes 
cavus; clubbed feet also occur. Most cases are nonpro-
gressive, but exceptions are well documented. Suscep-
tibility to malignant hyperthermia must be considered 
as a potential risk factor for patients with central core 
disease.
The serum CK level is usually normal. Needle EMG 
demonstrates a myopathic pattern. Muscle biopsy shows 
ﬁbers with single or multiple central or eccentric dis-
crete zones (cores) devoid of oxidative enzymes. Cores 
occur preferentially in type 1 ﬁbers and represent poorly 
aligned sarcomeres associated with Z disk streaming.
Autosomal dominant inheritance is characteristic; 
sporadic cases also occur. The disease is caused by point 
mutations of the ryanodine receptor gene on chromo-
some 19q, encoding the calcium-release channel of the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle; mutations of 
this gene also account for some cases of inherited malig-
nant hyperthermia. Malignant hyperthermia is an allelic 
condition; C-terminal mutations of the RYR1 gene 
predispose to this complication.
Speciﬁc treatment is not required, but establishing a 
diagnosis of central core disease is extremely important 
because these patients have a known predisposition to 
malignant hyperthermia during anesthesia.
NEMALINE MYOPATHY
The term nemaline refers to the distinctive presence in 
muscle ﬁbers of rods or threadlike structures (Greek 
nema, “thread”). Nemaline myopathy is clinically het-
erogeneous. A severe neonatal form presents with 
hypotonia and feeding and respiratory difﬁculties, lead-
ing to early death. Nemaline myopathy usually presents 
in infancy or childhood with delayed motor milestones. 
The course is nonprogressive or slowly progressive. 
The physical appearance is striking because of the long, 
narrow facies, high-arched palate, and open-mouthed 
appearance due to a prognathous jaw. Other skeletal 
abnormalities include pectus excavatum, kyphoscolio-
sis, pes cavus, and clubfoot deformities. Facial and gen-
eralized muscle weakness, including respiratory muscle 
weakness, is common. An adult-onset disorder with 
progressive proximal weakness may be seen. Myocar-
dial involvement is occasionally present in both the 
childhood and adult-onset forms. The serum CK level 
is usually normal or slightly elevated. The EMG dem-
onstrates a myopathic pattern. Muscle biopsy shows 
clusters of small rods (nemaline bodies), which occur 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
636
preferentially, but not exclusively, in the sarcoplasm 
of type 1 muscle ﬁbers. Occasionally, the rods are also 
apparent in myonuclei. The muscle often shows type 1 
muscle ﬁber predominance. Rods originate from the Z 
disk material of the muscle ﬁber.
Six genes have been associated with nemaline myop-
athy. Five of these code for thin ﬁlament–associated 
proteins, suggesting disturbed assembly or interplay of 
these structures as a pivotal mechanism. Mutations of 
the nebulin (NEB) gene account for most cases, includ-
ing both severe neonatal and early childhood forms, 
inherited as autosomal recessive disorders. Neonatal 
and childhood cases, inherited as predominantly auto-
somal dominant disorders, are caused by mutations of 
the skeletal muscle α-actinin (ACTA1) gene. In milder 
forms of the disease with autosomal dominant inheri-
tance, mutations have been identiﬁed in both the slow 
α-tropomyosin (TPM3) and β-tropomyosin (TPM2) 
genes accounting for <3% of cases. Muscle troponin T 
(TNNT1) gene mutations appear to be limited to the 
Amish population in North America. Mutations in a 
sixth nemaline myopathy gene, NEM6, have recently 
been reported; this gene encodes a putative BTB/Kelch 
protein. No speciﬁc treatment is available.
CENTRONUCLEAR (MYOTUBULAR) 
MYOPATHY
Three distinct variants of centronuclear myopathy 
occur. A neonatal form, also known as myotubular myop-
athy, presents with severe hypotonia and weakness at 
birth. The late infancy–early childhood form presents 
with delayed motor milestones. Later, difﬁculty with 
running and stair climbing becomes apparent. A mar-
fanoid, slender body habitus, long narrow face, and 
high-arched palate are typical. Scoliosis and clubbed feet 
may be present. Most patients exhibit progressive weak-
ness, some requiring wheelchairs. Progressive exter-
nal ophthalmoplegia with ptosis and varying degrees 
of extraocular muscle impairment are characteristic of 
both the neonatal and the late-infantile forms. A third 
variant, the late childhood–adult form, has an onset in 
the second or third decade. Patients have full extraocu-
lar muscle movements and rarely exhibit ptosis. There 
is mild, slowly progressive limb weakness that may be 
distally predominant (some of these patients have been 
classiﬁed as having Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 
[CMT2; Chap. 45]).
Normal or slightly elevated CK levels occur in each 
of the forms. Nerve conduction studies may reveal 
reduced amplitudes of distal compound muscle action 
potentials, in particular in adult-onset cases that resem-
ble CMT2. EMG studies often give distinctive results, 
showing positive sharp waves and ﬁbrillation potentials, 
complex and repetitive discharges, and rarely myotonic 
discharges. Muscle biopsy specimens in longitudinal 
section demonstrate rows of central nuclei, often sur-
rounded by a halo. In transverse sections, central nuclei 
are found in 25–80% of muscle ﬁbers.
A gene for the neonatal form of centronuclear myop-
athy has been localized to Xq28; this gene encodes 
myotubularin, a protein tyrosine phosphatase. Mis-
sense, frameshift, and splice-site mutations predict loss 
of myotubularin function in affected individuals. Carrier 
identiﬁcation and prenatal diagnosis are possible. Auto-
somal recessive forms are caused by mutations in BIB1 
that encodes for amphyphysin-2, while some autosomal 
dominant cases, which are allelic to a form of CMT2, 
are associated with mutations in the gene that encodes 
dynamin-2. No speciﬁc medical treatments are available 
at this time.
DISORDERS OF MUSCLE ENERGY 
METABOLISM
There are two principal sources of energy for skeletal 
muscle—fatty acids and glucose. Abnormalities in either 
glucose or lipid utilization can be associated with dis-
tinct clinical presentations that can range from an acute, 
painful syndrome with rhabdomyolysis and myoglobin-
uria to a chronic, progressive muscle weakness simulat-
ing muscular dystrophy.
GLYCOGEN STORAGE AND GLYCOLYTIC 
DEFECTS
Disorders of glycogen storage causing 
progressive weakness
 α-Glucosidase, or acid maltase, deﬁciency 
(Pompe’s disease)
Three clinical forms of α-glucosidase, or acid maltase, 
deﬁciency (type II glycogenosis) can be distinguished. 
The infantile form is the most common, with onset of 
symptoms in the ﬁrst 3 months of life. Infants develop 
severe muscle weakness, cardiomegaly, hepatomegaly, 
and respiratory insufﬁciency. Glycogen accumulation 
in motor neurons of the spinal cord and brainstem 
contributes to muscle weakness. Death usually occurs 
by 1 year of age. In the childhood form, the picture 
resembles muscular dystrophy. Delayed motor mile-
stones result from proximal limb muscle weakness and 
involvement of respiratory muscles. The heart may 
be involved, but the liver and brain are unaffected. 
The adult form usually begins in the third or fourth 
decade but can present as late as the seventh decade. 
Respiratory failure and diaphragmatic weakness are 
often initial manifestations, heralding progressive 
proximal muscle weakness. The heart and liver are not 
involved.
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
637
The serum CK level is 2 to 10 times normal in infan-
tile or childhood-onset Pompe’s disease but can be 
normal in adult-onset cases. EMG examination dem-
onstrates a myopathic pattern, but other features are 
especially distinctive, including myotonic discharges, 
trains of ﬁbrillation and positive waves, and complex 
repetitive discharges. EMG discharges are very promi-
nent in the paraspinal muscles. The muscle biopsy in 
infants typically reveals vacuoles containing glycogen 
and the lysosomal enzyme acid phosphatase. Electron 
microscopy reveals membrane-bound and free tis-
sue glycogen. However, muscle biopsies in late-onset 
Pompe’s disease may demonstrate only nonspeciﬁc 
abnormalities. Enzyme analysis of dried blood spots is 
a sensitive technique to screen for Pompe’s disease. A 
deﬁnitive diagnosis is established by enzyme assay in 
muscle or cultured ﬁbroblasts or by genetic testing.
Pompe’s disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations of the α-glucosidase gene. 
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with IV recombi-
nant human α-glucosidase has been shown to be ben-
eﬁcial in infantile-onset Pompe’s disease. Clinical ben-
eﬁts in the infantile disease include reduced heart size, 
improved muscle function, reduced need for ventilatory 
support, and longer life. In late-onset cases, ERT has 
not been associated with the dramatic response that can 
be seen in classic infantile Pompe’s disease, yet it appears 
to stabilize the disease process.
 Other glycogen storage diseases with 
progressive weakness
In debranching enzyme deﬁciency (type III glycogenosis), a 
slowly progressive form of muscle weakness can develop 
after puberty. Rarely, myoglobinuria may be seen. 
Patients are usually diagnosed in infancy, however, 
because of hypotonia and delayed motor milestones, 
hepatomegaly, growth retardation, and hypoglycemia. 
Branching enzyme deﬁciency (type IV glycogenosis) is a rare 
and fatal glycogen storage disease characterized by fail-
ure to thrive and hepatomegaly. Hypotonia and muscle 
wasting may be present, but the skeletal muscle mani-
festations are minor compared to liver failure.
Disorders of glycolysis causing exercise 
intolerance
Several glycolytic defects are associated with recur-
rent myoglobinuria: myophosphorylase deﬁciency (type V 
glycogenosis), phosphofructokinase deﬁciency (type VII gly-
cogenosis), phosphoglycerate kinase deﬁciency (type IX glyco-
genosis), phosphoglycerate mutase deﬁciency (type X glycogeno-
sis), lactate dehydrogenase deﬁciency (glycogenosis type XI), 
and β-enolase deﬁciency. Myophosphorylase deﬁciency, 
also known as McArdle’s disease, is by far the most com-
mon of the glycolytic defects associated with exercise 
intolerance. These glycolytic defects result in a common 
failure to support energy production at the initiation 
of exercise, although the exact site of energy failure 
remains controversial.
Clinical muscle manifestations in these conditions 
usually begin in adolescence. Symptoms are precipitated 
by brief bursts of high-intensity exercise such as running 
or lifting heavy objects. A history of myalgia and muscle 
stiffness usually precedes the intensely painful muscle 
contractures, which may be followed by myoglobinuria. 
Acute renal failure accompanies signiﬁcant pigmenturia.
Certain features help distinguish some enzyme defects. 
In McArdle’s disease, exercise tolerance can be enhanced 
by a slow induction phase (warm-up) or brief periods of 
rest, allowing for the start of the “second-wind” phe-
nomenon (switching to utilization of fatty acids). Vary-
ing degrees of hemolytic anemia accompany deﬁciencies 
of both phosphofructokinase (mild) and phosphoglycerate 
kinase (severe). In phosphoglycerate kinase deﬁciency, 
the usual clinical presentation is a seizure disorder asso-
ciated with mental retardation; exercise intolerance is an 
infrequent manifestation.
In all of these conditions, the serum CK levels ﬂuc-
tuate widely and may be elevated even during symp-
tom-free periods. CK levels >100 times normal are 
expected, accompanying myoglobinuria. All patients 
with suspected glycolytic defects leading to exercise 
intolerance should undergo a forearm exercise test. An 
impaired rise in venous lactate is highly indicative of a 
glycolytic defect. In lactate dehydrogenase deﬁciency, 
venous levels of lactate do not increase, but pyruvate 
rises to normal. A deﬁnitive diagnosis of glycolytic dis-
ease is made by muscle biopsy and subsequent enzyme 
analysis or by genetic testing.
Myophosphorylase deﬁciency, phosphofructokinase 
deﬁciency, and phosphoglycerate mutase deﬁciency are 
inherited as autosomal recessive disorders. Phospho-
glycerate kinase deﬁciency is X-linked recessive. Muta-
tions can be found in the respective genes encoding the 
abnormal proteins in each of these disorders.
Training may enhance exercise tolerance, perhaps 
by increasing perfusion to muscle. Dietary intake of 
free glucose or fructose prior to activity may improve 
function but care must be taken to avoid obesity from 
ingesting too many calories.
LIPID AS AN ENERGY SOURCE AND 
ASSOCIATED DEFECTS
Lipid is an important muscle energy source during rest 
and during prolonged, submaximal exercise. Fatty acids 
are derived from circulating very low-density lipopro-
tein (VLDL) in the blood or from triglycerides stored 
in muscle ﬁbers. Oxidation of fatty acids occurs in the 
mitochondria. To enter the mitochondria, a fatty acid 
must ﬁrst be converted to an “activated fatty acid,” 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
638
acyl-CoA. The acyl-CoA must be linked with carni-
tine by the enzyme carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT) 
I for transport into the mitochondria. CPT I is present 
on the inner side of the outer mitochondrial membrane. 
Carnitine is removed by CPT II, an enzyme attached to 
the inside of the inner mitochondrial membrane, allow-
ing transport of acyl-CoA into the mitochondrial matrix 
for β-oxidation.
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deﬁciency
CPT II deﬁciency is the most common recognizable 
cause of recurrent myoglobinuria, more common than 
the glycolytic defects. Onset is usually in the teenage 
years or early twenties. Muscle pain and myoglobinuria 
typically occur after prolonged exercise but can also be 
precipitated by fasting or infections; up to 20% of patients 
do not exhibit myoglobinuria, however. Strength is 
normal between attacks. In contrast to disorders caused 
by defects in glycolysis, in which muscle cramps follow 
short, intense bursts of exercise, the muscle pain in CPT 
II deﬁciency does not occur until the limits of utilization 
have been exceeded and muscle breakdown has already 
begun. Episodes of rhabdomyolysis may produce severe 
weakness. In young children and newborns, CPT II 
deﬁciency can present with a very severe clinical picture 
including hypoketotic hypoglycemia, cardiomyopathy, 
liver failure, and sudden death.
Serum CK levels and EMG ﬁndings are both usually 
normal between episodes. A normal rise of venous lac-
tate during forearm exercise distinguishes this condition 
from glycolytic defects, especially myophosphorylase 
deﬁciency. Muscle biopsy does not show lipid accumu-
lation and is usually normal between attacks. The diag-
nosis requires direct measurement of muscle CPT or 
genetic testing.
CPT II deﬁciency is much more common in men 
than women (5:1); nevertheless, all evidence indicates 
autosomal recessive inheritance. A mutation in the gene 
for CPT II (chromosome 1p36) causes the disease in 
some individuals. Attempts to improve exercise tolerance 
with frequent meals and a low-fat, high-carbohydrate 
diet, or by substituting medium-chain triglycerides in the 
diet, have not proven to be beneﬁcial.
Myoadenylate deaminase deﬁciency
The muscle enzyme myoadenylate deaminase converts 
adenosine-5′-monophosphate (5′-AMP) to inosine mono-
phosphate (IMP) with liberation of ammonia. Myoad-
enylate deaminase may play a role in regulating adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) levels in muscles. Most individuals 
with myoadenylate deaminase deﬁciency have no symp-
toms. There have been a few reports of patients with this 
disorder who have exercise-exacerbated myalgia and myo-
globinuria. Many questions have been raised about the 
clinical effects of myoadenylate deaminase deﬁciency, and, 
speciﬁcally, its relationship to exertional myalgia and fatiga-
bility, but there is no consensus.
MITOCHONDRIAL MYOPATHIES
In 1972, Olson and colleagues recognized that muscle 
ﬁbers with signiﬁcant numbers of abnormal mitochon-
dria could be highlighted with the modiﬁed trichrome 
stain; the term ragged red ﬁbers was coined. By electron 
microscopy, the mitochondria in ragged red ﬁbers are 
enlarged and often bizarrely shaped and have crystalline 
inclusions. Since that seminal observation, the under-
standing of these disorders of muscle and other tissues 
has expanded.
Mitochondria play a key role in energy production. 
Oxidation of the major nutrients derived from car-
bohydrate, fat, and protein leads to the generation of 
reducing equivalents. The latter are transported through 
the respiratory chain in the process known as oxidative 
phosphorylation. The energy generated by the oxidation-
reduction reactions of the respiratory chain is stored in 
an electrochemical gradient coupled to ATP synthesis.
A novel feature of mitochondria is their genetic com-
position. Each mitochondrion possesses a DNA genome 
that is distinct from that of the nuclear DNA. Human 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) consists of a double-
strand, circular molecule comprising 16,569 base pairs. 
It codes for 22 transfer RNAs, 2 ribosomal RNAs, and 
13 polypeptides of the respiratory chain enzymes. The 
genetics of mitochondrial diseases differ from the genet-
ics of chromosomal disorders. The DNA of mitochon-
dria is directly inherited from the cytoplasm of the 
gametes, mainly from the oocyte. The sperm contributes 
very little of its mitochondria to the offspring at the time 
of fertilization. Thus, mitochondrial genes are derived 
almost exclusively from the mother, accounting for 
maternal inheritance of some mitochondrial disorders.
Patients with mitochondrial myopathies have clini-
cal manifestations that usually fall into three groups: 
chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), 
skeletal muscle–CNS syndromes, and pure myopathy 
simulating muscular dystrophy or metabolic myopathy.
PROGRESSIVE EXTERNAL 
OPHTHALMOPLEGIA SYNDROMES  
WITH RAGGED RED FIBERS
The single most common sign of a mitochondrial 
myopathy is CPEO, occurring in >50% of all mito-
chondrial myopathies. Varying degrees of ptosis and 
weakness of extraocular muscles are seen, usually in the 
absence of diplopia, a point of distinction from disorders 
with ﬂuctuating eye weakness (e.g., myasthenia gravis).
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
639
KEARNS-SAYRE SYNDROME (KSS)
KSS is a widespread multiorgan system disorder with a 
deﬁned triad of clinical ﬁndings: onset before age 20, 
CPEO, and pigmentary retinopathy, plus one or more 
of the following features: complete heart block, cere-
brospinal ﬂuid (CSF) protein >1 g/L (100 mg/dL), or 
cerebellar ataxia. Some patients with CPEO and ragged 
red ﬁbers may not fulﬁll all of the criteria for KSS. The 
cardiac disease includes syncopal attacks and cardiac 
arrest related to the abnormalities in the cardiac con-
duction system: prolonged intraventricular conduction 
time, bundle branch block, and complete atrioventric-
ular block. Death attributed to heart block occurs in 
∼20% of the patients. Varying degrees of progressive 
limb muscle weakness and easy fatigability affect activi-
ties of daily living. Endocrine abnormalities are com-
mon, including gonadal dysfunction in both sexes with 
delayed puberty, short stature, and infertility. Diabetes 
mellitus is a cardinal sign of mitochondrial disorders and 
is estimated to occur in 13% of KSS patients. Other less 
common endocrine disorders include thyroid disease, 
hyperaldosteronism, Addison’s disease, and hypopara-
thyroidism. Both mental retardation and dementia are 
common accompaniments to this disorder. Serum CK 
levels are normal or slightly elevated. Serum lactate and 
pyruvate levels may be elevated. EMG is myopathic. 
Nerve conduction studies may be abnormal related to 
an associated neuropathy. Muscle biopsies reveal ragged 
red ﬁbers, highlighted in oxidative enzyme stains, many 
showing defects in cytochrome oxidase. By electron 
microscopy there are increased numbers of mitochon-
dria that often appear enlarged and contain paracrystal-
line inclusions.
KSS is a sporadic disorder. The disease is caused by 
single mtDNA deletions presumed to arise spontane-
ously in the ovum or zygote. The most common dele-
tion, occurring in about one-third of patients, removes 
4,977 bp of contiguous mtDNA. Monitoring for 
cardiac conduction defects is critical. Prophylactic pace-
maker implantation is indicated when ECGs demon-
strate a bifascicular block. In KSS, no beneﬁt has been 
shown for supplementary therapies, including multivi-
tamins or coenzyme Q10. Of all the proposed options, 
exercise might be the most applicable but must be 
approached cautiously because of defects in the cardiac 
conduction system.
PROGRESSIVE EXTERNAL 
OPHTHALMOPLEGIA (PEO)
This condition is caused by nuclear DNA mutations 
affecting mtDNA copy number and integrity and is 
thus inherited in a Mendelian fashion. Onset is usually 
after puberty. Fatigue, exercise intolerance, and com-
plaints of muscle weakness are typical. Some patients 
notice swallowing problems. The neurologic exami-
nation conﬁrms the ptosis and ophthalmoplegia, usu-
ally asymmetric in distribution. A sensorineural hearing 
loss may be encountered. Mild facial, neck ﬂexor, and 
proximal weakness are typical. Rarely, respiratory mus-
cles may be progressively affected and may be the direct 
cause of death. Serum CK is normal or mildly elevated. 
The resting lactate level is normal or slightly elevated 
but may rise excessively after exercise. CSF protein is 
normal. The EMG is myopathic, and nerve conduction 
studies are usually normal. Ragged red ﬁbers are prom-
inently displayed in the muscle biopsy. Southern blots 
of muscle reveal a normal mtDNA band at 16.6 kb and 
several additional mtDNA deletion bands with genomes 
varying from 0.5 to 10 kb.
This autosomal dominant form of CPEO has been 
linked to loci on three chromosomes: 4q35, 10q24, 
and 15q22–26. In the chromosome 4q-related form of 
disease, mutations of the gene encoding the heart and 
skeletal muscle–speciﬁc isoform of the adenine nucleo-
tide translocator 1 (ANT1) gene are found. This highly 
abundant mitochondrial protein forms a homodi-
meric inner mitochondrial channel through which 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) enters and ATP leaves 
the mitochondrial matrix. In the chromosome 10q–
related disorder, mutations of the gene C10orf2 are 
found. Its gene product, twinkle, co-localizes with the 
mtDNA and is named for its punctate, starlike stain-
ing properties. The function of twinkle is presumed to 
be critical for lifetime maintenance of mitochondrial 
integrity. In the cases mapped to chromosome 15q, a 
mutation affects the gene encoding mtDNA polymerase 
(POLG), an enzyme important in mtDNA replication. 
Autosomal recessive PEO has also been described with 
mutations in the POLG gene. Point mutations have 
been identiﬁed within various mitochondrial tRNA 
(Leu, Ile, Asn, Trp) genes in families with maternal 
inheritance of PEO.
Exercise may improve function but will depend on 
the patient’s ability to participate.
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA SKELETAL 
MUSCLE–CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
SYNDROMES
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red ﬁbers 
(MERRF)
The onset of MERRF is variable, ranging from late 
childhood to middle adult life. Characteristic fea-
tures include myoclonic epilepsy, cerebellar ataxia, 
and progressive muscle weakness. The seizure disorder 
is an integral part of the disease and may be the initial 
symptom. Cerebellar ataxia precedes or accompanies 
epilepsy. It is slowly progressive and generalized. The 
third major feature of the disease is muscle weakness in 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
640
a limb-girdle distribution. Other more variable features 
include dementia, peripheral neuropathy, optic atrophy, 
hearing loss, and diabetes mellitus.
Serum CK levels are normal or slightly increased. The 
serum lactate may be elevated. EMG is myopathic, and in 
some patients nerve conduction studies show a neuropa - 
thy. The electroencephalogram is abnormal, corroborat-
ing clinical ﬁndings of epilepsy. Typical ragged red ﬁbers 
are seen on muscle biopsy. MERRF is caused by mater-
nally inherited point mutations of mitochondrial tRNA 
genes. The most common mutation found in 80% of 
MERRF patients is an A to G substitution at nucleotide 
8344 of tRNA lysine (A8344G tRNAlys). Other tRNAlys 
mutations include base-pair substitutions T8356C and 
G8363A. Only supportive treatment is possible, with spe-
cial attention to epilepsy.
Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, 
lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes 
(MELAS)
MELAS is the most common mitochondrial encephalo-
myopathy. The term strokelike is appropriate because the 
cerebral lesions do not conform to a strictly vascular dis-
tribution. The onset in the majority of patients is before 
age 20. Seizures, usually partial motor or generalized, 
are common and may represent the ﬁrst clearly recog-
nizable sign of disease. The cerebral insults that resem-
ble strokes cause hemiparesis, hemianopia, and cortical 
blindness. A presumptive stroke occurring before age 
40 should place this mitochondrial encephalomyopathy 
high in the differential diagnosis. Associated conditions 
include hearing loss, diabetes mellitus, hypothalamic 
pituitary dysfunction causing growth hormone deﬁ-
ciency, hypothyroidism, and absence of secondary sex-
ual characteristics. In its full expression, MELAS leads to 
dementia, a bedridden state, and a fatal outcome. Serum 
lactic acid is typically elevated. The CSF protein is also 
increased but is usually f1 g/L (100 mg/dL). Muscle 
biopsies show ragged red ﬁbers. Neuroimaging dem-
onstrates basal ganglia calciﬁcation in a high percentage 
of cases. Focal lesions that mimic infarction are present 
predominantly in the occipital and parietal lobes. Strict 
vascular territories are not respected, and cerebral angi-
ography fails to demonstrate lesions of the major cere-
bral blood vessels.
MELAS is caused by maternally inherited point 
mutations of mitochondrial tRNA genes. Most of the 
tRNA mutations are lethal, accounting for the paucity 
of multigeneration families with this syndrome. The 
A3243G point mutation in tRNALeu(UUR) is the most 
common, occurring in ∼80% of MELAS cases. About 
10% of MELAS patients have other mutations of the 
tRNALeu(UUR) gene, including 3252G, 3256T, 3271C, 
and 3291C. Other tRNA gene mutations have also 
been reported in MELAS, including G583A tRNAPhe, 
G1642A tRNAVal, G4332A tRNAGlu, and T8316C 
tRNALys. Mutations have also been reported in mtDNA 
polypeptide-coding genes. Two mutations were found in 
the ND5 subunit of complex I of the respiratory chain. A 
missense mutation has been reported at mtDNA position 
9957 in the gene for subunit III of cytochrome C oxi-
dase. No speciﬁc treatment is available. Supportive treat-
ment is essential for the strokelike episodes, seizures, and 
endocrinopathies.
PURE MYOPATHY SYNDROMES
Muscle weakness and fatigue can be the predominant 
manifestations of mtDNA mutations. When the con-
dition affects exclusively muscle (pure myopathy), the 
disorder becomes difﬁcult to recognize. Occasionally, 
mitochondrial myopathies can present with recurrent 
myoglobinuria without ﬁxed weakness and thus resem-
ble a glycogen storage disorder or CPT deﬁciency.
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (MDS) is a het-
erogeneous group of disorders that are inherited in an 
autosomal recessive fashion and can present in infancy or 
adults. MDS can be caused by mutations in genes (TK2, 
DGUOK, RRM2B, TYMP, SUCLA1, and SUCLA2) 
that lead to depletion of pools of mitochondrial deoxyri-
bonucleotide (dNTP) pools necessary for mtDNA replica-
tion The other major cause of MDS is a set of mutations in 
genes essential for mtDNA replication (e.g., POLG1 and 
C10orf2). The clinical phenotypes associated with MDS 
vary. Patients may develop a severe encephalopathy (e.g., 
Leigh’s syndrome), PEO, an isolated myopathy, myo-
neuro-gastrointestinal-encephalopathy (MNGIE), and a 
sensory neuropathy with ataxia.
DISORDERS OF MUSCLE MEMBRANE 
EXCITABILITY
Muscle membrane excitability is affected in a group of 
disorders referred to as channelopathies. The heart may 
also be involved, resulting in life-threatening complica-
tions (Table 48-10).
CALCIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS OF 
MUSCLE
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoKPP)
Onset occurs at adolescence. Men are more often 
affected because of decreased penetrance in women. Epi-
sodic weakness with onset after age 25 is almost never 
due to periodic paralyses, with the exception of thyro-
toxic periodic paralysis (discussed later). Attacks are often 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
641
provoked by meals high in carbohydrates or sodium 
and may accompany rest following prolonged exercise. 
Weakness usually affects proximal limb muscles more 
than distal. Ocular and bulbar muscles are less likely to be 
affected. Respiratory muscles are usually spared but when 
they are involved, the condition may prove fatal. Weak-
ness may take as long as 24 h to resolve. Life-threatening 
cardiac arrhythmias related to hypokalemia may occur 
during attacks. As a late complication, patients com-
monly develop severe, disabling proximal lower extrem-
ity weakness.
Attacks of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis resemble 
those of primary HypoKPP. Despite a higher incidence 
of thyrotoxicosis in women, men, particularly those of 
Asian descent, are more likely to manifest this compli-
cation. Attacks abate with treatment of the underlying 
thyroid condition.
A low serum potassium level during an attack, 
excluding secondary causes, establishes the diagnosis. 
Interattack muscle biopsies show the presence of single 
or multiple centrally placed vacuoles or tubular aggre-
gates. Provocative tests with glucose and insulin to 
establish a diagnosis are usually not necessary and are 
potentially hazardous.
In the midst of an attack of weakness, motor conduc-
tion studies may demonstrate reduced amplitudes, whereas 
EMG may show electrical silence in severely weak mus-
cles. In between attacks, the EMG and nerve conduction 
studies are normal, with the exception that myopathic 
MUAPs may be seen in patients with ﬁxed weakness.
HypoKPP is caused by mutations in either of two 
genes. HypoKPP type 1, the most common form, 
is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder with 
incomplete penetrance. These patients have mutations 
in the voltage-sensitive, skeletal muscle calcium chan-
nel gene, CALCL1A3 (Fig. 48-8). Approximately 10% 
of cases are HypoKPP type 2, arising from mutations in 
the voltage-sensitive sodium channel gene (SCN4A). 
In either instance, the mutations lead to an abnormal 
gating pore current that predisposes the muscle cell to 
depolarize when potassium levels are low. It is also now 
recognized that some cases of thyrotoxic HypoKPP are 
caused by genetic variants in a potassium channel (Kir 
2.6), whose expression is regulated by thyroid hormone.
The chloride channel is envisioned to have 10 
membrane-spanning domains. The positions of muta-
tions causing dominantly and recessively inherited myo-
tonia congenita are indicated, along with mutations that 
cause this disease in mice and goats.
TREATMENT 
Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis
The acute paralysis improves after the administration of 
potassium. Muscle strength and ECG should be moni-
tored. Oral KCl (0.2–0.4 mmol/kg) should be given every 
TABLE 48-10 
CLINICAL FEATURES OF PERIODIC PARALYSIS AND NONDYSTROPHIC MYOTONIAS
CALCIUM CHANNEL
SODIUM CHANNEL
POTASSIUM CHANNEL
FEATURE
HYPOKALEMIC PP
HYPERKALEMIC PP PARAMYOTONIA CONGENITA
ANDERSEN-TAWIL SYNDROMEa
Mode of inheritance
AD
AD
AD
AD
Age of onset
Adolescence
Early childhood
Early childhood
Early childhood
Myotoniab
No
Yes
Yes
No
Episodic weakness
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Frequency of attacks 
of weakness
Daily to yearly
May be 2–3/d
With cold, usually rare
Daily to yearly
Duration of attacks of 
weakness
2–12 h
From 1–2 h to >1 d
2–24 h
2–24 h
Serum K+ level during 
attacks of weakness
Decreased
Increased or 
normal
Usually normal
Variable
Effect of K+ loading
No change
Increased 
myotonia, then 
weakness
Increased myotonia
No change
Effect of muscle 
cooling
No change
Increased myo-
tonia
Increased myotonia, then 
weakness
No change
Fixed weakness
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
aDysmorphic features and cardiac arrhythmias are distinguishing features (see text).
bMay be paradoxical in paramyotonia congenita.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; PP, periodic paralysis.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
642
30 min. Only rarely is IV therapy necessary (e.g., when 
swallowing problems or vomiting is present). Admin-
istration of potassium in a glucose solution should be 
avoided because it may further reduce serum potas-
sium levels. Mannitol is the preferred vehicle for admin-
istration of IV potassium. The long-term goal of therapy 
is to avoid attacks. This may reduce late-onset, fixed 
weakness. Patients should be made aware of the impor-
tance of a low-carbohydrate, low-sodium diet and con-
sequences of intense exercise. Prophylactic administra-
tion of acetazolamide (125–1000 mg/d in divided doses) 
reduces or may abolish attacks in HypoKPP type 1. Para-
doxically the potassium is lowered, but this is offset by 
the beneficial effect of metabolic acidosis. If attacks per-
sist on acetazolamide, oral KCl should be added. Some 
Sodium channel α subunit
Calcium channel α subunit
Chloride channel
I
II
III
PC
PAM
HyperKPP
IV
I
H
II
III
IV
Outside
Inside
COO2
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
COO2
COO2
1
NH3
1
NH3
1
NH3
Myotonia Congenita
  Dominant
H
G
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1112
Myotonia Congenita
  Recessive
ADR (murine)
  insertion
adrmto (murine)
  stop
Myotonic goat
  Ala     Pro
Δ
Δ
Δ
10
13
2
1 2 3 4 5 6
R
R
FIGURE 48-8
The sodium and calcium channels are depicted here 
as containing four homologous domains, each with six 
membrane-spanning segments. The fourth segment of each 
domain bears positive charges and acts as the “voltage sen-
sor” for the channel. The association of the four domains 
is thought to form a pore through which ions pass. Sodium 
channel mutations are shown along with the phenotype that 
they confer. HyperKPP, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis; PC, 
paramyotonia congenita; PAM, potassium-aggravated myo-
tonia. See text for details.
patients require treatment with triamterine (25–100 
mg/d) or spironolactone (25–100 mg/d). However, in 
patients with HypoKPP type 2, attacks of weakness can 
be exacerbated with acetazolamide.
SODIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS OF 
MUSCLE
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HyperKPP)
The term hyperkalemic is misleading since patients are 
often normokalemic during attacks. The fact that attacks 
are precipitated by potassium administration best deﬁnes 
the disease. The onset is in the ﬁrst decade; males and 
females are affected equally. Attacks are brief and mild, 
usually lasting 30 min to 4 h. Weakness affects proximal 
muscles, sparing bulbar muscles. Attacks are precipitated 
by rest following exercise and fasting. In a variant of this 
disorder, the predominant symptom is myotonia with-
out weakness (potassium-aggravated myotonia). The symp-
toms are aggravated by cold, and myotonia makes the 
muscles stiff and painful. This disorder can be confused 
with paramyotonia congenita, myotonia congenita, and 
proximal myotonic myopathy (DM2).
Potassium may be slightly elevated but may also be 
normal during an attack. As in HypoKPP, nerve con-
duction studies in HyperKPP muscle may demonstrate 
reduced motor amplitudes and the EMG may be silent 
in very weak muscles. In between attacks of weakness, 
the conduction studies are normal. The EMG will often 
demonstrate myotonic discharges during and between 
attacks.
The muscle biopsy shows vacuoles that are smaller, 
less numerous, and more peripheral compared to the 
hypokalemic form or tubular aggregates. Provocative 
tests by administration of potassium can induce weak-
ness but are usually not necessary to establish the diag-
nosis. HyperKPP and potassium-aggravated myotonia 
are inherited as autosomal dominant disorders. Muta-
tions of the voltage-gated sodium channel SCN4A 
gene (Fig. 48-8) cause these conditions. For patients 
with frequent attacks, acetazolamide (125–1000 mg/d) 
is helpful. We have found mexiletine to be helpful in 
patients with signiﬁcant myotonia.
Paramyotonia congenita
In paramyotonia congenita (PC), the attacks of weak-
ness are cold-induced or occur spontaneously and are 
mild. Myotonia is a prominent feature but worsens 
with muscle activity (paradoxical myotonia). This is in 
contrast to classic myotonia in which exercise alleviates 
the condition. Attacks of weakness are seldom severe 
enough to require emergency room treatment. Over 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
643
time patients develop interattack weakness as they do in 
other forms of periodic paralysis. PC is usually associ-
ated with normokalemia or hyperkalemia.
Serum CK is usually mildly elevated. Routine sen-
sory and motor nerve conduction studies are normal. 
Cooling of the muscle often dramatically reduces the 
amplitude of the compound muscle action potentials. 
EMG reveals diffuse myotonic potentials in PC. Upon 
local cooling of the muscle, the myotonic discharges 
disappear as the patient becomes unable to activate 
MUAPs.
PC is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition; 
voltage-gated sodium channel mutations (Fig. 48-8) are 
responsible and thus this disorder is allelic with Hyper-
KPP and potassium-aggravated myotonia. Patients with 
PC seldom seek treatment during attacks. Oral adminis-
tration of glucose or other carbohydrates hastens recovery. 
Since interattack weakness may develop after repeated epi-
sodes, prophylactic treatment is usually indicated. Thiazide 
diuretics (e.g., chlorothiazide, 250–1000 mg/d) and mexi-
letine (slowly increase dose from 450 mg/d) are reported 
to be helpful. Patients should be advised to increase carbo-
hydrates in their diet.
POTASSIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS
Andersen-Tawil syndrome
This rare disease is characterized by episodic weakness, 
cardiac arrhythmias, and dysmorphic features (short 
stature, scoliosis, clinodactyly, hypertelorism, small or 
prominent low-set ears, micrognathia, and broad fore-
head). The cardiac arrhythmias are potentially seri-
ous and life threatening. They include long QT, ven-
tricular ectopy, bidirectional ventricular arrhythmias, 
and tachycardia. For many years the classiﬁcation of 
this disorder was uncertain because episodes of weak-
ness are associated with elevated, normal, or reduced 
levels of potassium during an attack. In addition, the 
potassium levels differ among kindreds but are consis-
tent within a family. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, 
with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. 
The disease is caused by mutations of the inwardly rec-
tifying potassium channel (Kir 2.1) gene that heighten 
muscle cell excitability. The treatment is similar to that 
for other forms of periodic paralysis and must include 
cardiac monitoring. The episodes of weakness may dif-
fer between patients because of potassium variability. 
Acetazolamide may decrease the attack frequency and 
severity.
CHLORIDE CHANNEL DISORDERS
Two forms of this disorder, autosomal dominant (Thom-
sen’s disease) and autosomal recessive (Becker’s disease), 
are related to the same gene abnormality. Symptoms are 
noted in infancy and early childhood. The severity less-
ens in the third to fourth decade. Myotonia is worsened 
by cold and improved by activity. The gait may appear 
slow and labored at ﬁrst but improves with walking. 
In Thomsen’s disease muscle strength is normal, but in 
Becker’s disease, which is usually more severe, there 
may be muscle weakness. Muscle hypertrophy is usually 
present. Myotonic discharges are prominently displayed 
by EMG recordings.
Serum CK is normal or mildly elevated. The muscle 
biopsy shows hypertrophied ﬁbers. The disease is inher-
ited as dominant or recessive and is caused by mutations 
of the chloride channel gene (Fig. 48-8) that increase 
muscle cell excitability. Many patients will not require 
treatment and learn that the symptoms improve with 
activity. Medications that can be used to decrease myo-
tonia include quinine, phenytoin, and mexiletine.
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC 
MYOPATHIES
Many endocrine disorders cause weakness. Muscle 
fatigue is more common than true weakness. The cause 
of weakness in these disorders is not well deﬁned. It 
is not even clear that weakness results from disease of 
muscle as opposed to another part of the motor unit, 
since the serum CK level is often normal (except in 
hypothyroidism) and the muscle histology is character-
ized by atrophy rather than destruction of muscle ﬁbers. 
Nearly all endocrine myopathies respond to treatment.
THYROID DISORDERS
Abnormalities of thyroid function can cause a wide 
array of muscle disorders. These conditions relate to the 
important role of thyroid hormones in regulating the 
metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids as well as the 
rate of protein synthesis and enzyme production. Thy-
roid hormones also stimulate calorigenesis in muscle, 
increase muscle demand for vitamins, and enhance mus-
cle sensitivity to circulating catecholamines.
Hypothyroidism
Patients with hypothyroidism have frequent muscle 
complaints, and proximal muscle weakness occurs in 
about one-third of them. Muscle cramps, pain, and 
stiffness are common. Some patients have enlarged 
muscles. Features of slow muscle contraction and relax-
ation occur in 25% of patients; the relaxation phase of 
muscle stretch reﬂexes is characteristically prolonged 
and best observed at the ankle or biceps brachii reﬂexes. 
The serum CK level is often elevated (up to 10 times 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
644
normal), even when there is minimal clinical evi-
dence of muscle disease. EMG is typically normal. The 
cause of muscle enlargement has not been determined, 
and muscle biopsy shows no distinctive morphologic 
abnormalities.
Hyperthyroidism
Patients who are thyrotoxic commonly have proxi-
mal muscle weakness and atrophy on examination, but 
they rarely complain of myopathic symptoms. Activ-
ity of deep tendon reﬂexes may be enhanced. Bulbar, 
respiratory, and even esophageal muscles may occa-
sionally be affected, causing dysphagia, dysphonia, 
and aspiration. When bulbar involvement occurs, it is 
usually accompanied by chronic proximal limb weak-
ness, but occasionally it presents in the absence of gen-
eralized thyrotoxic myopathy. Fasciculations may be 
apparent and, when coupled with increased muscle 
stretch reﬂexes, may lead to an erroneous diagnosis of 
ALS. Other neuromuscular disorders occur in associa-
tion with hyperthyroidism, including acquired hypo-
kalemic periodic paralysis, myasthenia gravis, and a 
progressive ocular myopathy associated with propto-
sis (Graves’ ophthalmopathy). Serum CK levels are not 
elevated in thyrotoxic myopathy, the EMG is normal, 
and muscle histology usually shows only atrophy of 
muscle ﬁbers.
PARATHYROID DISORDERS
Hyperparathyroidism
Muscle weakness is an integral part of primary and sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism. Proximal muscle weak-
ness, muscle wasting, and brisk muscle stretch reﬂexes 
are the main features of this endocrinopathy. Some 
patients develop neck extensor weakness (part of the 
dropped head syndrome). Serum CK levels are usually 
normal or slightly elevated. Serum parathyroid hor-
mone levels are elevated. Serum calcium and phos-
phorus levels show no correlation with the clinical 
neuromuscular manifestations. Muscle biopsies show 
only varying degrees of atrophy without muscle ﬁber 
degeneration.
Hypoparathyroidism
An overt myopathy due to hypocalcemia rarely occurs. 
Neuromuscular symptoms are usually related to local-
ized or generalized tetany. Serum CK levels may be 
increased secondary to muscle damage from sustained 
tetany. Hyporeﬂexia or areﬂexia is usually present and 
contrasts with the hyperreﬂexia in hyperparathyroidism.
ADRENAL DISORDERS
Conditions associated with glucocorticoid excess cause 
a myopathy; in fact, steroid myopathy is the most com-
monly diagnosed endocrine muscle disease. Gluco-
corticoid excess, either endogenous or exogenous (see 
“Drug-Induced Myopathies”), produces various degrees 
of proximal limb weakness. Muscle wasting may be 
striking. A cushingoid appearance usually accompanies 
clinical signs of myopathy. Histologic sections demon-
strate muscle ﬁber atrophy, preferentially affecting type 
2b ﬁbers, rather than degeneration or necrosis of muscle 
ﬁbers. Adrenal insufﬁciency commonly causes muscle 
fatigue. The degree of weakness may be difﬁcult to 
assess but is typically mild. In primary hyperaldosteron-
ism (Conn’s syndrome), neuromuscular complications are 
due to potassium depletion. The clinical picture is one 
of persistent muscle weakness. Long-standing hyperal-
dosteronism may lead to proximal limb weakness and 
wasting. Serum CK levels may be elevated, and a mus-
cle biopsy may demonstrate degenerating ﬁbers, some 
with vacuoles. These changes relate to hypokalemia and 
are not a direct effect of aldosterone on skeletal muscle.
PITUITARY DISORDERS
Patients with acromegaly usually have mild proxi-
mal weakness without muscle atrophy. Muscles often 
appear enlarged but exhibit decreased force gen-
eration. The duration of acromegaly, rather than the 
serum growth hormone levels, correlates with the 
degree of myopathy.
DIABETES MELLITUS
Neuromuscular complications of diabetes mellitus are 
most often related to neuropathy, with cranial and 
peripheral nerve palsies or distal sensorimotor polyneu-
ropathy. Diabetic amyotrophy is a clumsy term since the 
condition represents a neuropathy affecting the proxi-
mal major nerve trunks and lumbosacral plexus. More 
appropriate terms for this disorder include diabetic proxi-
mal neuropathy and lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy.
The only notable myopathy of diabetes mellitus is 
ischemic infarction of leg muscles, usually involv-
ing one of the thigh muscles but on occasion affecting 
the distal leg. This condition occurs in patients with 
poorly controlled diabetes and presents with abrupt 
onset of pain, tenderness, and edema of one thigh. 
The area of muscle infarction is hard and indurated. 
The muscles most often affected include the vas-
tus lateralis, thigh adductors, and biceps femoris. CT 
or MRI can demonstrate focal abnormalities in the 
affected muscle. Diagnosis by imaging is preferable 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
645
to muscle biopsy, if possible, as hemorrhage into the 
biopsy site can occur.
VITAMIN DEFICIENCY
Vitamin D deﬁciency due to either decreased intake, 
decreased absorption, or impaired vitamin D metabo-
lism (as occurs in renal disease) may lead to chronic 
muscle weakness. Pain reﬂects the underlying bone dis-
ease (osteomalacia). Vitamin E deﬁciency may result from 
malabsorption. Clinical manifestations include ataxic 
neuropathy due to loss of proprioception and myopa-
thy with proximal weakness. Progressive external oph-
thalmoplegia is a distinctive ﬁnding. It has not been 
established that deﬁciency of other vitamins causes a 
myopathy.
MYOPATHIES OF SYSTEMIC ILLNESS
Systemic illnesses such as chronic respiratory, cardiac, 
or hepatic failure are frequently associated with severe 
muscle wasting and complaints of weakness. Fatigue 
is usually a more signiﬁcant problem than weakness, 
which is typically mild.
Myopathy may be a manifestation of chronic renal 
failure (CRF), independent of the better known uremic 
polyneuropathy. Abnormalities of calcium and phospho-
rus homeostasis and bone metabolism in chronic renal 
failure result from a reduction in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D, leading to decreased intestinal absorption of calcium. 
Hypocalcemia, further accentuated by hyperphosphatemia 
due to decreased renal phosphate clearance, leads to sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism. Renal osteodystrophy results 
from the compensatory hyperparathyroidism, which leads 
to osteomalacia from reduced calcium availability and to 
osteitis ﬁbrosa from the parathyroid hormone excess. The 
clinical picture of the myopathy of CRF is identical to that 
of primary hyperparathyroidism and osteomalacia. There is 
proximal limb weakness with bone pain.
Gangrenous calciﬁcation represents a separate, rare, 
and sometimes fatal complication of CRF. In this con-
dition, widespread arterial calciﬁcation occurs and 
results in ischemia. Extensive skin necrosis may occur, 
along with painful myopathy and even myoglobinuria.
DRUG-INDUCED MYOPATHIES
Drug-induced myopathies are relatively uncommon in 
clinical practice with the exception of those caused by 
the cholesterol-lowering agents and glucocorticoids. 
Others impact practice to a lesser degree but are impor-
tant to consider in speciﬁc situations. Table 48-11 
provides a comprehensive list of drug-induced myopa-
thies with their distinguishing features.
MYOPATHY FROM LIPID-LOWERING 
AGENTS
All classes of lipid-lowering agents have been implicated 
in muscle toxicity, including ﬁbrates (cloﬁbrate, gemﬁ-
brozil), HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (referred to as 
TABLE 48-11 
DRUG-INDUCED MYOPATHIES
DRUGS
MAJOR TOXIC REACTION
Lipid-lowering agents
 Fibric acid derivatives
 HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitors
 Niacin (nicotinic acid)
Drugs belonging to all three of the 
major classes of lipid-lowering 
agents can produce a spectrum 
of toxicity: asymptomatic serum 
creatine kinase elevation, myal-
gias, exercise-induced pain, 
rhabdomyolysis, and myoglo-
binuria.
Glucocorticoids
Acute, high-dose glucocorticoid 
treatment can cause acute 
quadriplegic myopathy. These 
high doses of steroids are often 
combined with nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking agents, 
but the weakness can occur 
without their use. Chronic steroid 
administration produces pre-
dominantly proximal weakness.
Nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular 
blocking agents
Acute quadriplegic myopathy can 
occur with or without concomi-
tant glucocorticoids.
Zidovudine
Mitochondrial myopathy with 
ragged red ﬁbers.
Drugs of abuse
 Alcohol
 Amphetamines
 Cocaine
 Heroin
 Phencyclidine
 Meperidine
All drugs in this group can lead 
to widespread muscle break-
down, rhabdomyolysis, and 
myoglobinuria.
Local injections cause muscle 
necrosis, skin induration, and 
limb contractures.
Autoimmune toxic 
myopathy 
 
D-Penicillamine
Use of this drug may cause poly-
myositis and myasthenia gravis.
Amphophilic cationic 
drugs
 Amiodarone
 Chloroquine
 Hydroxychloroquine
All amphophilic drugs have the 
potential to produce painless, 
proximal weakness associated 
with autophagic vacuoles in the 
muscle biopsy.
Antimicrotubular 
drugs
 Colchicine
This drug produces painless, 
proximal weakness especially 
in the setting of renal failure. 
Muscle biopsy shows 
autophagic vacuoles.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
646
statins), niacin (nicotinic acid), and ezetimibe. Myalgia, 
malaise, and muscle tenderness are the most common 
manifestations. Muscle pain may be related to exer-
cise. Patients may exhibit proximal weakness. Varying 
degrees of muscle necrosis are seen, and in severe reac-
tions rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria occur. Con-
comitant use of statins with ﬁbrates and cyclosporine is 
more likely to cause adverse reactions than use of one 
agent alone. Elevated serum CK is an important indi-
cation of toxicity. Muscle weakness is accompanied by 
a myopathic EMG, and muscle necrosis is observed by 
muscle biopsy. Severe myalgias, muscle weakness, sig-
niﬁcant elevations in serum CK (>three times base-
line), and myoglobinuria are indications for stopping 
the drug. Patients usually improve with drug cessation, 
although this may take several weeks. Rare cases con-
tinue to progress after the offending agent is discontin-
ued. It is possible that in such cases the statin may have 
triggered an immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy, 
as these individuals require immunotherapy (e.g., pred-
nisone and sometimes other agents) to improve and 
often relapse when these therapies are discontinued. 
Interestingly, antibodies directed against the 100-kD 
HMG-CoA reductase receptor on muscle ﬁbers has 
been identiﬁed in many of these cases.
GLUCOCORTICOID-RELATED MYOPATHIES
Glucocorticoid myopathy occurs with chronic treat-
ment or as “acute quadriplegic” myopathy secondary 
to high-dose IV glucocorticoid use. Chronic adminis-
tration produces proximal weakness accompanied by 
cushingoid manifestations, which can be quite debilitat-
ing; the chronic use of prednisone at a daily dose of v30 
mg/d is most often associated with toxicity. Patients 
taking ﬂuorinated glucocorticoids (triamcinolone, beta-
methasone, dexamethasone) appear to be at especially 
high risk for myopathy. In chronic steroid myopathy, 
the serum CK is usually normal. Serum potassium may 
be low. The muscle biopsy in chronic cases shows pref-
erential type 2 muscle ﬁber atrophy; this is not reﬂected 
in the EMG, which is usually normal.
Patients receiving high-dose IV glucocorticoids for 
status asthmaticus, chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease, organ transplantation, or other indications may 
develop severe generalized weakness (critical illness 
myopathy). This myopathy, also known as acute quad-
riplegic myopathy, can also occur in the setting of sep-
sis. Involvement of the diaphragm and intercostal mus-
cles causes respiratory failure and requires ventilatory 
support. In these settings, the use of glucocorticoids 
in combination with nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking agents potentiate this complication. In criti-
cal illness myopathy, the muscle biopsy is abnormal, 
showing a distinctive loss of thick ﬁlaments (myosin) by 
electron microscopy. By light microscopy, there is focal 
loss of ATPase staining in central or paracentral areas 
of the muscle ﬁber. Calpain stains show diffusely reac-
tive atrophic ﬁbers. Withdrawal of glucocorticoids will 
improve the chronic myopathy. In acute quadriplegic 
myopathy, recovery is slow. Patients require supportive 
care and rehabilitation.
DRUG-INDUCED MITOCHONDRIAL 
MYOPATHY
Zidovudine, used in the treatment of HIV infection, is 
a thymidine analogue that inhibits viral replication by 
interrupting reverse transcriptase. Myopathy is a well-
established complication of this agent. Patients present 
with myalgias, muscle weakness, and atrophy affecting 
the thigh and calf muscles. The complication occurs in 
about 17% of patients treated with doses of 1200 mg/d 
for 6 months. The introduction of protease inhibitors 
for treatment of HIV infection has led to lower doses of 
zidovudine therapy and a decreased incidence of myop-
athy. Serum CK is elevated and EMG is myopathic. 
Muscle biopsy shows ragged red ﬁbers with minimal 
inﬂammation; the lack of inﬂammation serves to distin-
guish zidovudine toxicity from HIV-related myopathy. 
If the myopathy is thought to be drug related, the med-
ication should be stopped or the dosage reduced.
DRUGS OF ABUSE AND RELATED 
MYOPATHIES
Myotoxicity is a potential consequence of addiction 
to alcohol and illicit drugs. Ethanol is one of the most 
commonly abused substances with potential to dam-
age muscle. Other potential toxins include cocaine, 
heroin, and amphetamines. The most deleterious reac-
tions occur from overdosing leading to coma and sei-
zures, causing rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, and renal 
failure. Direct toxicity can occur from cocaine, heroin, 
and amphetamines causing muscle breakdown and vary-
ing degrees of weakness. The effects of alcohol are more 
controversial. Direct muscle damage is less certain, since 
toxicity usually occurs in the setting of poor nutrition 
and possible contributing factors such as hypokalemia 
and hypophosphatemia. Alcoholics are also prone to 
neuropathy (Chap. 56).
Focal myopathies from self-administration of meperi-
dine, heroin, and pentazocine can cause pain, swelling, 
muscle necrosis, and hemorrhage. The cause is multifac-
torial; needle trauma, direct toxicity of the drug or vehi-
cle, and infection may all play a role. When severe, there 
may be overlying skin induration and contractures with 
replacement of muscle by connective tissue. Elevated 
serum CK and myopathic EMG are characteristic of these 
reactions. The muscle biopsy shows widespread or focal 
 
CHAPTER 48
Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases
647
areas of necrosis. In conditions leading to rhabdomyolysis, 
patients need adequate hydration to reduce serum myo-
globin and protect renal function. In all of these condi-
tions, counseling is essential to limit drug abuse.
DRUG-INDUCED AUTOIMMUNE 
MYOPATHIES
The most consistent drug-related inﬂammatory or anti-
body-mediated myopathy is caused by D-penicillamine. 
This drug chelates copper and is used in the treatment 
of Wilson’s disease. It is also used to treat other disor-
ders including scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
primary biliary cirrhosis. Adverse events include drug-
induced polymyositis, indistinguishable from the spon-
taneous disease. The incidence of this inﬂammatory 
muscle disease is about 1%. Myasthenia gravis is also 
induced by D-penicillamine, with a higher incidence 
estimated at 7%. These disorders resolve with drug 
withdrawal, although immunosuppressive therapy may 
be warranted in severe cases.
Scattered reports of other drugs causing an inﬂam-
matory myopathy are rare and include a heterogeneous 
group of agents: cimetidine, phenytoin, procainamide, 
and propylthiouracil. In most cases, a cause-and-effect 
relationship is uncertain. A complication of interest 
was related to L-tryptophan. In 1989 an epidemic of 
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (EMS) in the United 
States was caused by a contaminant in the product from 
one manufacturer. The product was withdrawn, and 
incidence of EMS diminished abruptly following this 
action.
OTHER DRUG-INDUCED MYOPATHIES
Certain drugs produce painless, largely proximal, muscle 
weakness. These drugs include the amphophilic cationic 
drugs (amiodarone, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine) 
and antimicrotubular drugs (colchicine) (Table 48-11). 
Muscle biopsy can be useful in the identiﬁcation of tox-
icity since autophagic vacuoles are prominent patho-
logic features of these toxins.
 Marinos C. Dalakas 
648
 The inﬂ ammatory myopathies represent the largest group 
of acquired and potentially treatable causes of skeletal 
muscle weakness. They are classiﬁ ed into three major 
groups: polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and 
inclusion body myositis (IBM). 
 CLINICAL FEATURES 
 The prevalence of the inﬂ ammatory myopathies is esti-
mated at 1 in 100,000. PM as a stand-alone entity is a 
rare disease. DM affects both children and adults and 
women more often than men. IBM is three times more 
frequent in men than in women, more common in 
whites than blacks, and is most likely to affect persons 
aged >50 years. 
 These disorders present as progressive and symmet-
ric muscle weakness except for IBM, which can have 
an asymmetric pattern. Patients usually report increas-
ing difﬁ culty with everyday tasks requiring the use of 
proximal muscles, such as getting up from a chair, 
climbing steps, stepping onto a curb, lifting objects, or 
combing hair. Fine-motor movements that depend on 
the strength of distal muscles, such as buttoning a shirt, 
sewing, knitting, or writing, are affected only late in the 
course of PM and DM, but fairly early in IBM. Falling 
is common in IBM because of early involvement of the 
quadriceps muscle, with buckling of the knees. Ocular 
muscles are spared, even in advanced, untreated cases; 
if these muscles are affected, the diagnosis of inﬂ am-
matory myopathy should be questioned. Facial muscles 
are unaffected in PM and DM, but mild facial muscle 
weakness is common in patientswith IBM. In all forms 
of inﬂ ammatory myopathy, pharyngeal and neck-ﬂ exor 
muscles are often involved, causing dysphagia or difﬁ -
culty in holding up the head ( head drop ). In advanced 
and rarely in acute cases, respiratory muscles may also be 
affected. Severe weakness, if untreated, is almost always 
associated with muscle wasting. Sensation remains 
normal. The tendon reﬂ exes are preserved but may be 
absent in severely weakened or atrophied muscles, espe-
cially in IBM, where atrophy of the quadriceps and the 
distal muscles is common. Myalgia and muscle tender-
ness may occur in a small number of patients, usually 
early in the disease, and particularly in DM associated 
with connective tissue disorders. Weakness in PM and 
DM progresses subacutely over a period of weeks or 
months and rarely acutely; by contrast, IBM progresses 
very slowly, over years, simulating a late-life muscular 
dystrophy ( Chap. 48 ) or slowly progressive motor neu-
ron disorder ( Chap. 32 ). 
 SPECIFIC FEATURES 
( Table 49-1 ) 
 Polymyositis 
 The actual onset of PM is often not easily determined, 
and patients typically delay seeking medical advice for 
several weeks or even months. This is in contrast to 
DM, in which the rash facilitates early recognition (dis-
cussed later). PM mimics many other myopathies and is 
a diagnosis of exclusion. It is a subacute inﬂ ammatory 
myopathy affecting adults, and rarely children, who  do 
not have any of the following: rash, involvement of the 
extraocular and facial muscles, family history of a neuro-
muscular disease, history of exposure to myotoxic drugs 
or toxins, endocrinopathy, neurogenic disease, muscular 
dystrophy, biochemical muscle disorder (deﬁ ciency of a 
muscle enzyme), or IBM as excluded by muscle biopsy 
analysis (discussed later). As an isolated entity, PM is a 
rare (and overdiagnosed) disorder; more commonly, 
PM occurs in association with a systemic autoimmune 
or connective tissue disease, or with a known viral or 
 POLYMYOSITIS, DERMATOMYOSITIS, AND 
INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS 
 CHAPTER 49 
 
CHAPTER 49
Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion Body Myositis
649
bacterial infection. Drugs, especially D-penicillamine, 
statins, or zidovudine (AZT), may also trigger an 
inﬂammatory myopathy similar to PM.
Dermatomyositis
DM is a distinctive entity identiﬁed by a characteristic 
rash accompanying, or more often preceding, muscle 
weakness. The rash may consist of a blue-purple dis-
coloration on the upper eyelids with edema (helio-
trope rash), a ﬂat red rash on the face and upper trunk, 
and erythema of the knuckles with a raised violaceous 
scaly eruption (Gottron’s sign). The erythematous rash 
can also occur on other body surfaces, including the 
knees, elbows, malleoli, neck and anterior chest (often 
in a V sign), or back and shoulders (shawl sign), and may 
worsen after sun exposure. In some patients, the rash is 
pruritic, especially on the scalp, chest, and back. Dilated 
capillary loops at the base of the ﬁngernails are also 
characteristic. The cuticles may be irregular, thickened, 
and distorted, and the lateral and palmar areas of the 
ﬁngers may become rough and cracked, with irregu-
lar, “dirty” horizontal lines, resembling mechanic’s hands. 
The weakness can be mild, moderate, or severe enough 
to lead to quadriparesis. At times, the muscle strength 
appears normal, hence the term dermatomyositis sine myo-
sitis. When muscle biopsy is performed in such cases, 
however, signiﬁcant perivascular and perimysial inﬂam-
mation is often seen.
DM usually occurs alone but may overlap with 
scleroderma and mixed connective tissue disease. Fasci-
itis and thickening of the skin, similar to that seen in 
chronic cases of DM, have occurred in patients with the 
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome associated with the inges-
tion of contaminated L-tryptophan.
Inclusion body myositis
In patients ≥50 years of age, IBM is the most com-
mon of the inﬂammatory myopathies. It is often mis-
diagnosed as PM and is suspected only later when a 
patient with presumed PM does not respond to therapy. 
Weakness and atrophy of the distal muscles, especially 
foot extensors and deep ﬁnger ﬂexors, occur in almost 
all cases of IBM and may be a clue to early diagnosis. 
Some patients present with falls because their knees col-
lapse due to early quadriceps weakness. Others present 
with weakness in the small muscles of the hands, espe-
cially ﬁnger ﬂexors, and complain of inability to hold 
objects such as golf clubs or perform tasks such as turn-
ing keys or tying knots. On occasion, the weakness and 
accompanying atrophy can be asymmetric and selec-
tively involve the quadriceps, iliopsoas, triceps, biceps, 
and ﬁnger ﬂexors, resembling a lower motor neuron 
disease. Dysphagia is common, occurring in up to 60% 
of IBM patients, and may lead to episodes of choking. 
Sensory examination is generally normal; some patients 
have mildly diminished vibratory sensation at the ankles 
TABLE 49-1 
FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES
CHARACTERISTIC
POLYMYOSITIS
DERMATOMYOSITIS
INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS
Age at onset
>18 years
Adulthood and childhood
>50 years
Familial association
No
No
Yes, in some cases
Extramuscular manifestations
Yes
Yes
Yes
Associated conditions
 Connective tissue diseases
Yesa
Scleroderma and mixed connective tissue 
disease (overlap syndromes)
Yes, in up to 20% of casesa
 Systemic autoimmune diseasesb
Frequent
Infrequent
Infrequent
 Malignancy
No
Yes, in up to 15% of cases
No
 Viruses
Yesc
Unproven
Yesc
 Drugsd
Yes
Yes, rarely
No
 Parasites and bacteriae
Yes
No
No
aSystemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic sclerosis, mixed connective tissue disease.
bCrohn’s disease, vasculitis, sarcoidosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, adult celiac disease, chronic graft-versus-host disease, discoid lupus, ankylos-
ing spondylitis, Behçet’s syndrome, myasthenia gravis, acne fulminans, dermatitis herpetiformis, psoriasis, Hashimoto’s disease, granulomatous 
diseases, agammaglobulinemia, monoclonal gammopathy, hypereosinophilic syndrome, Lyme disease, Kawasaki’s disease, autoimmune throm-
bocytopenia, hypergammaglobulinemic purpura, hereditary complement deﬁciency, IgA deﬁciency.
cHIV (human immunodeﬁciency virus) and HTLV-I (human T cell lymphotropic virus type I).
dDrugs include penicillamine (dermatomyositis and polymyositis), zidovudine (polymyositis), and contaminated tryptophan (dermatomyositis-like 
illness). Other myotoxic drugs may cause myopathy but not an inﬂammatory myopathy (see text for details).
eParasites (protozoa, cestodes, nematodes), tropical and bacterial myositis (pyomyositis).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
650
that presumably is age-related. The pattern of distal 
weakness, which superﬁcially resembles motor neuron 
or peripheral nerve disease, results from the myopathic 
process affecting distal muscles selectively. Disease pro-
gression is slow but steady, and most patients require 
an assistive device such as cane, walker, or wheelchair 
within several years of onset.
In at least 20% of cases, IBM is associated with sys-
temic autoimmune or connective tissue diseases. Famil-
ial aggregation of typical IBM may occur; such cases 
have been designated as familial inﬂammatory IBM. This 
disorder is distinct from hereditary inclusion body myopa-
thy (h-IBM), which describes a heterogeneous group of 
recessive, and less frequently dominant, inherited syn-
dromes; the h-IBMs are noninﬂammatory myopathies. 
A subset of h-IBM that spares the quadriceps muscles 
has emerged as a distinct entity. This disorder, originally 
described in Iranian Jews and now seen in many ethnic 
groups, is linked to chromosome 9p1 and results from 
mutations in the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/ 
N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) gene.
ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FINDINGS
Extramuscular manifestations
These may be present to a varying degree in patients 
with PM or DM, and include:
1. Systemic symptoms, such as fever, malaise, weight loss, 
arthralgia, and Raynaud’s phenomenon, especially 
when inﬂammatory myopathy is associated with a 
connective tissue disorder.
2. Joint contractures, mostly in DM and especially in chil-
dren.
3. Dysphagia and gastrointestinal symptoms, due to involve-
ment of oropharyngeal striated muscles and upper 
esophagus, especially in DM and IBM.
4. Cardiac disturbances, including atrioventricular con-
duction defects, tachyarrhythmias, dilated cardiomy-
opathy, a low ejection fraction, and congestive heart 
failure, may rarely occur, either from the disease 
itself or from hypertension associated with long-
term use of glucocorticoids.
5. Pulmonary dysfunction, due to weakness of the thoracic 
muscles, interstitial lung disease, or drug-induced 
pneumonitis (e.g., from methotrexate), which may 
cause dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and aspira-
tion pneumonia. Interstitial lung disease may precede 
myopathy or occur early in the disease and devel-
ops in up to 10% of patients with PM or DM, most 
of whom have antibodies to t-RNA synthetases, as 
described later.
6. Subcutaneous calciﬁcations, in DM, sometimes extrud-
ing on the skin and causing ulcerations and infec-
tions.
7. Arthralgias, synovitis, or deforming arthropathy with 
subluxation in the interphalangeal joints can occur 
in some patients with DM and PM who have Jo-1 
antibodies (discussed later).
Association with malignancies
Although all the inﬂammatory myopathies can have a 
chance association with malignant lesions, especially 
in older age groups, the incidence of malignant con-
ditions appears to be speciﬁcally increased only in 
patients with DM and not in those with PM or IBM. 
The most common tumors associated with DM are 
ovarian cancer, breast cancer, melanoma, colon can-
cer, and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The extent of the 
search that should be conducted for an occult neoplasm 
in adults with DM depends on the clinical circum-
stances. Tumors in these patients are usually uncovered 
by abnormal ﬁndings in the medical history and physi-
cal examination and not through an extensive blind 
search. The weight of evidence argues against per-
forming expensive, invasive, and nondirected tumor 
searches. A complete annual physical examination with 
pelvic, breast (mammogram, if indicated), and rectal 
examinations (with colonoscopy according to age and 
family history); urinalysis; complete blood count; blood 
chemistry tests; and a chest ﬁlm should sufﬁce in most 
cases. In Asians, nasopharyngeal cancer is common, and 
a careful examination of ears, nose, and throat is indi-
cated. If malignancy is clinically suspected, screening 
with whole-body PET scan should be considered.
Overlap syndromes
These describe the association of inﬂammatory myopa-
thies with connective tissue diseases. A well-character-
ized overlap syndrome occurs in patients with DM who 
also have manifestations of systemic sclerosis or mixed 
connective tissue disease, such as sclerotic thickening 
of the dermis, contractures, esophageal hypomotility, 
microangiopathy, and calcium deposits (Table 49-1). 
By contrast, signs of rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, or Sjögren’s syndrome are very rare in 
patients with DM. Patients with the overlap syndrome 
of DM and systemic sclerosis may have a speciﬁc anti-
nuclear antibody, the anti-PM/Scl, directed against a 
nucleolar-protein complex.
PATHOGENESIS
An autoimmune etiology of the inﬂammatory myopa-
thies is indirectly supported by an association with other 
autoimmune or connective tissue diseases; the pres-
ence of various autoantibodies; an association with spe-
ciﬁc major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes; 
demonstration of T cell–mediated myocytotoxicity or 
 
CHAPTER 49
Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion Body Myositis
651
complement-mediated microangiopathy; and a response 
to immunotherapy.
Autoantibodies and immunogenetics
Various autoantibodies against nuclear antigens (anti-
nuclear antibodies) and cytoplasmic antigens are found 
in up to 20% of patients with inﬂammatory myopa-
thies. The antibodies to cytoplasmic antigens are directed 
against ribonucleoproteins involved in protein synthesis 
(antisynthetases) or translational transport (anti-signal-
recognition particles). The antibody directed against 
the histidyl-transfer RNA synthetase, called anti-Jo-1, 
accounts for 75% of all the antisynthetases and is clini-
cally useful because up to 80% of patients with anti-Jo-1 
antibodies have interstitial lung disease. Some patients 
with the anti-Jo-1 antibody also have Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon, nonerosive arthritis, and the MHC molecules 
DR3 and DRw52. DR3 haplotypes (molecular desig-
nation DRB1*0301, DQB1*0201) occur in up to 75% 
of patients with PM and IBM, whereas in juvenile DM 
there is an increased frequency of DQA1*0501.
Immunopathologic mechanisms
In DM, humoral immune mechanisms are implicated, 
resulting in a microangiopathy and muscle ischemia 
(Fig. 49-1). Endomysial inﬂammatory inﬁltrates are 
composed of B cells located in proximity to CD4 T cells, 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, and macrophages; there is a 
relative absence of lymphocytic invasion of nonnecrotic 
muscle ﬁbers. Activation of the complement C5b-9 
membranolytic attack complex is thought to be a critical 
early event that triggers release of proinﬂammatory cyto-
kines and chemokines, induces expression of vascular cell 
Molecular mimicry,
tumors, viruses?
MAC
C3b
C3
C2
B
C4
C3
C1
D
C3a
B cell
T cell
LFA-1
ICAM-1
VCAM-1
ICAM-1
VLA-4
Mac-1
T cell
Macrophage
Cytokines
Chemokines
Cytokines
STAT-1, Chemokines,
Cathepsin, TGF-β
NO, TNF-α
T cell
B cell
MAC
C3bNEO
FIGURE 49-1
Immunopathogenesis of dermatomyositis. Activation of 
complement, possibly by autoantibodies (Y), against endo-
thelial cells and formation of C3 via the classic or alternative 
pathway. Activated C3 leads to formation of C3b, C3bNEO, 
and membrane attack complexes (MAC), which are depos-
ited in and around the endothelial cell wall of the endomysial 
capillaries. Deposition of MAC leads to destruction of cap-
illaries, ischemia, or microinfarcts, most prominent in the 
periphery of the fascicles, and perifascicular atrophy. B cells, 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, CD4 T cells, and macrophages 
trafﬁc from the circulation to the muscle. Endothelial expres-
sion of vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) and inter-
cellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) is induced by cytokines 
released by the mononuclear cells. Integrins, speciﬁcally 
very late activation antigen (VLA)-4 and lymphocyte function–
associated antigen (LFA)-1, bind VCAM and ICAM and pro-
mote T cell and macrophage inﬁltration of muscle through 
the endothelial cell wall.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
652
adhesion molecule (VCAM) 1 and intercellular adhesion 
molecule (ICAM) 1 on endothelial cells, and facilitates 
migration of activated lymphoid cells to the perimysial 
and endomysial spaces. Necrosis of the endothelial cells, 
reduced numbers of endomysial capillaries, ischemia, and 
muscle-ﬁber destruction resembling microinfarcts occur. 
The remaining capillaries often have dilated lumens in 
response to the ischemic process. Larger intramuscular 
blood vessels may also be affected in the same pattern. 
Residual perifascicular atrophy reﬂects the endofascicular 
hypoperfusion that is prominent in the periphery of mus-
cle fascicles. Increased expression of type I interferon-
inducible proteins is also noted in these regions.
By contrast, in PM and IBM a mechanism of T 
cell–mediated cytotoxicity is likely. CD8 T cells, along 
with macrophages, initially surround and eventually 
invade and destroy healthy, nonnecrotic muscle ﬁbers 
that aberrantly express class I MHC molecules. MHC-I 
expression, absent from the sarcolemma of normal 
muscle ﬁbers, is probably induced by cytokines secreted 
by activated T cells and macrophages. The CD8/
MHC-I complex is characteristic of PM and IBM; its 
detection can aid in conﬁrming the histologic diagnosis 
of PM, as discussed later. The cytotoxic CD8 T cells 
contain perforin and granzyme granules directed toward 
the surface of the muscle ﬁbers and capable of induc-
ing myonecrosis. Analysis of T cell receptor molecules 
expressed by the inﬁltrating CD8 cells has revealed 
clonal expansion and conserved sequences in the anti-
gen-binding region, both suggesting an antigen-driven 
T cell response. Whether the putative antigens are 
endogenous (e.g., muscle) or exogenous (e.g., viral) 
sequences is unknown. Viruses have not been identiﬁed 
within the muscle ﬁbers. Co-stimulatory molecules and 
their counterreceptors, which are fundamental for T cell 
activation and antigen recognition, are strongly upreg-
ulated in PM and IBM. Key molecules involved in 
T cell–mediated cytotoxicity are depicted in Fig. 49-2.
VCAM-1
TCR
CD28
CTLA-4
LFA-1
Chemokines
(MCP-1, Mig, IP-10)
Infection?
Co-stimulation
Clonal expansion
Cytokines
Systemic immune compartment
MHC
TCR
Macrophage
Antigen
Integrins
LFA-4
CD8
CD8
CD8
ICAM-1
MHC-I
MMP-9
MMP-9
MMP-2
IFN-γ
IFN-γ
TFN-α
TNF-α
IL-1, 2
IL-1, 2
MMPs
Perforin
Necrosis
Endoplasmic reticulum
BB1
β2m
Calnexin
MHC-I
TAP
Ag
(virus, muscle
peptide)
CD8
FIGURE 49-2
Cell-mediated mechanisms of muscle damage in poly-
myositis (PM) and inclusion body myositis (IBM). Antigen-
speciﬁc CD8 cells are expanded in the periphery, cross the 
endothelial barrier, and bind directly to muscle ﬁbers via T cell 
receptor (TCR) molecules that recognize aberrantly expressed 
MHC-I. Engagement of co-stimulatory molecules (BB1 and 
ICOSL) with their ligands (CD28, CTLA-4, and ICOS), along 
with ICAM-1/LFA-1, stabilize the CD8–muscle ﬁber interac-
tion. Metalloproteinases (MMPs) facilitate the migration of T 
cells and their attachment to the muscle surface. Muscle ﬁber 
necrosis occurs via perforin granules released by the autoag-
gressive T cells. A direct myocytotoxic effect exerted by the 
cytokines interferon (IFN) γ, interleukin (IL) 1, or tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) α may also play a role. Death of the muscle ﬁber 
is mediated by necrosis. MHC class I molecules consist of a 
heavy chain and a light chain [β2 microglobulin (β2m)] com-
plexed with an antigenic peptide that is transported into the 
endoplasmic reticulum by TAP proteins.
 
CHAPTER 49
Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion Body Myositis
653
The role of nonimmune factors in IBM
In IBM, the presence of Congo red–positive amy-
loid deposits within some vacuolated muscle ﬁbers and 
abnormal mitochondria with cytochrome oxidase–
negative ﬁbers suggest that, in addition to the autoim-
mune component, there is also a degenerative process. 
Similar to Alzheimer’s disease, the intracellular amyloid 
deposits in IBM are immunoreactive against amyloid 
precursor protein (APP), β-amyloid, chymotrypsin, 
apolipoprotein E, presenilin, ubiquitin, and phosphor-
ylated tau, but it is unclear whether these deposits, 
which are also seen in other vacuolar myopathies, are 
directly pathogenic or represent secondary phenom-
ena. The same is true for the mitochondrial abnormali-
ties, which may also be secondary to the effects of aging 
or a bystander effect of upregulated cytokines. Expres-
sion of cytokines and upregulation of MHC class I by 
the muscle ﬁbers may cause an endoplasmic reticulum 
stress response resulting in intracellular accumulation of 
stressor molecules or misfolded glycoproteins and acti-
vation of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), leading to further 
cytokine activation.
Association with viral infections and the role  
of retroviruses
Several viruses, including coxsackieviruses, inﬂu-
enza, paramyxoviruses, mumps, cytomegalovirus, and 
Epstein-Barr virus, have been indirectly associated with 
myositis. For the coxsackieviruses, an autoimmune 
myositis triggered by molecular mimicry has been pro-
posed because of structural homology between histidyl-
transfer RNA synthetase that is the target of the Jo-1 
antibody (discussed earlier) and genomic RNA of an 
animal picornavirus, the encephalomyocarditis virus. 
Sensitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies, 
however, have repeatedly failed to conﬁrm the presence 
of such viruses in muscle biopsies.
The best evidence of a viral connection in PM 
and IBM is with the retroviruses. Some individuals 
infected with HIV or with human T cell lymphotropic 
virus I (HTLV-I) develop PM or IBM; a similar disor-
der has been described in nonhuman primates infected 
with the simian immunodeﬁciency virus. The inﬂam-
matory myopathy may occur as the initial manifesta-
tion of a retroviral infection, or myositis may develop 
later in the disease course. Retroviral antigens have 
been detected only in occasional endomysial macro-
phages and not within the muscle ﬁbers themselves, 
suggesting that persistent infection and viral replication 
within the muscle do not occur. Histologic ﬁndings 
are identical to retroviral-negative PM or IBM. The 
inﬁltrating T cells in the muscle are clonally driven 
and a number of them are retroviral-speciﬁc. This dis-
order should be distinguished from a toxic myopathy 
related to long-term therapy with AZT, character-
ized by fatigue, myalgia, mild muscle weakness, and 
mild elevation of creatine kinase (CK). AZT-induced 
myopathy, which generally improves when the drug 
is discontinued, is a mitochondrial disorder character-
ized histologically by “ragged-red” ﬁbers. AZT inhib-
its γ-DNA polymerase, an enzyme found solely in the 
mitochondrial matrix.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The clinical picture of the typical skin rash and proxi-
mal or diffuse muscle weakness has few causes other 
than DM. However, proximal muscle weakness with-
out skin involvement can be due to many conditions 
other than PM or IBM.
Subacute or chronic progressive muscle 
weakness
This may be due to denervating conditions such as the 
spinal muscular atrophies or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(Chap. 32). In addition to the muscle weakness, upper 
motor neuron signs in the latter and signs of denerva-
tion detected by electromyography (EMG) aid in the 
diagnosis. The muscular dystrophies (Chap. 48) may be 
additional considerations; however, these disorders usu-
ally develop over years rather than weeks or months and 
rarely present after the age of 30 years. It may be dif-
ﬁcult, even with a muscle biopsy, to distinguish chronic 
PM from a rapidly advancing muscular dystrophy. This 
is particularly true of facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy, dysferlin myopathy, and the dystrophinopa-
thies where inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration is often found 
early in the disease. Such doubtful cases should always 
be given an adequate trial of glucocorticoid therapy and 
undergo genetic testing to exclude muscular dystro-
phy. Identiﬁcation of the MHC/CD8 lesion by muscle 
biopsy is helpful to identify cases of PM. Some meta-
bolic myopathies, including glycogen storage disease 
due to myophosphorylase or acid maltase deﬁciency, 
lipid storage myopathies due to carnitine deﬁciency, 
and mitochondrial diseases produce weakness that is 
often associated with other characteristic clinical signs; 
diagnosis rests upon histochemical and biochemical 
studies of the muscle biopsy. The endocrine myopathies 
such as those due to hypercorticosteroidism, hyper- 
and hypothyroidism, and hyper- and hypoparathyroid-
ism require the appropriate laboratory investigations for 
diagnosis. Muscle wasting in patients with an underlying 
neoplasm may be due to disuse, cachexia, or rarely to a 
paraneoplastic neuromyopathy (Chap. 44).
Diseases of the neuromuscular junction, including 
myasthenia gravis or the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
654
syndrome, cause fatiguing weakness that also affects 
ocular and other cranial muscles (Chap. 47). Repetitive 
nerve stimulation and single-ﬁber EMG studies aid in 
diagnosis.
Acute muscle weakness
This may be caused by an acute neuropathy such as 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 46), transverse myeli-
tis (Chap. 35), a neurotoxin (Chap. 48), or a neuro-
tropic viral infection such as poliomyelitis or West 
Nile virus (Chap. 40). When acute weakness is associ-
ated with very high levels of serum creatine kinase 
(CK) (often in the thousands), painful muscle cramps, 
rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria, it may be due to 
a viral infection or a metabolic disorder such as myo-
phosphorylase deﬁciency or carnitine palmitoyltrans-
ferase deﬁciency (Chap. 48). Several animal parasites, 
including protozoa (Toxoplasma, Trypanosoma), cestodes 
(cysticerci), and nematodes (trichinae), may produce a 
focal or diffuse inﬂammatory myopathy known as para-
sitic polymyositis. Staphylococcus aureus, Yersinia, Streptococ-
cus, or anaerobic bacteria may produce a suppurative 
myositis, known as tropical polymyositis, or pyomyositis. 
Pyomyositis, previously rare in the West, is now occa-
sionally seen in AIDS patients. Other bacteria, such as 
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) and Legionella pneu-
mophila (Legionnaire’s disease), may infrequently cause 
myositis.
Patients with periodic paralysis experience recur-
rent episodes of acute muscle weakness without pain, 
always beginning in childhood. Chronic alcoholics may 
develop painful myopathy with myoglobinuria after a 
bout of heavy drinking. Acute painless muscle weakness 
with myoglobinuria may occur with prolonged hypoka-
lemia, or hypophosphatemia and hypomagnesemia, usu-
ally in chronic alcoholics or in patients on nasogastric 
suction receiving parenteral hyperalimentation.
Myofasciitis
This distinctive inﬂammatory disorder affecting muscle 
and fascia presents as diffuse myalgias, skin induration, 
fatigue, and mild muscle weakness; mild elevations of 
serum CK are usually present. The most common form 
is eosinophilic myofasciitis characterized by periph-
eral blood eosinophilia and eosinophilic inﬁltrates in 
the endomysial tissue. In some patients, the eosino-
philic myositis/fasciitis occurs in the context of parasitic 
infections, vasculitis, mixed connective tissue disease, 
hypereosinophilic syndrome, or toxic exposures (e.g., 
toxic oil syndrome, contaminated L-tryptophan) or 
with mutations in the calpain gene. A distinct subset 
of myofasciitis is characterized by pronounced inﬁl-
tration of the connective tissue around the muscle by 
sheets of periodic acid–Schiff-positive macrophages 
and occasional CD8 T cells (macrophagic myofasciitis). 
Such histologic involvement is focal and limited to sites 
of previous vaccinations, which may have been admin-
istered months or years earlier. This disorder, which to 
date has not been observed outside of France, has been 
linked to an aluminum-containing substrate in vaccines. 
Most patients respond to glucocorticoid therapy, and 
the overall prognosis seems favorable.
Necrotizing myositis
This is an increasingly recognized entity that has distinct 
features, even though it is often labeled as PM. It pres-
ents often in the fall or winter as an acute or subacute 
onset of symmetric muscle weakness; CK is typically 
extremely high. The weakness can be severe. Coexist-
ing interstitial lung disease and cardiomyopathy may be 
present. The disorder may develop after a viral infec-
tion or in association with cancer. Some patients have 
antibodies against signal recognition particle (SRP). The 
muscle biopsy demonstrates necrotic ﬁbers inﬁltrated 
by macrophages but only rare, if any, T cell inﬁltrates. 
Muscle MHC-I expression is only slightly and focally 
upregulated. The capillaries may be swollen with hya-
linization, thickening of the capillary wall, and deposi-
tion of complement. Some patients respond to immu-
notherapy, but others are resistant.
Hyperacute necrotizing fasciitis/myositis 
(ﬂesh-eating disease)
This a fulminant infectious disease, seen most often in 
the tropics or in conditions with poor hygiene, char-
acterized by widespread necrosis of the superﬁcial fas-
cia and muscle of a limb; if the scrotum, perineum, and 
abdominal wall are affected, the condition is referred 
to as Fournier’s gangrene. It may be caused by group 
A β-hemolytic streptococcus, methicillin-sensitive S. 
aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Vibrio vulniﬁcus, clostridial 
species (gas gangrene), or polymicrobial infection with 
anaerobes and facultative bacteria; toxins from these 
bacteria may act as superantigens. The port of bacte-
rial entry is usually a trivial cut or skin abrasion and the 
source is contact with carriers of the organism. Indi-
viduals with diabetes mellitus, immunodeﬁciency states, 
or systemic illnesses such as liver failure are most sus-
ceptible. Systemic varicella is a predisposing factor in 
children.
The disease presents with swelling, pain, and redness 
in the involved area followed by a rapid tissue necrosis 
of fascia and muscle that progresses at an estimated rate 
of 3 cm/h. Emergency debridement, antibiotics, as well 
as IVIg, or even hyperbaric oxygen have been recom-
mended. In progressive or advanced cases, amputation 
of the affected limb may be necessary to avoid a fatal 
outcome.
 
CHAPTER 49
Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion Body Myositis
655
Drug-induced myopathies
D-Penicillamine, procainamide, and statins may produce 
a true myositis resembling PM, and a DM-like illness 
had been associated with the contaminated prepara-
tions of L-tryptophan. As noted earlier, AZT causes a 
mitochondrial myopathy. Other drugs may elicit a 
toxic noninﬂammatory myopathy that is histologi-
cally different from DM, PM, or IBM. These include 
cholesterol-lowering agents such as cloﬁbrate, lovas-
tatin, simvastatin, or provastatin, especially when com-
bined with cyclosporine, amiodarone, or gemﬁbrozil. 
Statin-induced necrotizing myopathy or asymptomatic 
elevations of CK usually improve after discontinuation 
of the drug. In rare patients, however, muscle weakness 
continues to progress even after the statin is withdrawn; 
in these cases, a diagnostic muscle biopsy is indicated, 
and if evidence of inﬂammation and MHC-I upregula-
tion is present, immunotherapy for PM should be con-
sidered. Rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria have been 
rarely associated with amphotericin B, ε-aminocaproic 
acid, fenﬂuramine, heroin, and phencyclidine. The use 
of amiodarone, chloroquine, colchicine, carbimazole, 
emetine, etretinate, ipecac syrup, chronic laxative or 
licorice use resulting in hypokalemia, and glucocor-
ticoids or growth hormone administration have also 
been associated with myopathic muscle weakness. Some 
neuromuscular blocking agents such as pancuronium, 
in combination with glucocorticoids, may cause an 
acute critical illness myopathy. A careful drug history 
is essential for diagnosis of these drug-induced myopa-
thies, which do not require immunosuppressive therapy 
except when an autoimmune myopathy has been trig-
gered, as noted earlier.
“Weakness” due to muscle pain and muscle 
tenderness
A number of conditions including polymyalgia rheu-
matica and arthritic disorders of adjacent joints may 
enter into the differential diagnosis of inﬂammatory 
myopathy, even though they do not cause myositis. 
The muscle biopsy is either normal or discloses type II 
muscle ﬁber atrophy. Patients with ﬁbrositis and ﬁbro-
myalgia complain of focal or diffuse muscle tenderness, 
fatigue, and aching, which is sometimes poorly dif-
ferentiated from joint pain. Some patients, however, 
have muscle tenderness, painful muscles on move-
ment, and signs suggestive of a collagen vascular dis-
order, such as an increased erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibody, or 
rheumatoid factor, along with modest elevation of the 
serum CK and aldolase. They demonstrate a “break-
away” pattern of weakness with difﬁculty sustain-
ing effort but not true muscle weakness. The muscle 
biopsy is usually normal or nonspeciﬁc. Many such 
patients show some response to nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory agents or glucocorticoids, though most 
continue to have indolent complaints. An indolent fas-
ciitis in the setting of an ill-deﬁned connective tissue 
disorder may be present, and these patients should not 
be labeled as having a psychosomatic disorder. Chronic 
fatigue syndrome, which may follow a viral infection, 
can present with debilitating fatigue, fever, sore throat, 
painful lymphadenopathy, myalgia, arthralgia, sleep 
disorder, and headache (Chap. 52). These patients do 
not have muscle weakness, and the muscle biopsy is 
normal.
DIAGNOSIS
The clinically suspected diagnosis of PM, DM, or IBM 
is conﬁrmed by analysis of serum muscle enzymes, 
EMG ﬁndings, and muscle biopsy (Table 49-2).
The most sensitive enzyme is CK, which in active 
disease can be elevated as much as ﬁftyfold. Although 
the CK level usually parallels disease activity, it can be 
normal in some patients with active IBM or DM, espe-
cially when associated with a connective tissue disease. 
The CK is always elevated in patients with active PM. 
Along with the CK, the serum glutamic-oxaloacetic 
and glutamate pyruvate transaminases, lactate dehydro-
genase, and aldolase may be elevated.
Needle EMG shows myopathic potentials charac-
terized by short-duration, low-amplitude polyphasic 
units on voluntary activation and increased spontaneous 
activity with ﬁbrillations, complex repetitive discharges, 
and positive sharp waves. Mixed potentials (polyphasic 
units of short and long duration) indicating a chronic 
process and muscle ﬁber regeneration are often present 
in IBM. These EMG ﬁndings are not diagnostic of an 
inﬂammatory myopathy but are useful to identify the 
presence of active or chronic myopathy and to exclude 
neurogenic disorders.
MRI is not routinely used for the diagnosis of PM, 
DM, or IBM. However, it may provide information or 
guide the location of the muscle biopsy in certain clini-
cal settings.
Muscle biopsy—in spite of occasional variability in 
demonstrating all of the typical pathologic ﬁndings—is 
the most sensitive and speciﬁc test for establishing the 
diagnosis of inﬂammatory myopathy and for excluding 
other neuromuscular diseases. Inﬂammation is the his-
tologic hallmark for these diseases; however, additional 
features are characteristic of each subtype (Figs. 49-3, 
49-4, and 49-5).
In PM the inﬂammation is primary, a term used to 
indicate that the inﬂammation is not reactive and the T 
cell inﬁltrates, located primarily within the muscle fasci-
cles (endomysially), surround individual, healthy muscle 
ﬁbers and result in phagocytosis and necrosis (Fig.  49-3). 
The MHC-I molecule is ubiquitously expressed on the 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
656
sarcolemma, even in ﬁbers not invaded by CD8+ cells. 
The CD8/MHC-I lesion is characteristic and essen-
tial to conﬁrm or establish the diagnosis and to exclude 
disorders with secondary, nonspeciﬁc, inﬂammation, 
such as in some muscular dystrophies. When the disease 
is chronic, connective tissue is increased and may react 
positively with alkaline phosphatase.
In DM the endomysial inﬂammation is predomi-
nantly perivascular or in the interfascicular septae and 
around—rather than within—the muscle fascicles (Fig. 
49-4). The intramuscular blood vessels show endothelial 
hyperplasia with tubuloreticular proﬁles, ﬁbrin thrombi, 
and obliteration of capillaries. The muscle ﬁbers 
undergo necrosis, degeneration, and phagocytosis, often 
in groups involving a portion of a muscle fasciculus in a 
wedgelike shape or at the periphery of the fascicle, due 
to microinfarcts within the muscle. This results in peri-
fascicular atrophy, characterized by 2–10 layers of atro-
phic ﬁbers at the periphery of the fascicles. The pres-
ence of perifascicular atrophy is diagnostic of DM, even 
in the absence of inﬂammation.
In IBM (Fig.  49-5), there is endomysial inﬂammation 
with T cells invading MHC-I-expressing nonvacuolated 
muscle ﬁbers; basophilic granular deposits distributed 
around the edge of slitlike vacuoles (rimmed vacuoles); 
loss of ﬁbers, replaced by fat and connective tissue, 
hypertrophic ﬁbers, and angulated or round ﬁbers; rare 
eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions; abnormal mito-
chondria characterized by the presence of ragged-red 
TABLE 49-2 
CRITERIA FOR DIAGNOSIS OF INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES
POLYMYOSITIS
INCLUSION BODY  
MYOSITIS
CRITERION
DEFINITE
PROBABLE
DERMATOMYOSITIS
Myopathic muscle 
weaknessa
Yes
Yes
Yesb
Yes; slow onset, early 
involvement of distal muscles, 
frequent falls
Electromyographic 
ﬁndings
Myopathic
Myopathic
Myopathic
Myopathic with mixed 
potentials
Muscle enzymes
Elevated (up to ﬁftyfold)
Elevated (up to ﬁftyfold)
Elevated (up to 
ﬁftyfold) or normal
Elevated (up to tenfold) or  
normal
Muscle biopsy 
ﬁndingsc
“Primary” inﬂammation 
with the CD8/MHC-I 
complex and no 
vacuoles
Ubiquitous MHC-I 
expression but mini-
mal inﬂammation and 
no vacuolesd
Perifascicular, 
perimysial, or 
perivascular 
inﬁltrates, 
perifascicular 
atrophy
Primary inﬂammation with CD8/
MHC-I complex; vacuolated 
ﬁbers with β-amyloid 
deposits; cytochrome 
oxygenase–negative ﬁbers; 
signs of chronic myopathye
Rash or calcinosis
Absent
Absent
Presentf
Absent
aMyopathic muscle weakness, affecting proximal muscles more than distal ones and sparing eye and facial muscles, is characterized by a sub-
acute onset (weeks to months) and rapid progression in patients who have no family history of neuromuscular disease, no endocrinopathy, no 
exposure to myotoxic drugs or toxins, and no biochemical muscle disease (excluded on the basis of muscle-biopsy ﬁndings).
bIn some cases with the typical rash, the muscle strength is seemingly normal (dermatomyositis sine myositis); these patients often have new 
onset of easy fatigue and reduced endurance. Careful muscle testing may reveal mild muscle weakness.
cSee text for details.
dAn adequate trial of prednisone or other immunosuppressive drugs is warranted in probable cases. If, in retrospect, the disease is unresponsive 
to therapy, another muscle biopsy should be considered to exclude other diseases or possible evolution in inclusion body myositis.
eIf the muscle biopsy does not contain vacuolated ﬁbers but shows chronic myopathy with hypertrophic ﬁbers, primary inﬂammation with the 
CD8/MHC-I complex and cytochrome oxygenase–negative ﬁbers, the diagnosis is probable inclusion body myositis.
fIf rash is absent but muscle biopsy ﬁndings are characteristic of dermatomyositis, the diagnosis is probable dermatomyositis.
FIGURE 49-3
Cross-section of a muscle biopsy from a patient with 
polymyositis demonstrates scattered inﬂammatory foci with 
lymphocytes invading or surrounding muscle ﬁbers. Note 
lack of chronic myopathic features (increased connective 
tissue, atrophic or hypertrophic ﬁbers) as seen in inclusion 
body myositis.
 
CHAPTER 49
Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion Body Myositis
657
ﬁbers or cytochrome oxidase–negative ﬁbers; and amy-
loid deposits within or next to the vacuoles best visual-
ized with crystal violet or Congo-red staining viewed 
with ﬂuorescent optics. Electron microscopy dem-
onstrates ﬁlamentous inclusions in the vicinity of the 
rimmed vacuoles. In at least 15% of patients with the 
typical clinical phenotype of IBM, no vacuoles or amy-
loid deposits can be identiﬁed in muscle biopsy, leading 
to an erroneous diagnosis of PM. Close clinicopatho-
logic correlations are essential; if uncertain, a repeat 
muscle biopsy from another site is often helpful.
TREATMENT 
Therapy of Inﬂammatory Myopathies
The goal of therapy is to improve muscle strength, 
thereby improving function in activities of daily living, 
and ameliorate the extramuscular manifestations (rash, 
FIGURE 49-4
Cross-section of a muscle biopsy from a patient with 
dermatomyositis demonstrates atrophy of the ﬁbers at the 
periphery of the fascicle (perifascicular atrophy).
FIGURE 49-5
Cross-sections of a muscle biopsy from a patient with 
inclusion body myositis demonstrate the typical features 
of vacuoles with lymphocytic inﬁltrates surrounding non-
vacuolated or necrotic ﬁbers (A), tiny endomysial deposits 
of amyloid visualized with crystal violet (B), cytochrome oxi-
dase–negative ﬁbers, indicative of mitochondrial dysfunction 
(C), and ubiquitous MHC-I expression at the periphery of all 
ﬁbers (D).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
658
dysphagia, dyspnea, fever). When strength improves, 
the serum CK falls concurrently; however, the reverse is 
not always true. Unfortunately, there is a common ten-
dency to “chase” or treat the CK level instead of the mus-
cle weakness, a practice that has led to prolonged and 
unnecessary use of immunosuppressive drugs and erro-
neous assessment of their efficacy. It is prudent to dis-
continue these drugs if, after an adequate trial, there is 
no objective improvement in muscle strength whether 
or not CK levels are reduced. Agents used in the treat-
ment of PM and DM include the following:
1.  Glucocorticoids. Oral prednisone is the initial treat-
ment of choice; the effectiveness and side effects of 
this therapy determine the future need for stronger 
immunosuppressive drugs. High-dose prednisone, 
at least 1 mg/kg per day, is initiated as early in the 
disease as possible. After 3–4 weeks, prednisone is 
tapered slowly over a period of 10 weeks to 1 mg/
kg every other day. If there is evidence of efficacy 
and no serious side effects, the dosage is then fur-
ther reduced by 5 or 10 mg every 3–4 weeks until 
the lowest possible dose that controls the disease is 
reached. The efficacy of prednisone is determined by 
an objective increase in muscle strength and activi-
ties of daily living, which almost always occurs by the 
third month of therapy. A feeling of increased energy 
or a reduction of the CK level without a concomitant 
increase in muscle strength is not a reliable sign of 
improvement. If prednisone provides no objective 
benefit after ∼3 months of high-dose therapy, the 
disease is probably unresponsive to the drug and 
tapering should be accelerated while the next-in-
line immunosuppressive drug is started. Although 
controlled trials have not been performed, almost all 
patients with true PM or DM respond to glucocorti-
coids to some degree and for some period of time; in 
general, DM responds better than PM.
The long-term use of prednisone may cause 
increased weakness associated with a normal 
or unchanged CK level; this effect is referred to 
as steroid myopathy. In a patient who previously 
responded to high doses of prednisone, the devel-
opment of new weakness may be related to ste-
roid myopathy or to disease activity that either will 
respond to a higher dose of glucocorticoids or has 
become glucocorticoid-resistant. In uncertain cases, 
the prednisone dosage can be steadily increased or 
decreased as desired: the cause of the weakness is 
usually evident in 2–8 weeks.
2.  Other immunosuppressive drugs. Approximately 75% of 
patients ultimately require additional treatment. This 
occurs when a patient fails to respond adequately to glu-
cocorticoids after a 3-month trial, the patient becomes 
glucocorticoid-resistant, glucocorticoid-related side effects 
appear, attempts to lower the prednisone dose 
repeatedly result in a new relapse, or rapidly pro-
gressive disease with evolving severe weakness and 
respiratory failure develops.
The following drugs are commonly used but 
have never been tested in controlled studies: (1) 
Azathioprine is well tolerated, has few side effects, 
and appears to be as effective for long-term therapy 
as other drugs. The dose is up to 3 mg/kg daily. (2) 
Methotrexate has a faster onset of action than aza-
thioprine. It is given orally starting at 7.5 mg weekly 
for the first 3 weeks (2.5 mg every 12 h for 3 doses), 
with gradual dose escalation by 2.5 mg per week to 
a total of 25 mg weekly. A rare side effect is metho-
trexate pneumonitis, which can be difficult to distin-
guish from the interstitial lung disease of the primary 
myopathy associated with Jo-1 antibodies (described 
earlier). (3) Mycophenolate mofetil also has a faster 
onset of action than azathioprine. At doses up to 2.5 
or 3 g/d in two divided doses, it is well tolerated for 
long-term use. (4) Monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody 
(rituximab) has been shown in a small uncontrolled 
series to benefit patients with DM and PM. (5) Cyclo-
sporine has inconsistent and mild benefit. (6) Cyclo-
phosphamide (0.5–1 g/m2 IV monthly for 6 months) 
has limited success and significant toxicity. (7) Tacro-
limus (formerly known as Fk506) has been effective in 
some difficult cases of PM.
3.  Immunomodulation. In a controlled trial of patients 
with refractory DM, intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIg) improved not only strength and rash but also 
the underlying immunopathology. The benefit is 
often short-lived (≤8 weeks), and repeated infusions 
every 6–8 weeks are generally required to main-
tain improvement. A dose of 2 g/kg divided over 
2–5 days per course is recommended. Uncontrolled 
observations suggest that IVIg may also be beneficial 
for patients with PM. Neither plasmapheresis nor leu-
kapheresis appears to be effective in PM and DM.
The following sequential empirical approach to the 
treatment of PM and DM is suggested: Step 1: high-
dose prednisone; Step 2: azathioprine, mycophenolate, 
or methotrexate for steroid-sparing effect; Step 3: IVIg; 
Step 4: a trial, with guarded optimism, of one of the fol-
lowing agents, chosen according to the patient’s age, 
degree of disability, tolerance, experience with the drug, 
and general health: rituximab, cyclosporine, cyclophos-
phamide, or tacrolimus. Patients with interstitial lung 
disease may benefit from aggressive treatment with 
cyclophosphamide or tacrolimus.
A patient with presumed PM who has not responded 
to any form of immunotherapy most likely has IBM 
or another disease, usually a metabolic myopathy, a 
muscular dystrophy, a drug-induced myopathy, or an 
 
CHAPTER 49
Polymyositis, Dermatomyositis, and Inclusion Body Myositis
659
endocrinopathy. In these cases, a repeat muscle biopsy 
and a renewed search for another cause of the myopa-
thy is indicated.
Calcinosis, a manifestation of DM, is difficult to treat; 
however, new calcium deposits may be prevented if the 
primary disease responds to the available therapies. 
Bisphosphonates, aluminum hydroxide, probenecid, 
colchicine, low doses of warfarin, calcium blockers, and 
surgical excision have all been tried without success.
IBM is generally resistant to immunosuppressive 
therapies. Prednisone together with azathioprine or 
methotrexate is often tried for a few months in newly 
diagnosed patients, although results are generally disap-
pointing. Because occasional patients may feel subjec-
tively weaker after these drugs are discontinued, some 
clinicians prefer to maintain these patients on low-dose, 
every-other-day prednisone along with mycophenolate 
in an effort to slow disease progression, even though 
there is no objective evidence or controlled study to 
support this practice. In two controlled studies of IVIg in 
IBM, minimal benefit in up to 30% of patients was found; 
the strength gains, however, were not of sufficient mag-
nitude to justify its routine use. Another trial of IVIg com-
bined with prednisone was ineffective. Nonetheless, 
many experts believe that a 2- to 3-month trial with IVIg 
may be reasonable for selected patients with IBM who 
experience rapid progression of muscle weakness or 
choking episodes due to worsening dysphagia.
PROGNOSIS The 5-year survival rate for treated 
patients with PM and DM is ∼95% and the 10-year sur-
vival rate is 84%; death is usually due to pulmonary, 
cardiac, or other systemic complications. The progno-
sis is worse for patients who are severely affected at 
presentation, when initial treatment is delayed, and in 
cases with severe dysphagia or respiratory difficulties. 
Older patients, and those with associated cancer also 
have a worse prognosis. DM responds more favorably 
to therapy than PM and thus has a better prognosis. 
Most patients improve with therapy, and many make a 
full functional recovery, which is often sustained with 
maintenance therapy. Up to 30% may be left with some 
residual muscle weakness. Relapses may occur at any 
time.
IBM has the least favorable prognosis of the inflam-
matory myopathies. Most patients will require the use 
of an assistive device such as a cane, walker, or wheel-
chair within 5–10 years of onset. In general, the older 
the age of onset in IBM, the more rapidly progressive is 
the course.
 S. Andrew Josephson  ■   Martin A. Samuels 
660
 Inpatient neurologic consultations usually involve ques-
tions about speciﬁ c disease processes or prognostica-
tion after various cerebral injuries. Common reasons 
for neurologic consultation include stroke ( Chap. 27 ), 
seizures ( Chap. 26 ), altered mental status ( Chap. 16 ), 
headache ( Chap. 8 ), and management of coma and 
other neurocritical care conditions (Chaps. 17 and 28). 
This chapter focuses on additional common reasons 
for consultation that are not addressed elsewhere in the 
text. 
 CONSULTATIONS REGARDING CENTRAL 
NERVOUS SYSTEM DYSFUNCTION 
 HYPERPERFUSION STATES 
 A group of neurologic disorders shares the common 
feature of hyperperfusion playing a key role in patho-
genesis. These seemingly diverse syndromes include 
hypertensive encephalopathy, eclampsia, postcarotid 
endarterectomy syndrome, and toxicity from calci-
neurin-inhibitor medications. Modern imaging tech-
niques and experimental models suggest that vasogenic 
edema is usually the primary process leading to neuro-
logic dysfunction; therefore, prompt recognition and 
management of this condition should allow for clinical 
recovery if superimposed hemorrhage or infarction has 
not occurred. 
 The brain’s autoregulatory capability successfully 
maintains a fairly stable cerebral blood ﬂ ow in adults 
despite alterations in systemic mean arterial pressure 
(MAP) ranging from 50–150 mmHg. In patients with 
chronic hypertension, this cerebral autoregulation curve 
is shifted, resulting in autoregulation working over a 
much higher range of pressures (e.g., 70–175 mmHg). 
In these hypertensive patients, cerebral blood ﬂ ow 
is kept steady at higher MAP, but a rapid lowering of 
pressure can more easily lead to ischemia on the lower 
end of the autoregulatory curve. This autoregulatory 
phenomenon is achieved through both myogenic and 
neurogenic inﬂ uences causing small arterioles to con-
tract and dilate. When the systemic blood pressure 
exceeds the limits of this mechanism, breakthrough of 
autoregulation occurs, resulting in hyperperfusion via 
increased cerebral blood ﬂ ow, capillary leakage into the 
interstitium, and resulting edema. The predilection of 
all of the hyperperfusion disorders to affect the posterior 
rather than anterior portions of the brain may be due 
to a lower threshold for autoregulatory breakthrough in 
the posterior circulation. 
 While elevated or relatively elevated blood pressure 
is common in many of these disorders, some hyperper-
fusion states such as calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity occur 
with no apparent pressure rise. In these cases, vaso-
genic edema is likely due primarily to dysfunction of 
the capillary endothelium itself, leading to breakdown 
of the blood-brain barrier. It is useful to separate dis-
orders of hyperperfusion into those caused primarily by 
increased pressure and those due mostly to endothe-
lial dysfunction from a toxic or autoimmune etiology 
(Table 50-1) . In reality, both of these pathophysiologic 
processes are likely playing some role in each of these 
disorders. 
 The clinical presentation of the hyperperfusion syn-
dromes is similar with prominent headaches, seizures, or 
focal deﬁ cits. Headaches have no speciﬁ c characteristics, 
range from mild to severe, and may be accompanied 
by alterations in consciousness ranging from confusion 
to coma. Seizures may be present, and these can be of 
multiple types depending on the severity and location of 
the edema. Nonconvulsive seizures have been described 
in hyperperfusion states; therefore, a low threshold for 
obtaining an electroencephalogram (EEG) in these 
 SPECIAL ISSUES IN INPATIENT NEUROLOGIC 
CONSULTATION 
 CHAPTER 50 
Special Issues in Inpatient Neurologic Consultation
661
 
CHAPTER 50
patients should be maintained. The typical focal deﬁcit 
in hyperperfusion states is cortical visual loss, given the 
tendency of the process to involve the occipital lobes. 
However, any focal deﬁcit can occur depending on the 
area affected, as evidenced by patients who, after carotid 
endarterectomy, exhibit neurologic dysfunction in the 
ipsilateral newly reperfused hemisphere. In conditions 
where increased cerebral blood ﬂow plays a role, exami-
nation of the inpatient vital signs record will usually 
reveal a systemic blood pressure that is increased above 
baseline. It appears as if the rapidity of rise rather than 
the absolute value of pressure is the most important risk 
factor.
The diagnosis in all of these conditions is clinical. 
The symptoms of these disorders are common and 
nonspeciﬁc, so a long differential diagnosis should be 
entertained, including consideration of other causes 
of confusion, focal deﬁcits, headache, and seizures. 
MRI has improved the ability of clinicians to diag-
nose hyperperfusion syndromes, although cases have 
been reported with normal imaging. Patients classically 
exhibit the high T2 signal of edema primarily in the 
posterior occipital lobes, not respecting any single vas-
cular territory (Fig. 50-1). Diffusion-weighted images 
are typically normal, emphasizing the vasogenic rather 
than cytotoxic nature of this edema. Imaging with 
CT is less sensitive but may show a pattern of patchy 
hypodensity in the involved territory. Previously this 
classic radiographic appearance had been termed revers-
ible posterior leukoencephalopathy (RPLE). However, this 
term has fallen out of favor because none of its ele-
ments are completely accurate. The radiographic and 
clinical changes are not always reversible; the territory 
involved is not uniquely posterior; and gray matter 
may be affected as well, rather than purely white mat-
ter as the word “leukoencephalopathy” intimates. Other 
ancillary studies such as cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) anal-
ysis often yield nonspeciﬁc results. It should be noted 
that many of the substances that have been implicated, 
such as cyclosporine, can cause this syndrome even at 
low doses or after years of treatment. Therefore, normal 
serum levels of these medications do not exclude them 
as inciting agents.
In cases of hyperperfusion syndromes, treatment 
should commence urgently once the diagnosis is consid-
ered. Hypertension plays a key role commonly, and judi-
cious lowering of the blood pressure with IV agents such 
as labetalol or nicardipine is advised along with continu-
ous cardiac and blood pressure monitoring, often through 
an arterial line. It is reasonable to lower mean arterial 
pressure by ∼20% initially, as further lowering of the 
pressure may cause secondary ischemia as pressure drops 
below the lower range of the patient’s autoregulatory 
TABLE 50-1 
SOME COMMON ETIOLOGIES OF HYPERPERFUSION 
SYNDROME
Disorders in which increased capillary pressure dominates 
the pathophysiology
  Hypertensive encephalopathy, including secondary 
causes such as renovascular hypertension, pheochro-
mocytoma, cocaine use, etc.
 Postcarotid endarterectomy syndrome
 Preeclampsia/eclampsia
 High-altitude cerebral edema
Disorders in which endothelial dysfunction dominates the 
pathophysiology
 Calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity
  Chemotherapeutic agent toxicity (e.g., cytarabine, aza-
thioprine, 5-ﬂuorouracil, cisplatin, methotrexate)
  Glucocorticoids
  Erythropoietin
  HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme 
levels, low platelet count)
  Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
  Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)
  Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
FIGURE 50-1
Axial ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI of 
the brain in a patient taking cyclosporine after liver trans-
plantation, who presented with seizures, headache, and 
cortical blindness. Increased signal is seen bilaterally in the 
occipital lobes predominantly involving the white matter, 
consistent with a hyperperfusion state secondary to calci-
neurin-inhibitor exposure.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
662
capability. In cases where there is an identiﬁed cause 
of the syndrome, these etiologies should be treated 
promptly, including discontinuation of offending sub-
stances such as calcineurin inhibitors in toxic processes, 
treatment of immune-mediated disorders such as throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), and prompt 
delivery of the fetus in eclampsia. Seizures must be iden-
tiﬁed and controlled, often necessitating continuous EEG 
monitoring. Anticonvulsants are effective, but in the spe-
cial case of eclampsia, there is good evidence to support 
the use of magnesium sulfate for seizure control.
POST-CARDIAC BYPASS BRAIN INJURY
Central nervous system (CNS) injuries following open 
heart or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) sur-
gery are common and include acute encephalopathy, 
stroke, and a chronic syndrome of cognitive impair-
ment, which is now increasingly recognized. Hypo-
perfusion and embolic disease are frequently involved 
in the pathogenesis of these syndromes, although mul-
tiple mechanisms may be involved in these critically ill 
patients who are at risk for various metabolic and poly-
pharmaceutical complications.
The frequency of hypoxic injury secondary to inad-
equate blood ﬂow intraoperatively has been mark-
edly decreased by the use of modern surgical and anes-
thetic techniques. Despite these advances, some patients 
still experience neurologic complications from cere-
bral hypoperfusion or may suffer focal ischemia from 
tight carotid or focal intracranial stenoses in the setting 
of regional hypoperfusion. Postoperative infarcts in 
the border zones between vascular territories commonly 
are blamed on systemic hypotension, although some 
have suggested that these infarcts can also result from 
embolic disease (Fig. 50-2).
Embolic disease is likely the predominant mechanism 
of cerebral injury during cardiac surgery as evidenced 
by diffusion-weighted MRI and intraoperative transcra-
nial Doppler studies. It should be noted that some of the 
emboli that are found histologically in these patients are 
too small to be detected by standard imaging sequences; 
therefore, a negative MRI after surgery does not exclude 
the diagnosis of emboli-related complications. Throm-
bus in the heart itself as well as atheromas in the aor-
tic arch can become dislodged during cardiac surgeries, 
releasing a shower of particulate matter into the cere-
bral circulation. Cross-clamping of the aorta, manipula-
tion of the heart, extracorporeal circulation techniques 
(“bypass”), arrhythmias such as atrial ﬁbrillation, and 
introduction of air through suctioning have all been 
implicated as potential sources of emboli. Histologic 
studies indicate that literally millions of tiny emboli may 
be released, even using modern surgical techniques.
This shower of microemboli results in a number of 
clinical syndromes. Occasionally, a single large embolus 
leads to an isolated large-vessel stroke that presents with 
obvious clinical focal deﬁcits. More commonly, the 
emboli released are multiple and smaller. When there is 
a high burden of these small emboli, an acute encepha-
lopathy can occur postoperatively, presenting as either 
a hyperactive or hypoactive confusional state, the lat-
ter of which is frequently and incorrectly ascribed to 
depression. When the burden of microemboli is lower, 
no acute syndrome is recognized, but the patient may 
suffer a chronic cognitive deﬁcit. Cardiac surgery can 
be viewed, like delirium, as a “stress test for the brain.” 
Some patients with a low cerebral reserve due to under-
lying cerebrovascular disease or an early neurodegenera-
tive process will develop a chronic, cognitive deﬁcit, 
whereas others with higher reserves may remain asymp-
tomatic despite a similar dose of microemboli. In this 
manner, cardiac surgery may serve to unmask the early 
manifestations of disorders such as vascular dementia 
and Alzheimer’s disease.
Since modern techniques have successfully mini-
mized hypoperfusion complications during these sur-
geries, much attention is now focused on reducing this 
inevitable shower of microemboli. Off-pump CABG 
surgeries have the advantages of reducing length of stay 
and perioperative complications; however, some recent 
data suggests that off-pump CABG does not preserve 
FIGURE 50-2
Coronal ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI 
of the brain in a patient presenting with altered men-
tal status after an episode of hypotension during coronary 
artery bypass grafting (CABG). Increased signal is seen in the 
border zones bilaterally between the middle cerebral artery 
and anterior cerebral artery territories. Diffusion-weighted 
MRI sequences demonstrated restricted diffusion in these 
same locations, suggesting acute infarction.
Special Issues in Inpatient Neurologic Consultation
663
 
CHAPTER 50
cognitive function compared with on-pump CABG. 
Filters placed in the aortic arch may have some prom-
ise in capturing these emboli, although convincing evi-
dence is currently lacking. Development of successful 
endovascular operative approaches may provide a rea-
sonable alternative to conventional CABG procedures, 
especially for patients at high risk of developing cog-
nitive dysfunction after surgery due to advanced age, 
previous stroke, or severe atheromatous disease of the 
carotid arteries or aortic arch.
POST-SOLID ORGAN TRANSPLANT BRAIN 
INJURY
Patients who have undergone solid organ transplan-
tation are at risk for neurologic injury in the postop-
erative period and for the months to years thereafter. 
Neurologic consultants should view these patients as a 
special population at risk for both unique neurologic 
complications as well as for the usual disorders found in 
any critically ill inpatient.
Immunosuppressive medications are administered in 
high doses to patients after solid organ transplant, and 
many of these compounds have well-described neuro-
logic complications. In patients with headache, seizures, 
or focal neurologic deﬁcits taking calcineurin inhibi-
tors, the diagnosis of hyperperfusion syndrome should 
be considered, as discussed earlier. This neurotoxicity 
occurs mainly with cyclosporine and tacrolimus and can 
present even in the setting of normal serum drug levels. 
Treatment primarily involves lowering the drug dosage 
or discontinuing the drug. A related newer agent, siro-
limus, has very few recorded cases of neurotoxicity and 
may be a reasonable alternative for some patients. Other 
examples of immunosuppressive medications and their 
neurologic complications include OKT3-associated aki-
netic mutism and the leukoencephalopathy seen with 
methotrexate, especially when it is administered intra-
thecally or with concurrent radiotherapy. In any solid 
organ transplant patient with neurologic complaints, a 
careful examination of the medication list is required to 
search for these possible drug effects.
Cerebrovascular complications of solid organ trans-
plant are often ﬁrst recognized in the immediate post-
operative period. Border zone territory infarctions can 
occur, especially in the setting of systemic hypoten-
sion during cardiac transplant surgery. Embolic infarc-
tions classically complicate cardiac transplantation, but 
all solid organ transplant procedures place patients at 
risk for systemic emboli. When cerebral embolization 
accompanies renal or liver transplantation surgery, a 
careful search for right-to-left shunting should include 
evaluation of the heart with agitated saline echocardiog-
raphy, as well as looking for intrapulmonary shunting. 
Renal and some cardiac transplant patients often have 
advanced atherosclerosis, providing yet another mech-
anism for stroke. Imaging with CT or MRI with dif-
fusion is advised when cerebrovascular complications 
are suspected to conﬁrm the diagnosis and to exclude 
intracerebral hemorrhage, which most often occurs in 
the setting of coagulopathy secondary to liver failure or 
after cardiac bypass procedures.
Given that patients with solid organ transplants are 
chronically immunosuppressed, infections are a com-
mon concern. In any transplant patient with new 
CNS signs or symptoms such as seizure, confusion, or 
focal deﬁcit, the diagnosis of a central nervous system 
infection should be considered and evaluated through 
imaging (usually MRI) and possibly lumbar puncture. 
The most common pathogens responsible for CNS 
infections in these patients vary based on time since 
transplant. In the ﬁrst month posttransplant, common 
pathogens include the usual bacterial organisms associ-
ated with surgical procedures and indwelling catheters. 
Starting in the second month posttransplant, opportu-
nistic infections of the CNS become more common, 
including Nocardia and Toxoplasma species as well as 
fungal infections such as aspergillosis. Viral infections 
that can affect the brain of the immunosuppressed 
patient, such as herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, 
and varicella, also become more common after the ﬁrst 
month posttransplant. After 6 months posttransplant, 
immunosuppressed patients still remain at risk for these 
opportunistic bacterial, fungal, and viral infections but 
can also suffer late CNS infectious complications such 
as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) 
associated with JC virus and Epstein-Barr virus–
driven clonal expansions of B cells resulting in CNS 
lymphoma.
COMMON NEUROLOGIC 
COMPLICATIONS OF ELECTROLYTE 
DISTURBANCES
A wide variety of neurologic conditions can result from 
abnormalities in serum electrolytes, and consideration of 
electrolyte disturbances should be part of any inpatient 
neurologic consultation. 
HYPERNATREMIA AND HYPEROSMOLALITY
The normal range of serum osmolality is around 275–
295 mOsm/kg, but neurologic manifestations are usu-
ally seen only at levels >325 mOsm/kg. Hyperosmo-
lality is usually due to hypernatremia, hyperglycemia, 
azotemia, or the addition of extrinsic osmoles such as 
mannitol, which is commonly used in critically ill 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
664
neurologic patients. Hyperosmolality itself can lead 
to a generalized encephalopathy that is nonspeciﬁc 
and without focal ﬁndings; however, an underlying 
lesion such as a mass can become symptomatic under 
the metabolic stress of a hyperosmolar state, producing 
focal signs. Some patients with hyperosmolality from 
severe hyperglycemia can present, for unclear reasons, 
with generalized seizures or unilateral movement disor-
ders, which usually respond to lowering of the serum 
glucose. The treatment of all forms of hyperosmolality 
involves calculation of apparent water losses and slow 
replacement so that the serum sodium declines no faster 
than 2 mmol/L (2 meq/L) per hour.
Hypernatremia leads to the loss of intracellular water, 
leading to cell shrinkage. In the cells of the brain, sol-
utes such as glutamine and urea are generated under 
these conditions in order to minimize this shrink-
age. Despite this corrective mechanism, when hyper-
natremia is severe (serum sodium >160 mmol/L [>160 
meq/L]) or occurs rapidly, cellular metabolic processes 
fail and encephalopathy will result. There are many eti-
ologies of hypernatremia including, most commonly, 
renal and extrarenal losses of water. Causes of neuro-
logic relevance include central diabetes insipidus, where 
hyperosmolality is accompanied by submaximal urinary 
concentration due to inadequate release of arginine 
vasopressin (AVP) from the posterior pituitary, result-
ing often from pituitary injury in the setting of surgery, 
hemorrhage, inﬁltrative processes, or cerebral herniation.
HYPONATREMIA
Hyponatremia is commonly deﬁned as a serum sodium 
<135 mmol/L (<135 meq/L). Neurologic symptoms 
occur at different levels of low sodium, depending 
not only on the absolute value but also on the rate of 
fall. In patients with hyponatremia that develops over 
hours, life-threatening seizures and cerebral edema 
may occur at values as high as 125 mmol/L. In con-
trast, some patients with more chronic hyponatremia 
that has slowly developed over months to years may be 
asymptomatic even with serum levels <110 mmol/L. 
Correction of hyponatremia, especially when chronic, 
must take place slowly in order to avoid additional neu-
rologic complications. Cells in the brain swell in hypo-
tonic hyponatremic states but may compensate over 
time by excreting solute into the extracellular space, 
leading to restoration of cell volume when water fol-
lows the solute out of the cells. If treatment of hypo-
natremia results in a rapid rise in serum sodium, cells in 
the brain may quickly shrink, leading to osmotic demy-
elination, a process that previously was thought to be 
limited exclusively to the brainstem (central pontine 
myelinolysis; see Fig. 28-6), but now has been described 
elsewhere in the CNS.
Treatment of hyponatremia is dependent on the 
cause. Hypertonic hyponatremia treatment focuses on 
the underlying condition, such as hyperglycemia. Iso-
volemic hyponatremia (syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone [SIADH]) is managed with water 
restriction or administration of AVP antagonists. The 
management of choice for patients with hypervolemic 
hypotonic hyponatremia is free-water restriction and 
treatment of the underlying edematous disorder, such as 
nephrotic syndrome or congestive heart failure. Finally, 
in hypovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia, volume is 
replaced with isotonic saline while underlying condi-
tions of the kidneys, adrenals, and gastrointestinal tract 
are addressed.
One neurologic cause of hypovolemic hypotonic 
hyponatremia is the cerebral salt-wasting syndrome that 
accompanies subarachnoid hemorrhage and, less com-
monly, other cerebral processes such as meningitis or 
stroke. In these cases, the degree of renal sodium excre-
tion can be remarkable, and large amounts of saline, 
hypertonic saline, or oral sodium may need to be given 
in a judicious fashion in order to avoid complications 
from cerebral edema.
HYPOKALEMIA
Hypokalemia, deﬁned as a serum potassium level <3.5 
mmol/L (<3.5 meq/L), occurs either because of exces-
sive potassium losses (from the kidneys or gut) or due 
to an abnormal potassium distribution between the 
intracellular and extracellular spaces. At very low lev-
els (<1.5 mmol/L), hypokalemia may be life threaten-
ing due to the risk of cardiac arrhythmia and may pres-
ent neurologically with severe muscle weakness and 
paralysis. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is a rare disor-
der caused by excessive intracellular potassium uptake 
in the setting of a calcium or sodium channel muta-
tion. Treatment of hypokalemia is dependent on the 
etiology but usually includes replacement of potassium 
through oral or IV routes as well as correcting the cause 
of potassium balance problems (e.g., eliminating β2-
adrenergic agonist medications).
HYPERKALEMIA
Hyperkalemia is deﬁned as a serum potassium level 
>5.5 mmol/L (>5.5 meq/L) and can neurologically 
present as muscle weakness with or without paresthesias. 
Hyperkalemia becomes life threatening when it produces 
electrocardiographic abnormalities such as peaked T waves 
or a widened QRS complex. In these cases, prompt treat-
ment is essential and consists of strategies that protect the 
heart against arrhythmias (calcium gluconate administra-
tion); promote potassium redistribution into cells (with 
glucose, insulin, and β2-agonist medications); and increase 
Special Issues in Inpatient Neurologic Consultation
665
 
CHAPTER 50
potassium removal (through sodium polystyrene sulfo-
nate, loop diuretics, or hemodialysis).
CALCIUM DISTURBANCES
Hypercalcemia usually occurs in the setting of either 
hyperparathyroidism or systemic malignancy. Neuro-
logic manifestations include encephalopathy as well as 
muscle weakness due to reduced neuromuscular excit-
ability. Seizures can occur but are more common in 
states of low calcium.
Hypocalcemia in adults often follows surgical treatment 
of the thyroid or parathyroid. Seizures and altered mental 
status dominate the neurologic picture and usually resolve 
with calcium repletion. Tetany is due to spontaneous, 
repetitive action potentials in peripheral nerves and remains 
the classic sign of symptomatic hypocalcemia.
MAGNESIUM DISTURBANCES
Disorders of magnesium are difﬁcult to correlate with 
serum levels because a very small amount of total-body 
magnesium is located in the extracellular space. Hypomag-
nesemia presents neurologically with seizures, tremor, and 
myoclonus. When intractable seizures occur in the setting 
of hypomagnesemia, only administration of magnesium 
will lead to resolution. High levels of magnesium, in con-
trast, lead to CNS depression. Hypermagnesemia usually 
only occurs in the setting of renal failure or magnesium 
administration and can lead to confusion and muscular 
paralysis when severe.
CONSULTATIONS REGARDING 
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
DYSFUNCTION
ENTRAPMENT NEUROPATHIES
Polyneuropathy is a common cause of outpatient neu-
rologicconsultation (Chap. 45). In the inpatient set-
ting, however, mononeuropathies are more frequent, 
especially the entrapment neuropathies that compli-
cate many surgical procedures and medical conditions. 
Median neuropathy at the wrist (carpal tunnel syn-
drome) is the most frequent entrapment neuropathy 
by far, but it is rarely a cause for inpatient consultation. 
Mechanisms for perioperative mononeuropathy include 
traction, compression, and ischemia of the nerve. Imag-
ing with MR neurography may allow these causes to 
be distinguished deﬁnitively. In all cases of mononeu-
ropathy, the diagnosis can be made through the clinical 
examination and then conﬁrmed with electrodiagnostic 
studies in the subacute period, if necessary. Treatment 
consists mainly of avoidance of repetitive trauma but 
may also include surgical approaches to relieve pressure 
on the nerve.
RADIAL NEUROPATHY
Radial nerve injury classically presents with weakness 
of extension of the wrist and ﬁngers (“wrist drop”) 
with or without more proximal weakness of exten-
sor muscles of the upper extremity, depending on the 
site of injury. Sensory loss is in the distribution of the 
radial nerve, which includes the dorsum of the hand 
(Fig. 50-3A). Compression at the level of the axilla, 
e.g., resulting from use of crutches, includes weakness 
of the triceps, brachioradialis, and supinator muscles in 
addition to wrist drop. A more common site of com-
pression occurs in the spiral groove of the upper arm 
in the setting of a humerus fracture or from sleeping 
with the arm draped over a bench or chair (“Saturday 
night palsy”). Sparing of the triceps is the rule when the 
nerve is injured in this location. Because extensors of 
the upper extremity are injured preferentially in radial 
nerve injury, these lesions may be mistaken for the 
pyramidal distribution of weakness that accompanies 
upper motor neuron lesions from brain or spinal cord 
processes.
ULNAR NEUROPATHY
Compression of the ulnar nerve is the second most 
common entrapment neuropathy after carpal tunnel 
syndrome. The most frequent site of compression is at 
the elbow where the nerve passes superﬁcially in the 
ulnar groove. Symptoms usually begin with tingling 
in the ulnar distribution, including the fourth and ﬁfth 
digits of the hand (Fig. 50-3B). Sensory symptoms may 
be worsened by elbow ﬂexion due to increased pressure 
on the nerve, hence the tendency of patients to com-
plain of increasing paresthesias at night when the arm 
is ﬂexed at the elbow during sleep. Motor dysfunc-
tion can be disabling and involves most of the intrin-
sic hand muscles, limiting dexterity and strength of 
grasp and pinch. Etiologies of ulnar entrapment include 
trauma to the nerve (hitting the “funny bone”), mal-
positioning during anesthesia for surgical procedures, 
and chronic arthritis of the elbow. When a periopera-
tive ulnar nerve injury is considered, stretch injury or 
trauma to the lower trunk of the brachial plexus should 
be entertained as well since its symptoms can mimic 
those of an ulnar neuropathy. If the clinical examination 
is equivocal, electrodiagnostic studies can deﬁnitively 
distinguish between plexus and ulnar nerve lesions a few 
weeks after the injury. Conservative methods of treat-
ment are often the ﬁrst step, but a variety of surgical 
approaches may be effective, including anterior ulnar 
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
666
nerve transposition and release of the ﬂexor carpi ulnaris 
aponeurosis.
PERONEAL NEUROPATHY
The peroneal nerve winds around the head of the ﬁb-
ula in the leg below the lateral aspect of the knee, and 
its superﬁcial location at this site makes it vulnerable to 
trauma. Patients present with weakness of foot dorsi-
ﬂexion (“foot drop”) as well as with weakness in ever-
sion but not inversion at the ankle. Sparing of inversion, 
which is a function of muscles innervated by the tibial 
nerve, helps to distinguish peroneal neuropathies from 
L5 radiculopathies. Sensory loss involves the lat-
eral aspect of the leg as well as the dorsum of the foot 
(Fig. 50-3C). Fractures of the ﬁbular head may be 
responsible for peroneal neuropathies, but in the peri-
operative setting poorly applied braces exerting pressure 
on the nerve while the patient is unconscious are more 
often responsible. Tight-ﬁtting stockings or casts of the 
upper leg can also cause a peroneal neuropathy, and 
thin individuals and those with recent weight loss are at 
increased risk.
PROXIMAL FEMORAL NEUROPATHY
Lesions of the proximal femoral nerve are relatively 
uncommon but may present dramatically with weak-
ness of hip ﬂexion, quadriceps atrophy, weakness of knee 
extension (often manifesting with leg-buckling falls), and 
an absent patellar reﬂex. Adduction of the thigh is spared 
as these muscles are supplied by the obturator nerve, 
thereby distinguishing a femoral neuropathy from a more 
proximal lumbosacral plexus lesion. The sensory loss 
found is in the distribution of the femoral nerve sensory 
branches on the anterior part of the thigh (Fig. 50-3D). 
Compressive lesions from retroperitoneal hematomas or 
masses are common, and a CT of the pelvis should be 
obtained in all cases of femoral neuropathy to exclude 
these conditions. Bleeding into the pelvis resulting in 
hematoma can occur spontaneously, following trauma, 
or after intrapelvic surgeries such as renal transplantation. 
In intoxicated or comatose patients, stretch injuries to the 
femoral nerve are seen following prolonged, extreme hip 
ﬂexion or extension. Rarely, attempts at femoral vein 
or arterial puncture can be complicated by injury to this 
nerve.
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Sensory distribution
of the radial nerve
Radial nerve
A
B
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of arm
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Superficial branch
Peroneal nerve
Deep peroneal
nerve
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of calf
Superficial peroneal nerve
Sensory distribution of
the peroneal nerve
Sensory distribution
of the femoral nerve
Anterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
Medial femoral
cutaneous nerve
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Ulnar nerve
E
D
C
Sensory distribution of the ulnar nerve
Saphenous nerve
FIGURE 50-3
Sensory distribution of peripheral nerves commonly affected by entrapment neuropathies. A. Radial nerve. B. Ulnar nerve. 
C. Peroneal nerve. D. Femoral nerve. E. Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve.
Special Issues in Inpatient Neurologic Consultation
667
 
CHAPTER 50
LATERAL FEMORAL CUTANEOUS NERVE
The symptoms of lateral femoral cutaneous nerve entrap-
ment, commonly known as “meralgia paresthetica,” 
include sensory loss, pain, and dysesthesia in part of the 
area supplied by the nerve (Fig. 50-3E). There is no 
motor component to the nerve, and therefore weakness 
is not a part of this syndrome. Symptoms often are wors-
ened by standing or walking. Compression of the nerve 
occurs where it enters the leg near the inguinal ligament, 
usually in the setting of tight-ﬁtting belts, pants, corsets, 
or recent weight gain, including that of pregnancy. The 
differential diagnosis of these symptoms includes hip 
problems such as trochanteric bursitis.
OBSTETRIC NEUROPATHIES
Pregnancy and delivery place women at special risk 
for a variety of nerve injuries. Radiculopathy due to 
a herniated lumbar disc is not common during preg-
nancy, but compressive injuries of the lumbosacral 
plexus do occur secondary to either the fetal head 
passing through the pelvis or the use of forceps dur-
ing delivery. These plexus injuries are more frequent 
with cephalopelvic disproportion and often present 
with a painless unilateral foot drop which must be dis-
tinguished from a peroneal neuropathy caused by pres-
sure on the nerve while in lithotomy position during 
delivery. Other compressive mononeuropathies of 
pregnancy include meralgia paresthetica, carpal tun-
nel syndrome, femoral neuropathy when the thigh 
is abducted severely in an effort to facilitate delivery 
of the fetal shoulder, and obturator neuropathy dur-
ing lithotomy positioning. The latter presents with 
medial thigh pain that may be accompanied by weak-
ness of thigh adduction. There is also a clear association 
between pregnancy and an increased frequency of idio-
pathic facial palsy (Bell’s palsy).
 Andre Furtado  ■   William P. Dillon 
668
 FIGURE 51-1  
 Limbic encephalitis ( Chap. 44 ) 
Coronal ( A ,  B ), axial ﬂ uid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) 
( C ,  D ), and axial T2-weighted ( E ) MR images demonstrate 
abnormal high signal involving the bilateral mesial temporal 
 ATLAS OF NEUROIMAGING 
 CHAPTER 51 
lobes ( arrow-heads ) including the hippocampi (left greater 
than right) without signiﬁ cant mass effect ( arrows ). There was 
no enhancement on postgadolinium images (not shown). 
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
669
FIGURE 51-2 
CNS tuberculosis 
Axial T2-weighted MRI (A) demonstrates multiple lesions 
(arrows) with peripheral high signal and central low signal, 
located predominantly in the cortex and subcortical white mat-
ter, as well as in the basal ganglia.
Axial T1-weighted MR images postgadolinium (B, C) dem-
onstrate ring enhancement of the lesions (arrows) and addi-
tional lesions in the subarachnoid space (arrowheads).
FIGURE 51-1
(continued )
Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the cervical spine (D) 
demonstrates a hypointense lesion in the subarachnoid 
space at the level of T5 (arrow).
Sagittal T1-weighted MR image postgadolinium of the cervi-
cal spine (E) demonstrates enhancement of the lesion in the 
subarachnoid space at the level of T5 (arrow).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
670
FIGURE 51-3 
Neurosyphilis
Case I
Axial T2-weighted MR images (A, B) demonstrate well-
deﬁned areas of abnormal high signal in the basal ganglia 
bilaterally and in a wedge-shaped distribution in the right 
parietal lobe (arrows).
Axial (C, D) T1-weighted images postgadolinium.
Coronal (E, F) T1-weighted images postgadolinium demon-
strate irregular ring enhancement of the lesions (arrows).
FIGURE 51-2
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
671
FIGURE 51-3
(continued )
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
672
FIGURE 51-4 
Neurosyphilis
Case II
Axial T2-weighted MRI (A) demonstrates a dural-based, 
peripherally hyperintense and centrally hypointense lesion 
located lateral to the left frontal lobe (arrow).
Axial (B) and coronal (C) T1-weighted MR images postgad-
olinium demonstrate peripheral enhancement of the lesion 
(arrows).
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
673
FIGURE 51-5 
Histoplasmosis of the pons
Axial FLAIR (A) and T2-weighted (B) MR images demonstrate 
a low signal mass in the right pons (arrows) with surrounding 
vasogenic edema.
Axial T1-weighted MR image postgadolinium (C) demon-
strates ring enhancement of the lesion in the right pons 
(arrow). Of note, there was no evidence of restricted diffusion 
(not shown).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
674
FIGURE 51-6 
Coccidiomycosis meningitis 
Axial postcontrast CT (A) and axial (B) and coronal (C) T1-
weighted MR images postgadolinium demonstrate enhancement 
of the perimesencephalic cisterns (arrows), as well as the sylvian 
and interhemispheric ﬁssures.
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
675
FIGURE 51-7 
Candidiasis in a newborn 
Axial T2-weighted MR image (A) demonstrates multiple 
punctate foci of low signal diffusely distributed in the brain 
parenchyma (arrowhead).
Axial T1-weighted MR images postgadolinium (B, C) demon-
strate marked enhancement of the lesions (arrowheads).
ADC map (D, E) demonstrates restricted diffusion of water 
molecules in the lesions (arrowheads).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
676
FIGURE 51-8 
CNS aspergillosis
Axial FLAIR MR images (A, B) demonstrate multiple areas of 
abnormal high signal in the basal ganglia as well as cortex 
and subcortical white matter (arrows). There is also abnormal 
high signal in the subarachnoid space adjacent to the lesions 
(arrowheads) that can correspond to blood or high protein 
content.
Axial T2-weighted MR images (C, D) demonstrate intrinsic 
low signal in the lesions (arrows), suggesting the presence 
of blood products. Some of the lesions also show vasogenic 
edema. Coronal (E) and axial (F) T1-weighted MR images 
postgadolinium demonstrate peripheral enhancement of the 
lesions (arrows).
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
677
FIGURE 51-9 
Invasive sinonasal aspergillosis 
Axial T2-weighted MR image (A) demonstrates an irregu-
larly shaped low signal lesion involving the left orbital apex 
(arrow).
B. T1-weighted image pregadolinium demonstrates low sig-
nal in left anterior clinoid process (arrow).
C. T1-weighted image postgadolinium demonstrates enhance-
ment of lesion (arrow).
FIGURE 51-8
(continued )
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
678
FIGURE 51-10 
Behçet’s disease 
Axial FLAIR MRI demonstrates abnormal high signal involv-
ing the anterior pons (arrow); following gadolinium adminis-
tration, the lesion was nonenhancing (not shown). Brainstem 
lesions are typical of Behçet’s disease, caused primarily by 
vasculitis and in some cases demyelinating lesions.
FIGURE 51-11 
Neurosarcoid
Case I
Coronal (A) and axial (B) T1-weighted images postgado-
linium with fat suppression demonstrate a homogeneously 
enhancing well-circumscribed mass centered in the left 
Meckel’s cave (arrows).
FIGURE 51-9
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
679
FIGURE 51-12 
Neurosarcoid 
Case II
Axial (A, B) and sagittal (C) T1-weighted images postgado-
linium with fat suppression demonstrate a homogeneously 
enhancing mass involving the hypothalamus and the pituitary 
stalk (arrows).
FIGURE 51-13 
Neurosarcoid 
Case III
Axial FLAIR images (A–E) demonstrate abnormal high signal 
and slight expansion in the midbrain, dorsal pons, and pineal 
region (arrows) without signiﬁcant mass effect.
Sagittal T1-weighted images postgadolinium (F) with fat sup-
pression demonstrate abnormal enhancement in the mid-
brain, dorsal pons, and pineal region (arrows).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
680
FIGURE 51-13
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
681
FIGURE 51-14 
Neurosarcoid
Case IV
Axial T2-weighted images (A–D) demonstrate numerous 
areas of abnormal hyperintensity involving the corpus cal-
losum, left internal capsule and globus pallidus, bilateral 
cerebral peduncles, bilateral gyrus rectus, right frontal lobe 
periventricular white matter, and patchy areas in bilateral 
temporal lobes.
T1-weighted images postgadolinium (E–H) demonstrate 
abnormal enhancement of those areas with high T2 signal.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
682
FIGURE 51-14
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
683
FIGURE 51-15 
Histiocytosis
Sagittal T1-weighted image (A) demonstrates enlargement of 
the pituitary stalk (arrow) and absence of the posterior pitu-
itary intrinsic T1 hyperintensity (arrowhead).
Sagittal and coronal T1-weighted images postgadolinium (B, 
C) demonstrate enhancement of the pituitary stalk and infun-
dibulum (arrows).
FIGURE 51-16 
Middle cerebral artery stenosis (Chap. 27)
Time-of-ﬂight (TOF) MR angiography (MRA) (A, B) reveals 
narrowing within the left M1 segment that is likely secondary 
to atherosclerosis (arrows).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
684
FIGURE 51-17 
Lacunar infarction (Chap. 27)
Axial noncontrast CT (A) demonstrates abnormal hypoden-
sity involving the left anterior putamen and anterior limb of 
internal capsule with ex-vacuo dilatation of the adjacent 
frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle, suggestive of an old 
infarction (arrow). A small area of slight hypodensity is also 
seen in the posterior limb of the right internal capsule that 
can correspond to an acute infarct (arrowhead).
Axial FLAIR MRI (B) demonstrates abnormal high sig-
nal involving the left anterior putamen and anterior limb of 
internal capsule with ex-vacuo dilatation of the adjacent 
frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle, suggestive of an old 
infarction (arrow). A small area of slight hyperintensity is also 
seen in the posterior limb of the right internal capsule that 
can correspond to an acute lacunar infarct (arrowhead).
Diffusion-weighted image (C) and apparent diffusion coefﬁ-
cient (ADC) map (D) demonstrate restricted water motion in 
the lesion of the posterior limb of the right internal capsule, 
strongly suggestive for an acute lacunar infarct (arrowhead). 
There is no evidence of restricted diffusion in the old infarct 
(arrow).
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
685
FIGURE 51-18 
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcor-
tical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) (Chap. 
27)
Axial T2-weighted MR images (A, B) demonstrate multiple 
patchy areas of abnormal high signal in the periventricular 
white matter (arrows). Coronal FLAIR MRI (C, D) demon-
strates multiple patchy areas of abnormal high signal in the 
periventricular white matter bilaterally, including the temporal 
lobes (arrows). In some of these areas, there are small areas 
of tissue loss (encephalomalacia) (arrowheads).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
686
FIGURE 51-19 
CNS vasculitis (Chap. 27)
Axial noncontrast CT (A) demonstrates a large hyperdense 
intraparenchymal hematoma surrounded by hypodense vaso-
genic edema in the right parietal lobe.
Axial T2-weighted MRI (B) demonstrates a large hypointense 
intraparenchymal hematoma surrounded by hyperintense 
vasogenic edema in the right parietal lobe.
Conventional angiography (C) demonstrates multiple seg-
ments of intracranial arterial narrowing, some of which have 
associated adjacent areas of focal arterial dilatation. These 
abnormalities are suggestive of vasculitis.
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
687
FIGURE 51-20 
Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis (Chap. 27)
Noncontrast CT of the head (A) demonstrates increased den-
sity in the superior sagittal sinus, suggestive of thrombosis 
(arrow), and small linear hyperdensities in some temporal 
lobe sulci, suggestive of subarachnoid hemorrhage (arrow-
heads).
Axial T1-weighted MRI (B) demonstrates absence of ﬂow 
void in the superior sagittal sinus, suggestive of thrombosis.
Coronal FLAIR images (C, D) demonstrate areas of abnormal 
high signal involving the gray and the subcortical white mat-
ter of the right frontal and left parietal lobes, as well as the 
adjacent sulci. These ﬁndings are suggestive of vasogenic 
edema with subarachnoid hemorrhage (arrowheads).
Diffusion-weighted images (E, F) and ADC maps (G, H) dem-
onstrate restricted diffusion of the abnormal areas on FLAIR, 
suggestive of infarct.
Phase-contrast venography of the brain (I) demonstrates 
absence of signal in the superior sagittal sinus down to the 
torcular herophili, and left transverse sinus and jugular vein.
Axial (J) and coronal (K) T1-weighted images postgadolinium 
demonstrate a ﬁlling defect in the superior sagittal sinus, 
suggestive of thrombosis.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
688
FIGURE 51-20
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
689
FIGURE 51-20
(continued )
FIGURE 51-21 
Multiple system atrophy (Chap. 30)
Axial T2-weighted MR image (A) reveals symmetric poorly 
circumscribed abnormal high signal in the middle cerebellar 
peduncles bilaterally (arrowheads).
Sagittal T1-weighted MR image (B) demonstrates pontine 
atrophy and enlarged cerebellar ﬁssures as a result of cer-
ebellar atrophy (arrows).
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
690
FIGURE 51-22 
Huntington’s disease (Chap. 30)
Axial noncontrast CT (A) demonstrates symmetric bilateral 
severe atrophy involving the caudate nuclei, putamen, and 
globus pallidi bilaterally with consequent enlargement of the 
frontal horns of the lateral ventricles (arrows). There is also 
diffuse prominence of the sulci indicating generalized cortical 
atrophy.
Axial (B) and coronal (C) FLAIR images demonstrate bilateral 
symmetric abnormal high signal in the caudate and putamen.
Coronal T1-weighted image (D) demonstrates enlarged fron-
tal horns with abnormal conﬁguration. Also note diffusely 
decreased marrow signal, which could represent anemia or 
myeloproliferative disease.
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
691
FIGURE 51-23 
Bell’s palsy (Chap. 34)
Axial T1-weighted images postgadolinium with fat suppres-
sion (A–C) demonstrate diffuse smooth linear enhancement 
along the left facial nerve, involving the second and third 
segments (genu, tympanic, and mastoid) within the tempo-
ral bone (arrows). Note that there is no evidence of a mass 
lesion. A potential pitfall for facial nerve enhancement in the 
stylomastoid foramen is the enhancement of the stylomas-
toid artery that enters the foramen and supplies the tympanic 
cavity, the tympanic antrum, mastoid cells, and the semicir-
cular canals.
Coronal T1-weighted images postgadolinium with fat sup-
pression (D, E) demonstrate the course of the enhancing 
facial nerve (arrows). Although these ﬁndings are highly sug-
gestive of Bell’s palsy, the diagnosis is established on clinical 
grounds.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
692
FIGURE 51-24 
Spinal cord infarction (Chap. 35)
Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the lumbar spine (A) dem-
onstrates poorly deﬁned areas of abnormal high signal in the 
conus medullaris and mild cord expansion (arrow).
T1-weighted MR image of the lumbar spine postgadolinium 
(B) demonstrates mild enhancement (arrow).
Sagittal diffusion-weighted MR image of the lumbar spine 
(C) demonstrates restricted diffusion (arrow) in the areas of 
abnormal high signal on the T2-weighted image (A).
FIGURE 51-25 
Acute transverse myelitis (Chap. 35)
Sagittal T2-weighted MR image (A) demonstrates abnormal 
high signal in the cervical cord extending from C1 to T1 with 
associated cord expansion (arrows).
Sagittal T1-weighted MR image postgadolinium (B) demon-
strates abnormal enhancement in the posterior half of the 
cord from C2 to T1 (arrows).
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
693
FIGURE 51-26 
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) (Chap. 39)
Axial T2-weighted (A) and coronal FLAIR (B) images demon-
strate abnormal areas of high signal involving predominantly 
the subcortical white matter of the frontal lobe bilaterally, and 
left caudate head.
Following administration of gadolinium, corresponding axial 
(C) and coronal (D) T1-weighted images demonstrate irregu-
lar enhancement consistent with blood-brain barrier break-
down and inﬂammation; some lesions show incomplete rim 
enhancement, typical for demyelination.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
694
FIGURE 51-27 
Baló’s concentric sclerosis (a variant of multiple sclerosis) 
(Chap. 39)
Coronal FLAIR MRI (A) demonstrates multiple areas of 
abnormal high signal in the supratentorial white matter bilat-
erally. The lesions are ovoid in shape, perpendicular to the 
orientation of the lateral ventricles, and with little mass effect.
Axial (B) and sagittal (C–E) T2-weighted MR images dem-
onstrate multiple areas of abnormal high signal in the supra-
tentorial white matter bilaterally, as well as the involvement 
of the body and splenium of the corpus callosum and the 
callosal-septal interface (arrowhead). Some of the lesions 
reveal concentric layers, typical of Baló’s concentric sclero-
sis (arrows).
Sagittal (F) and axial (G, H) T1-weighted MR images post-
gadolinium demonstrate abnormal enhancement of all lesions 
with some of the lesions demonstrating concentric ring enhance-
ment (arrows).
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
695
FIGURE 51-27
(continued )
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
696
FIGURE 51-28 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy (Chap. 40)
Axial FLAIR (A) demonstrates focal area of abnormal high 
signal involving the gray and white matter in the left frontal 
lobe. There is also a small area of abnormal high signal in the 
precentral gyrus.
Axial T1-weighted images (B, C) pre- and postgadolinium 
demonstrate cortical/pial enhancement in the region of high 
signal on FLAIR.
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
697
FIGURE 51-29 
Brachial plexopathy (Chap. 45)
Axial (A), sagittal (B), and coronal (C, D) short tau inversion 
recovery (STIR) MR images demonstrate abnormal enlarge-
ment and abnormal high signal involving the right C6, C7, 
and C8 nerve roots, and the trunks and divisions that origi-
nate from these roots (arrows).
Diffusion-weighted MR imaging (E) demonstrates abnormal 
reduced diffusion within the right C6, C7, and C8 nerve roots 
and their corresponding trunks and divisions (arrow). These 
ﬁndings are compatible with radiation-induced brachial 
plexopathy.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
698
FIGURE 51-29
(continued )
FIGURE 51-30 
Anterior dens dislocation
Sagittal CT demonstrates the tip of the dens below the ante-
rior arch of C2 (arrow), indicating anterior dislocation.
FIGURE 51-31 
CT facet fracture
Axial CT demonstrates fracture line along the C2 facet (arrow).
FIGURE 51-32 
Compression fracture
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI demonstrates compression frac-
ture of C7 (*) and high signal within the spinous processes 
of C6-C7 (arrows) and to a lesser degree C5-C6. This is sug-
gestive of interspinous ligament injury. Note the pad under 
the patient’s neck to maintain neck alignment during the 
scanning time.
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
699
A
B
FIGURE 51-33 
Epidural hematoma
Axial noncontrast CT (A) demonstrates a high-density epidu-
ral collection in the cervical spine (*), which is consistent with 
acute hemorrhage. Also noted is mass effect on the spinal 
cord (arrowheads). Sagittal reformatted CT image (B) demon-
strates the extension of the acute epidural hematoma (*) and 
a disk bulge (arrowhead), which further contributes to spinal 
canal narrowing. CT is the imaging procedure of choice to 
detect acute hematoma.
FIGURE 51-34 
Retropharyngeal soft tissue mass
Sagittal T1-weighted MRI demonstrates a hyperﬂexion frac-
ture with retropulsion of the posterior wall in the canal at C5 
and C6 (arrow). There is also a large retropharyngeal hema-
toma (*). The distance from the posterior wall of the airway 
to the anterior wall of the vertebral body should not measure 
more than 6 mm at C2 or more than 20 mm at C6 (mnemonic 
“6 at 2 and 20 at 6”).
FIGURE 51-35 
Jefferson fracture
Axial CT demonstrates four fracture lines (arrows) separating 
C1 in four parts. Jefferson fracture is usually caused by axial 
impact to the head such as diving in shallow water.
SECTION III
Diseases of the Nervous System
700
A
B
A
B
FIGURE 51-36 
Ligament injury after trauma
Coronal CT reconstruction demonstrates abnormal asymme-
try between the dens and the lateral masses of C1 indicating 
transverse ligament rupture.
FIGURE 51-37 
Odontoid fracture
Sagittal CT demonstrates disruption of the main reference 
cervical lines. 1: Anterior vertebral body line; 2: Posterior ver-
tebral body line; 3: Spinolaminar line.
FIGURE 51-38 
Pathologic fracture
Sagittal T1-weighted MRI (A) demonstrates wedge-shaped 
T6 vertebral body (arrow). Sagittal postcontrast T1-weighted 
MRI (B) depicts tumor extension into the epidural space and 
the involvement of the posterior arch (*), which are highly 
suggestive of metastatic or primary bone tumor.
FIGURE 51-39 
Sacral insufﬁciency fracture
Axial T2-weighted MRI (A) and T1-weighted MRI (B) dem-
onstrate symmetric high T2 and low T1 signal involving the 
sacral alae longitudinally (arrows).
 
CHAPTER 51
Atlas of Neuroimaging
701
A
B
FIGURE 51-40 
Subdural hematoma
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI (A) and axial noncontrast T1-weighted MRI (B) demonstrate subdural collection in the lumbosacral 
region (**). Note that the epidural fat is compressed but not involved (arrow).
A
B
FIGURE 51-41 
Teardrop fracture
Sagittal CT (A) demonstrates fracture line separating the antero-inferior corner of C6 (arrow). Sagittal T2-weighted MRI (B) dis-
plays cord injury (arrow).
This page intentionally left blank 
SECTION IV
CHRONIC FATIGUE  
SYNDROME
704
 CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME 
 CHAPTER 52 
 Gijs Bleijenberg 
■  Jos W.M. van der Meer 
 DEFINITION 
 Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a disorder characterized 
by persistent and unexplained fatigue resulting in severe 
impairment in daily functioning. Besides intense fatigue, 
most patients with CFS report concomitant symptoms 
such as pain, cognitive dysfunction, and unrefreshing sleep. 
Additional symptoms can include headache, sore throat, 
tender lymph nodes, muscle aches, joint aches, feverish-
ness, difﬁ culty sleeping, psychiatric problems, allergies, and 
abdominal cramps. Criteria for the diagnosis of CFS have 
been developed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention  ( Table 52-1 ) . 
 EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 CFS is seen worldwide, with adult prevalence rates 
varying between 0.2 and 0.4%. In the United States, the 
prevalence is higher in women, members of minority 
groups (African and Native Americans), and individuals 
with lower levels of education and occupational status. 
Approximately 75% of all CFS patients are women. 
The mean age of onset is between 29 and 35 years. It is 
probable that many patients go undiagnosed and/or do 
not seek help. 
 ETIOLOGY 
 There are numerous hypotheses about the etiology of 
CFS; there is no deﬁ nitively indentiﬁ ed cause. Distin-
guishing between predisposing, precipitating, and per-
petuating factors in CFS helps to provide a framework 
for understanding this complex condition  ( Table 52-2 ) . 
 Predisposing factors 
 Physical inactivity and trauma in childhood tend to 
increase the risk of CFS in adults. Neuroendocrine dys-
function may be associated with childhood trauma, 
reﬂ ecting a biological correlate of vulnerability. Psychiatric 
illness and physical hyperactivity in adulthood raise the 
risk of CFS in later life. Twin studies suggest a familial 
predisposition to CFS, but no causative genes have been 
identiﬁ ed. 
 Precipitating factors 
 Physical or psychological stress may elicit the onset of 
CFS. Most patients report an infection (usually a ﬂ u-
like illness or infectious mononucleosis) as the trigger of 
their fatigue. Relatively high percentages of CFS follow 
Q fever and Lyme disease. However, no differences were 
TABLE 52-1 
 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR CHRONIC FATIGUE 
SYNDROME 
Characterized by Persistent or Relapsing Unexplained 
Chronic Fatigue 
Fatigue lasts for at least 6 months
Fatigue is of new or deﬁ nite onset
Fatigue is not the result of an organic disease or of 
continuing exertion
Fatigue is not alleviated by rest
Fatigue results in a substantial reduction in previous 
occupational, educational, social, and personal activities
Four or more of the following symptoms, concurrently 
present for 6 months:
impaired memory or concentration, sore throat, tender 
cervical or axillary lymph nodes, muscle pain, pain in 
several joints, new headaches, unrefreshing sleep, or 
malaise after exertion
Exclusion Criteria 
Medical condition explaining fatigue
Major depressive disorder (psychotic features) or bipolar 
disorder
Schizophrenia, dementia, or delusional disorder
Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa
Alcohol or substance abuse
Severe obesity (BMI >40)
 
CHAPTER 52
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
705
found in Epstein-Barr virus load and immunologic reac-
tivity in individuals who developed CFS and those who 
did not. While antecedent infections are associated with 
CFS, a direct microbial causality is unproven and unlikely. 
A recent study identiﬁed a murine leukemia virus-related 
retrovirus (XMRV); however, several subsequent studies 
have failed to conﬁrm this result. Patients also often report 
other precipitating somatic events such as serious injury, 
surgery, pregnancy, or childbirth. Serious life events such 
as the loss of a loved one or a job, military combat, and 
other stressful situations may also precipitate CFS. A third 
of all patients cannot recall a trigger.
Perpetuating factors
Once CFS has developed, numerous factors may impede 
recovery. Physicians may contribute to chronicity by 
ordering unnecessary diagnostic procedures, by persistently 
suggesting psychological causes, and by not acknowledging 
CFS as a diagnosis.
A patient’s focus on illness and avoidance of activities 
may perpetuate symptoms. A ﬁrm belief in a physical 
cause, a strong focus on bodily sensations, and a poor 
sense of control over symptoms may also prolong or 
exacerbate the fatigue and functional impairment. In 
most patients, inactivity is caused by negative illness 
perceptions rather than by poor physical ﬁtness. Solic-
itous behavior of others may reinforce a patient’s illness-
related perceptions and behavior. A lack of social 
support is another known perpetuating factor.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The pathophysiology of CFS is unclear. Neuroimaging 
studies have reported that CFS is associated with reduced 
gray matter volume, associated with a decline in physical 
activity; these changes were partially reversed following 
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). In addition, func-
tional MRI data have suggested that abnormal patterns 
of activation correlate with self-reported problems with 
information processing. Neurophysiologic studies have 
shown altered CNS activation patterns during muscle 
contraction.
Evidence for immunologic dysfunction is inconsis-
tent. Modest elevations in titers of antinuclear antibodies, 
reductions in immunoglobulin subclasses, deﬁciencies 
in mitogen-driven lymphocyte proliferation, reductions 
in natural killer cell activity, disturbances in cytokine 
production, and shifts in lymphocyte subsets have been 
described. None of these immune ﬁndings appear in most 
patients, nor do any correlate with the severity of CFS. 
In theory, symptoms of CFS could result from exces-
sive production of a cytokine, such as interleukin 1, that 
induces asthenia and other ﬂulike symptoms; however, 
compelling data in support of this hypothesis are lacking.
There is some evidence that CFS patients have mild 
hypocortisolism, the degree of which is associated with 
a poorer response to CBT.
Discrepancies in perceived and actual cognitive per-
formance are a consistent ﬁnding in patients with CFS.
DIAGNOSIS
In addition to a thorough history, a systematic physical 
examination is warranted to exclude disorders causing 
fatigue (e.g., endocrine disorders, neoplasms, heart fail-
ure, etc.). The heart rate of CFS patients is often slightly 
above normal. Laboratory tests primarily serve to exclude 
other diagnoses; there is no test that can diagnose CFS. 
The following laboratory screen usually sufﬁces: com-
plete blood count; ESR, CRP; serum creatinine, elec-
trolytes, calcium and iron; blood glucose; creatine kinase; 
liver function tests; TSH; anti-gliadin antibodies; urinaly-
sis. Serology for viral or bacterial infections is usually not 
helpful. No speciﬁc abnormalities have been identiﬁed 
on MRI or CT scans. CFS is a constellation of symptoms 
without any pathognomonic features, and remains a diag-
nosis of exclusion.
Bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and substance abuse 
exclude a diagnosis of CFS, as do eating disorders, 
TABLE 52-2 
PREDISPOSING, PRECIPITATING, AND 
PERPETUATING FACTORS IN CHRONIC FATIGUE 
SYNDROME
TIME
Predisposing Factors
Childhood trauma (sexual, physical, emotional abuse; 
emotional and physical neglect)
Physical inactivity during childhood
Premorbid psychiatric illness or psychopathology
Premorbid hyperactivity
    ↓
Precipitating Factors
Somatic events: infection (mononucleosis, Q fever, Lyme 
disease), surgery, pregnancy
Psychosocial stress, life events
    ↓
Perpetuating Factors
(Non)acknowledgement by physician
Negative self-efﬁcacy
Strong physical attributions
Strong focus on bodily symptoms
Fear of fatigue
(Lack of) social support
Low physical activity pattern
SECTION IV
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
706
unless these have been resolved 5 years or longer 
before symptom onset. Also, CFS is excluded if the 
chronic fatigue developed immediately after a depres-
sive episode. Depression developing in the course of the 
fatigue, however, does not preclude CFS. Co-occurring 
psychiatric disorder, especially anxiety and mood disor-
ders, is seen in 30–60% of all cases.
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
In cases of suspected CFS, the clinician should acknowl-
edge the impact of the patient’s symptoms on daily 
functioning. Disbelief or denial can provoke an exacer-
bation of genuine symptoms, which in turn strengthens 
the clinician’s disbelief, leading to an unfortunate cycle 
of miscommunication. The possibility of CFS should be 
considered if a patient fulﬁls all criteria (Table 52-1) and 
if other diagnoses have been excluded.
The patient should be asked to describe the symp-
toms (fatigue and accompanying symptoms) and their 
duration as well as the consequences (reduction in daily 
activities). To assess symptom severity and the extent 
of daily-life impairment, the patient should describe 
a typical day, from waking to retiring, and to contrast 
this with an average day prior to symptom onset. Next, 
potential fatigue-precipitating factors are sought. The 
severity of fatigue is difﬁcult to assess quantitatively; a 
brief questionnaire is often helpful (Fig. 52-1).
The patient should be informed of the current 
understanding of precipitating and perpetuating factors and 
effective treatments, and be offered general advice about 
disease management. If CBT for CFS is not available 
as an initial treatment option (see below) and depres-
sion and anxiety are present, these symptoms should 
be treated. For patients with headache, diffuse pain, 
and feverishness, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs 
may be helpful. Even modest improvements in symp-
toms can make an important difference in the patient’s 
degree of self-sufﬁciency and ability to appreciate life’s 
pleasures.
Controlled therapeutic trials have established that 
acyclovir, ﬂudrocortisone, galantamine, modaﬁnil, and 
IV immunoglobulin, among other agents, offer no sig-
niﬁcant beneﬁt in CFS. Countless anecdotes circulate 
regarding other traditional and nontraditional thera-
pies. It is important to guide patients away from those 
therapeutic modalities that are toxic, expensive, or 
unreasonable.
The patient should be encouraged to maintain regular 
sleep patterns, to remain as active as possible, and to 
gradually return to previous exercise and activity (work) 
levels.
TREATMENT 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
CBT and graded exercise therapy (GET) have been 
found to be the only beneficial interventions in CFS. 
Some patient groups argue against these approaches 
because of the implication that CFS is a purely mental 
disorder. CBT is a psychotherapeutic approach directed 
at changing condition-related cognitions and behaviors. 
CBT for CFS aims at changing a patient’s perpetuating fac-
tors by exploiting various techniques and components. 
How have you felt during the last two weeks?
Please rate all four statements and per statement check the box that reflects your situation best.
1.
I feel tired
Yes,
that is true
Yes,
that is true
Yes,
that is true
Yes,
that is true
 No,
 that is not true
2.
I tire easily
 No,
 that is not true
3.
I feel fit
 No,
 that is not true
4.
Physically I feel exhausted
 No,
 that is not true
Scoring:
1, 2 and 4: 
3: Reversed
Sum scores >18 indicate severe fatigue
Yes,
that is true
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
No,
that is not true
FIGURE 52-1
Shortened fatigue questionnaire (SFQ).
 
CHAPTER 52
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
707
It includes educating the patient about the etiologic 
model, setting goals, restoring fixed bedtime and 
wake-up time, challenging and changing fatigue- and 
activity-related cognitions, reducing symptom focusing, 
spreading activities evenly throughout the day, gradu-
ally increasing physical activity, planning a return to 
work, and resuming other activities. The intervention, 
which typically consists of 12–14 sessions spread over 
6 months, helps CFS patients gain control over their 
symptoms.
GET is based on the model of deconditioning and 
exercise intolerance and usually involves a home exer-
cise program that continues for 3–5 months. Walking 
or cycling is systematically increased, with set target 
heart rates. Evidence that deconditioning is the basis 
for symptoms in CFS is lacking, however. The primary 
component of CBT and GET that results in a reduction 
in fatigue is the change in the patient’s perception of 
fatigue and focus on symptoms.
CBT is generally the more complex treatment, which 
might explain why CBT studies tend to yield better 
improvement rates than GET trials.
Not all patients benefit from CBT or GET. Predictors of 
poor outcome are somatic comorbidity, current disability 
claims, and severe pain. CBT offered in an early stage of the 
illness reduces the burden of CFS for the patient as well 
as society in terms of decreased medical and disability-
related costs.
PROGNOSIS
Full recovery from untreated CFS is rare: the median 
annual recovery rate is 5% (range 0–31%) and the 
improvement rate 39% (range 8–63%). Patients with an 
underlying psychiatric disorder and those who continue 
to attribute their symptoms to an undiagnosed medical 
condition have poorer outcomes.
This page intentionally left blank 
SECTION V
PSYCHIATRIC  
DISORDERS
710
 BIOLOGY OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 53 
 Robert O. Messing 
■  John H. Rubenstein 
■  Eric J. Nestler 
 Psychiatric disorders are central nervous system diseases 
characterized by disturbances in emotion, cognition, 
motivation, and socialization. As a result of their high 
prevalence, early onset, and persistence, they contribute 
substantially to the burden of illness worldwide. Most 
psychiatric disorders are heterogeneous syndromes that 
currently lack well-deﬁ ned neuropathology and  bona 
ﬁ de biological markers. Therefore, diagnoses continue to 
be made solely from clinical observations using criteria 
in the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders of the American Psychiatric Association (2000), 4th 
edition, text revision (DSM-IVTR). Recent advances 
in neuroimaging are beginning to provide evidence of 
brain pathology, which may one day be used for diag-
nosis and for following treatment. Family, twin, and 
adoption studies have shown that all common psychi-
atric syndromes are highly heritable, with genetic risk 
comprising 20–90% of disease vulnerability. The epi-
demiology, genetics, and biology of four common psy-
chiatric disorders—autism, schizophrenia, mood disor-
ders, and drug addiction—are presented in this chapter. 
A detailed discussion of the clinical manifestations and 
treatment of schizophrenia and mood disorders can be 
found in  Chap. 54 . Further discussion of alcoholism can 
be found in  Chap. 56 , opiate addiction in  Chap. 57 , and 
cocaine and other drugs of abuse in  Chap. 58 .  
 AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS 
 The DSM-IVTR criteria for autism spectrum disorders 
(ASDs) require delays or abnormal functioning in social 
interactions, language as used in social communication, 
and symbolic or imaginative play, with onset prior to 
age 3. In addition to abnormal social behavior, ASDs are 
frequently, but not always, associated with reduced IQ 
and epilepsy. Individuals who exhibit some autism-like 
symptoms with relatively preserved cognitive function-
ing and language skills are described as having Asperger’s 
syndrome. 
 EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 There has been a dramatic increase in the diagnosis of 
ASDs, from ∼1/1000 (1950s–1990s) to a current level 
of ∼1/150. Whether this increase reﬂ ects increased 
disease prevalence remains uncertain; ongoing studies 
are searching for genetic, environmental, and sociologic 
mechanisms that may have contributed to this change. 
In the 1950s–1960s, psychological factors were held to 
underlie autism. This conception was largely debunked 
by the 1970s, with the demonstration that prenatal 
rubella and phenylketonuria can cause ASDs, and with 
evidence for the genetic etiology of ASDs from twin 
studies. There is ongoing public concern that vaccines 
in general, or mercury-based preservatives in vaccines, 
can cause ASDs; however, large epidemiologic analyses 
have not supported this as an etiology. Whether envi-
ronmental factors, such as perinatal infection and various 
toxins, for example, ethanol, illicit drugs, medications, 
and mutagenic agents, play a role is unclear. 
 NEUROPATHOLOGY AND NEUROIMAGING 
 ASDs show no deﬁ ning neuroanatomic phenotype 
that would indicate neurodevelopmental abnormalities. 
However, structural neuroimaging and histologic studies 
of postmortem brain provide evidence for anatomic 
defects. There is a modest increase in cerebrum growth 
(∼10%; affecting both the white and grey matter) during 
early childhood (years 1–3), with the largest effect in the 
frontal lobes; the growth rate then decreases with age. 
Cerebellar size is increased by about 7% in children 
under age 5 years, but is decreased in older patients, and 
there are reduced (∼30%) numbers of cerebellar Purkinje 
 
CHAPTER 53
Biology of Psychiatric Disorders
711
neurons. Finally, there is reduced cell size and increased 
cell density in the limbic areas of the brain.
GENETICS
ASDs are highly heritable; concordance rates in 
monozygotic twins (∼60–90%) are roughly tenfold 
higher than in dizygotic twins and siblings, and ﬁrst-
degree relatives show about ﬁftyfold increased risk 
TABLE 53-1
EXAMPLES OF GENES IMPLICATED IN AUTISM
GENE SYMBOL
GENE NAME
FUNCTION
PTEN
Phosphatase and tensin homolog
Signal transduction
Synaptic function
TSC1
Tuberous sclerosis 1
Signal transduction
Translation and protein stability
Synaptic function
TSC2
Tuberous sclerosis 2
Signal transduction
Translation and protein stability
Synaptic function
FMR1
Fragile X mental retardation 1
Translation and protein stability
Synaptic function
UBE3A
Ubiquitin protein ligase E3A
Translation and protein stability
Synaptic function
CNTN3
Contactin 3
Synaptic function
CNTN4
Contactin 4
Synaptic function
CNTNAP2
Contactin-associated protein-like 2
Synaptic function
NLGN3
Neuroligin 3
Synaptic function
NLGN4
Neuroligin 4
Synaptic function
NRXN1
Neurexin 1
Synaptic function
PCDH10
Protocadherin 10
Synaptic function
SHANK3
Shank 3
Synaptic function
SLC6A4
Serotonin transporter
Neurotransmitter signaling
AVPR1
Arginine vasopressin receptor 1
Neurotransmitter signaling
OXTR
Oxytosin receptor
Neurotransmitter signaling
CACNA1C
Voltage-gated calcium channel–alpha 1C subunit
Ion channel
CACNA1H
Voltage-gated calcium channel–alpha 1H subunit
Ion channel
SCN1A
Sodium channel, voltage-gated, type I, alpha subunit
Ion channel
SCN2A
Sodium channel, voltage-gated, type II, alpha subunit
Ion channel
SLC9A9
Sodium/hydrogen exchanger
Ion channel
DHCR7
7-Dehydrocholesterol reductase
Metabolism
PAH
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
Metabolism
ARX
Arx transcription factor
Gene expression
En2
Engrailed 2 transcription factor
Gene expression
MeCP2
Methyl CpG–binding protein 2 (Rett syndrome)
Gene expression
RNF8
Ring ﬁnger protein 8
Gene expression
for autism compared with prevalence in the general 
population. For unknown reasons, ASDs affect four 
times as many boys as girls. ASDs are also geneti-
cally heterogeneous. More than 20 known mutations, 
including copy number variations, account for about 
10–20% of all cases, though none of these causes indi-
vidually accounts for more than 1–2% (Table 53-1). 
Many of the genes linked to ASDs can also cause 
other illnesses. For instance, mutations in MeCP2, 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
712
FMR1, and TSC1&2 (see Table 53-1 for abbrevia-
tions) can cause mental retardation without ASDs, 
and alleles of certain genes, for example, neurexin 1, 
are associated with both ASDs and schizophrenia. 
It is likely that many cases of ASDs result from more 
complex genetic mechanisms, including inheritance of 
multiple genetic variants or epigenetic modiﬁcations.
PATHOGENESIS
Despite the genetic heterogeneity of ASDs, there are 
some common themes that may explain pathogenesis. 
These include mutations in proteins involved in the 
formation and function of synapses, control over 
the size and projections of neurons, production and 
signaling of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, 
the function of ion channels, general cell metabolism, 
gene expression, and protein synthesis (see Table 53-1). 
Many of these mutations have a clear relationship to 
activity-dependent neural responses and can affect the 
development of neural systems that underlie cogni-
tion and social behaviors. They may be detrimental by 
altering the balance of excitatory vs. inhibitory synaptic 
signaling in local and extended circuits, and by altering 
the mechanisms that control brain growth. Another 
class of mutations affects genes (e.g., PTEN and Tsc) 
that negatively regulate signaling from several types 
of extracellular stimuli, including those transduced by 
receptor tyrosine kinases. Their dysregulation can have 
pleiotropic effects, including altering brain and neuronal 
growth as well as synaptic development and function. 
With further understanding of pathogenesis and the 
deﬁnition of speciﬁc ASD subtypes, there is reason to 
believe that effective therapies will be identiﬁed, as in 
the case of dietary treatments for phenylketonuria. In 
addition, work in mouse models (e.g., with fragile X or 
Rett syndrome mutations) has suggested that autism-
like behavioral abnormalities can be reversed even in 
fully developed adult animals by reversing the underly-
ing pathology, which holds out hope for many affected 
individuals.
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Schizophrenia appears to be a heterogeneous collec-
tion of many distinct diseases, which remain poorly 
deﬁned but linked by common clinical features. Three 
major symptom clusters are seen in schizophrenia: posi-
tive, negative, and cognitive symptoms. Positive symp-
toms include hallucinations and delusions, experiences 
that are not characteristic of normal mental life. Nega-
tive symptoms represent deﬁcits in normal functions such 
as blunted affect, impoverished speech, asocial behavior, 
and diminished motivation. Cognitive symptoms include 
deﬁcits in working memory and cognitive control of 
behavior that often prove extremely disabling. Current 
antipsychotic drugs are efﬁcacious for positive symptoms 
only and generally lack efﬁcacy for negative and cogni-
tive symptoms.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Schizophrenia is common, affecting males and females 
roughly equally, with a worldwide prevalence of approx-
imately 1%. Environmental risks are thought to include 
prenatal exposure to viral infection (inﬂuenza), prenatal 
poor nutrition, perinatal hypoxia, psychotropic drug 
use (in particular, cannabis), and psychological stress. 
Advanced paternal age, birth order, and season of birth 
have also been implicated. However, none of these envi-
ronmental inﬂuences has a speciﬁc or strong association 
with most cases of schizophrenia.
NEUROPATHOLOGY AND NEUROIMAGING
The best-established neuropathologic ﬁnding in schizo-
phrenia is enlargement of the lateral ventricles of the 
cerebral hemispheres. This is accompanied by a reduc-
tion in cortical thickness. These abnormalities are not 
speciﬁc to schizophrenia and are seen in many other 
conditions, including many neurodegenerative dis-
orders. However, there is a general consensus that 
the reduction in cortical thickness in schizophrenia 
is associated with increased cell packing density and 
reduced neuropil (deﬁned as axons, dendrites, and 
glial cell processes) without an overt change in neu-
ronal cell number. Speciﬁc classes of interneurons in 
prefrontal cortex consistently show reduced expression 
of the gene encoding the enzyme glutamic acid decar-
boxylase 1 (GAD1), which synthesizes γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter 
in the brain. Functional imaging studies, by positron 
emission tomography (PET) or functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), show evidence of reduced 
metabolic or neural activity in the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex at rest and when performing psycho-
logical tests of executive function, including working 
memory. Alleles of two candidate risk genes (catechol-
O-methyltransferase [COMT] and metabotropic glu-
tamate receptor 3 [mGluR3]) are reported to affect 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity, but these ﬁndings 
need to be replicated in larger samples. Similar patho-
logic and brain imaging abnormalities are seen in several 
other brain regions, in particular, the hippocampus. 
There are also numerous reports of abnormalities in 
myelin and oligodendrocytes in the cerebral cortex of 
patients with schizophrenia.
 
CHAPTER 53
Biology of Psychiatric Disorders
713
GENETICS
Twins studies establish the heritability of schizophrenia, 
with co-inheritance at ∼50% for monozygotic twins 
and ∼10% for dizygotic twins. Genomewide linkage 
and association studies, and studies of copy number 
variation, have identiﬁed many regions and alleles that 
confer increased disease risk, particularly near genes 
on chromosome 22 (disrupted in schizophrenia 1 
[DISC1], COMT, neuregulin 1, the neuregulin recep-
tor ERBB4, and the DiGeorge [or velocardiofacial 
syndrome] region), and on chromosome 16p. The 
DiGeorge region deletions produce, in heterozygous 
form, a psychotic disorder with variable clinical fea-
tures and a moderate to strong degree of penetrance. 
In contrast, the contribution of each of the individual 
genes to schizophrenia remains to be established with 
certainty. Moreover, the responsible genes within the 
DiGeorge region have not yet been identiﬁed. What is 
clear is that none of these other alleles produce schizo-
phrenia with a high degree of penetrance. The current 
view in the ﬁeld is that multiple rare alleles, many or 
most with limited penetrance, likely contribute to risk of 
schizophrenia. As for ASDs, the same allele may be a risk 
factor for multiple disorders. For instance, duplication of 
chromosome 16p is associated with both schizophrenia 
and autism, while DiGeorge region deletions and the 
DISC1 locus on chromosome 22 are associated with 
schizophrenia, autism, and bipolar disorder.
PATHOGENESIS
There are several prevailing hypotheses about neuro-
chemical mechanisms underlying schizophrenia. A reduc-
tion in the function of cortical and perhaps hippocampal 
GABAergic interneurons ﬁts with reduced expression of 
glutamic acid decarboxylase. However, it is unknown 
whether this is a primary or compensatory feature of the 
disorder. Nevertheless, defects in parvalbumin-expressing 
GABAergic interneurons are known to reduce gamma-
frequency activity on the EEG, which is a feature of 
many people with schizophrenia. Reduced excitatory 
neurotransmitter (glutamate) function is posited based on 
psychotic and cognitive symptoms generated in humans 
exposed to ketamine or phencyclidine, which are non-
competitive antagonists of the NMDA subtype of glu-
tamate receptors. There are reports of altered levels of 
glutamate receptors or associated proteins in the brains 
of individuals with schizophrenia examined postmortem, 
but no ﬁndings have yet been widely replicated. Finally, 
overactivity of dopamine neurotransmission at D2-type 
dopamine receptors is proposed based on the ability of 
D2 antagonists (an action common to all current antipsy-
chotic agents; see Chap. 54) to ameliorate the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia. Excessive dopamine release 
in the striatum elicited by an acute dose of amphetamine 
has been demonstrated by PET imaging in some patients 
with schizophrenia. However, it is unclear whether this 
abnormality reﬂects the underlying illness or a lasting 
effect of antipsychotic medications. In contrast, reduced 
activity of dopamine at D1 dopamine receptors in the 
prefrontal cortex has been implicated in working memory 
deﬁcits based on the cognitive effects of D1 receptor ago-
nists and antagonists in the illness. Nevertheless, inferring 
something about disease pathogenesis from the actions of 
psychotropic drugs, for example, as with the glutamate 
and dopamine hypotheses, is fraught with artifact.
Efforts to understand how defects in these neurotrans-
mitter systems might generate similar behavioral pheno-
types have led to intriguing hypotheses. For instance, in 
the hippocampus, reduced glutamate transmission (based 
on a hypothesized deﬁcit in glutamate release or gluta-
mate receptors) onto GABAergic interneurons could 
lead to reduced glutamic acid decarboxylase expression, 
reduced gamma oscillations, and reduced inhibition onto 
excitatory neurons. These events in turn could lead to 
increased dopamine release from the ventral tegmental 
area, with dopamine antagonists thereby helping to reset 
the system to its nonpathologic state. It must be empha-
sized that these are working models only, and a true 
pathophysiology (or pathophysiologies) for schizophrenia 
remains to be established.
Overlaid on these neurotransmitter-based hypotheses 
is speculation as to how mutations in any of several 
genes implicated, however tentatively, in schizophrenia 
lead to the associated pathologic and behavioral abnor-
malities. DISC1 was originally discovered based on its 
association with schizophrenia in an Icelandic family. 
However, as stated earlier, DISC1 has since been vari-
ably associated with other neuropsychiatric conditions 
and its role in schizophrenia remains uncertain. The 
DISC1 protein has been implicated in several cellular 
functions, including neuronal growth and maturation, 
neurite outgrowth, and even the proliferation of new 
neurons during development. Neuregulin 1 (NRG1), a 
member of the EGF family of growth factors, and its 
receptor ERBB4 have also been implicated in schizo-
phrenia in several genetic studies. Interestingly, NRG1 
and ERBB4 play important roles in the maturation of 
GABAergic interneurons in cerebral cortex, and regu-
late dopamine transmission to several limbic brain 
regions. Moreover, loss of NRG1-ERBB4 in mice 
leads to reduced neuropil, thus phenocopying a patho-
logic ﬁnding in schizophrenia. Another gene of potential 
interest encodes Reelin, a secreted extracellular matrix 
serine protease. There are unconﬁrmed reports of asso-
ciation of schizophrenia with the Reelin locus on chro-
mosome 7, and of reduced Reelin expression in the 
cerebral cortex of schizophrenic subjects, possibly related 
to increased methylation of the Reelin gene promoter. 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
714
Reelin is important during development in the migra-
tion of newly born neurons to their appropriate layers 
of cerebral cortex. In the adult brain, the protein is 
enriched in cortical GABAergic interneurons and has 
been implicated in regulating NMDA glutamate receptor 
function. It is, therefore, easy to imagine how abnor-
malities in DISC1, NRG1, or Reelin may be related to 
GABAergic, glutamatergic, and dopaminergic mecha-
nisms in schizophrenia, and to associated pathologic 
abnormalities, but all such connections are currently 
speculative.
MOOD DISORDERS
Mood disorders are divided into depressive and bipolar 
disorders. Depressive disorders include the major 
depressive disorders, dysthymia, and more minor forms 
of depression. These disorders are heterogeneous syn-
dromes, each composed of several diseases with pre-
sumably distinct pathophysiologies that remain to be 
elucidated.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Mood disorders are common, with a prevalence of 
∼1–2% for bipolar disorder, ∼5% for major depres-
sion, and ∼15–20% for milder forms of depression. 
Between 40–50% of the risk for depression appears to 
be genetic. Nongenetic factors as diverse as stress and 
emotional trauma, viral infections, and even stochastic 
(random) processes during brain development have 
been implicated in the etiology. Depressive syndromes 
can occur in the context of general medical condi-
tions such as endocrine disturbances (hyper- or hypo-
cortisolemia, hyper- or hypothyroidism), autoimmune 
diseases, Parkinson’s disease, traumatic brain injury, 
certain cancers, asthma, diabetes, and stroke. Depres-
sion and obesity/metabolic syndrome are important 
risk factors for each other. In predisposed individuals, 
stressful life events can lead to clear-cut depressive 
episodes, while severe stress can induce posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD), instead of depression. Bipolar 
disorder is characterized by episodes of mania and 
depression and is one of the most heritable of psychi-
atric illnesses, with genetic risk of ∼80%. Stress and 
disrupted circadian rhythms can promote the manic 
episodes, during which patients exhibit extremely 
elevated mood, abnormal thought patterns, and some-
times psychosis. Several of these clinical signs can 
resemble certain features of schizophrenia; indeed, 
recent epidemiologic and genetic research has ques-
tioned the DSM-IVTR designations of bipolar disorder, 
schizophrenia, and schizoaffective disorder as distinct 
syndromes.
NEUROPATHOLOGY AND NEUROIMAGING
Brain imaging studies in humans are deﬁning the neu-
ral circuitry of mood within the brain’s limbic sys-
tem (Fig. 53-1). Integral to this system are the nucleus 
accumbens (important for brain reward—see later in the 
chapter under Substance Use Disorders), amygdala, hip-
pocampus, and regions of prefrontal cortex. Given that 
many symptoms of depression (so-called neurovegetative 
symptoms) involve physiologic functions, a key role for 
the hypothalamus is also presumed. Depressed individu-
als show a small reduction in hippocampal size. PET and 
functional MRI have revealed increased activation of the 
amygdala by negative stimuli and reduced activation of 
the nucleus accumbens by rewarding stimuli. There is 
also evidence for altered activity in prefrontal cortex, for 
example, hyperactivity of subgenual area 25 in anterior 
cingulate cortex. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of either 
the nucleus accumbens or subgenual area 25 elevates 
mood in normal and depressed individuals. While there 
are numerous reports of pathologic ﬁndings within these 
various regions postmortem, there is to date no deﬁned 
neuropathology of depression.
GENETICS
Although depression and bipolar disorder are highly heri-
table, the speciﬁc genes that comprise this risk remain 
unknown. As noted earlier, some of the genes impli-
cated in autism or schizophrenia seem to cause bipolar 
disorder in some families. Large genomewide association 
studies have identiﬁed genes for diacylglycerol kinase η 
(DGKH), ankyrin G (ANK3), an L-type voltage-gated 
calcium channel (CACNA1C), and a gene-rich region 
on chromosome 16p12 as being associated with bipolar 
disorder, but these ﬁndings await conﬁrmation by addi-
tional studies. Numerous susceptibility genes have also 
been implicated in linkage and association studies, but 
none has yet been deﬁnitively established as a bona ﬁde 
depression gene. However, a few genes with variants that 
may modify depression risk are worthy of mention since 
they may be linked to mechanisms of pathogenesis (dis-
cussed later). These include genes for the type 1 receptor 
for corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRHR1); the gluco-
corticoid receptor gene (GR); FKBP5, which encodes 
a chaperone protein for the glucocorticoid receptor; the 
serotonin transporter gene (SLA6A4); the catechol-O-
methyltransferase gene (COMT); and brain-derived neu-
rotrophic factor (BDNF).
PATHOGENESIS
Human and animal research in depression has focused 
on the long-term effects of chronic stress on the brain 
 
CHAPTER 53
Biology of Psychiatric Disorders
715
and their reversal by antidepressant medications; promi-
nent examples are discussed here. A subset of depressed 
patients show elevated levels of cortisol associated with 
increased production of corticotrophin-releasing factor 
from the hypothalamus and perhaps other brain regions 
(e.g., amygdala). In animals, sustained elevations in glu-
cocorticoids impair hippocampal function, in part via 
direct damage to hippocampal neurons, which is con-
sistent with reduced hippocampal volumes seen in some 
depressed humans. As the hippocampus exerts the major 
inhibitory inﬂuence over the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis, impairment of hippocampal function would 
lead to still further increases in glucocorticoid secretion, 
establishing a pathologic feed-forward loop.
Stress-induced damage to the hippocampus, and per-
haps other limbic regions (e.g., amygdala), in animals is 
also mediated in part by reduced levels of BDNF and 
other growth factors and cytokines. Furthermore, stress 
leads to a decrease in the birth of new neurons in the 
adult hippocampus. Interestingly, antidepressant treat-
ments reverse these effects of stress, and the antidepres-
sant effects of these medications seem to depend, in part, 
on their ability to promote hippocampal neurogenesis in 
animal models of depression. The clinical ramiﬁcations of 
such observations are unproven, although similar regula-
tion of adult hippocampal neurogenesis may be important 
for certain forms of learning and memory.
Another important target of stress in animals is 
the nucleus accumbens, where stress regulation of 
numerous signaling events (dopaminergic transmission 
and BDNF signaling are two examples) exert potent 
effects on depression-like behavioral abnormalities. 
While a reduction in BDNF in the hippocampus pro-
motes depression-like behaviors, an induction of BDNF 
in the nucleus accumbens promotes depression; similar 
changes in BDNF expression have been observed in 
FIGURE 53-1 
Neural circuitry of depression and addiction. The ﬁgure 
shows a simpliﬁed summary of a series of limbic circuits 
in brain that regulate mood and motivation and are impli-
cated in depression and addiction. Shown in the ﬁgure are 
the hippocampus (HP) and amygdala (Amy), regions of pre-
frontal cortex, nucleus accumbens (NAc), and hypothalamus 
(Hyp). Only a subset of the known interconnections among 
these brain regions is shown. Also shown is the innervation 
of several of these brain regions by monoaminergic neurons. 
Amy
NAc
HP
LC
DR
VTA
Hyp
FC
Glutamatergic
GABAergic
Dopaminergic
Peptidergic
The ventral tegmental area (VTA) provides dopaminergic 
input to each of the limbic structures. Norepinephrine (from 
the locus coeruleus or LC) and serotonin (from the dorsal 
raphe [DR] and other raphe nuclei) innervate all of the regions 
shown. In addition, there are strong connections between the 
hypothalamus and the VTA-NAc pathway. Important peptider-
gic projections from the hypothalamus include those from the 
arcuate nucleus that release β-endorphin and melanocortin 
and from the lateral hypothalamus that release orexin.
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
716
postmortem brains of depressed patients. Thus the role 
of BDNF in regulating mood is highly brain-region 
speciﬁc.
In contrast to depression, animal models of mania as 
well as bipolar disorder have proved much more elu-
sive. Mice with loss-of-function mutations in the Clock 
or GluR6 glutamate receptor genes or transgenic mice 
that overexpress glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) 
show manic-like behavioral abnormalities, although the 
relevance of these observations to human mania remains 
unknown.
The observation that tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., 
imipramine) inhibit serotonin and/or norepinephrine 
reuptake, and that monoamine oxidase inhibitors (e.g., 
tranylcypromine) are effective antidepressants, initially 
led to the view that depression is caused by a deﬁciency 
of these monoamines. However, this hypothesis has not 
been well substantiated, although variants in the sero-
tonin transporter, and in the COMT gene, have been 
associated with altered mood states in some individuals. 
Nevertheless, these medications, particularly the tricy-
clics, have formed the basis of antidepressant discovery 
efforts, with virtually all of today’s marketed antidepres-
sants being SSRIs (e.g., ﬂuoxetine, sertraline, citalo-
pram), serotonin, and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs) (e.g., venlafaxine, duloxetine), or norepineph-
rine reuptake inhibitors (NRIs) (e.g., atomoxetine).
A cardinal feature of all antidepressant medications 
is that long-term administration is needed for their 
mood-elevating effects. This means that their short-
term actions, namely promotion of serotonin or nor-
epinephrine function, is not per se antidepressant but 
rather induces a cascade of adaptations in the brain that 
underlie their clinical effects. The nature of these thera-
peutic drug-induced adaptations has not been identiﬁed 
with certainty. Presumably, the rich innervation of the 
brain’s limbic circuitry by serotonin and norepinephrine 
(Fig. 53-1) provide the anatomic basis of their therapeu-
tic actions.
Lithium is a highly effective drug for bipolar disor-
der, and competes with magnesium to inhibit magne-
sium-dependent enzymes, including GSK3β and several 
enzymes involved in phosphoinositide signaling leading 
to activation of protein kinase C. These ﬁndings have 
led to discovery programs focused on developing GSK3 
and PKC inhibitors as potential novel treatments for 
mood disorders. Another commonly prescribed drug 
for bipolar disorder is valproic acid, which has pleio-
tropic effects, including inhibition of histone deacety-
lases (HDACs). Histone acetylation promotes transcrip-
tional activation through posttranslational modiﬁcation 
of N-terminal lysine residues in histones and thereby 
causes chromatin decondensation. HDAC inhibitors 
have shown some antidepressant effects in animal mod-
els of depression. Another form of epigenetic control of 
gene expression is methylation of cytosine residues in 
DNA, which inhibits gene transcription. DNA meth-
ylation has been shown to be important for inherited 
maternal effects on emotional behavior. Thus, rats born 
to mothers that exhibit low levels of nurturing behavior 
show increased anxiety and reduced expression of hippo-
campal glucocorticoid receptors due to increased meth-
ylation of the receptor gene. They pass these traits on to 
their offspring, but cross-fostering by mothers that dis-
play high levels of nurturing reverses them. As research 
into epigenetic mechanisms progresses, there is hope 
that it may become possible to identify speciﬁc depres-
sion-associated alterations in human chromatin.
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
The DSM-IVTR uses the terms substance dependence and 
substance abuse to describe substance use disorders. It is 
unfortunate that the term substance dependence instead of 
addiction is used, because dependence can develop with-
out addiction, and addiction involves much more than 
dependence per se. Physical dependence develops through 
resetting of homeostatic cellular mechanisms to permit 
normal function despite the continued presence of a 
drug; when drug intake is terminated abruptly, a with-
drawal syndrome emerges. Withdrawal from alcohol or 
other sedative-hypnotics causes nervous system hyper-
activity, whereas withdrawal from psychostimulants 
produces fatigue and sedation. Tolerance is a reduction 
in response to a drug, which like dependence, develops 
after repeated use. It results from a change in drug 
metabolism (pharmacokinetic tolerance) or cell signaling 
(pharmacodynamic tolerance). It is important to recog-
nize that many nonaddictive medications induce tolerance 
and physical dependence, including β-adrenergic antag-
onists (e.g., propranolol) and α2-adrenergic agonists 
(e.g., clonidine).
What sets drugs of abuse apart is their unique ability 
to produce euphoria, a positive emotional state charac-
terized by intensely pleasant feelings that are rewarding 
and reinforcing since they motivate users to take the drug 
repeatedly. Tolerance develops to the rewarding proper-
ties of most abused drugs during periods of heavy use, 
which promotes the use of higher drug doses. In addi-
tion, psychological (or motivational) dependence develops 
through the resetting of cellular mechanisms within 
reward-related regions of the brain and leads to negative 
emotional symptoms resembling depression during drug 
withdrawal. Addictive drugs can also cause sensitization, 
an increased drug effect upon repeated use, as exempli-
ﬁed by the paranoid psychosis induced by chronic use of 
cocaine or other psychostimulants (e.g., amphetamine). 
Addiction, therefore, results from drug-induced changes 
 
CHAPTER 53
Biology of Psychiatric Disorders
717
in reward-related regions of the brain that lead to a 
complex mixture of tolerance, sensitization, and motiva-
tional dependence, in addition to powerful conditioning 
effects of these drugs mediated by the brain’s memory 
circuits.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Substance use disorders, especially those involving alco-
hol and tobacco, are very prevalent. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) estimates that more than 76 million 
people worldwide have alcohol use disorders and ∼1.3 
billion people smoke tobacco products (∼1 billion 
men, 250 million women). The most widely used illicit 
drug in the United States is marijuana, with ∼17% of 
18–25-year-olds reporting regular use. Estimates of the 
annual economic burden of substance use disorders in 
the United States, including health- and crime-related 
costs and losses in productivity, exceed $500 billion.
NEUROPATHOLOGY AND NEUROIMAGING
Imaging studies in humans demonstrate that addictive 
drugs, as well as craving for them, activate the brain’s 
reward circuitry (discussed later). However, there is no 
established pathology associated with addiction risk. 
Patients who abuse alcohol or psychostimulants show 
reduced gray matter in the prefrontal cortex. Functional 
MRI or PET studies show reduced activity in anterior 
cingulate and orbitofrontal cortex during tasks of atten-
tion and inhibitory control. Damage to these cortical 
areas may contribute to addiction by impairing decision 
making and increasing impulsivity.
GENETICS
Substance use disorders are highly heritable, with genetic 
risk estimated to be 0.4 to 0.7; however, the speciﬁc 
genes that comprise this risk remain largely unknown. 
The best-established genetic contribution to addiction 
is the protective effect that mutations in alcohol-
metabolizing enzymes have on risk for alcoholism. 
Mutations that increase alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) 
activity and decrease aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 
activity are additive and promote accumulation of acet-
aldehyde following ingestion of alcohol. This produces 
intoxication at low doses and a ﬂushing reaction that is 
unpleasant, resembling the reaction to disulﬁram, a drug 
used to prevent relapse. These variants are common 
among people of East Asian descent, and individuals 
expressing these variants rarely abuse alcohol.
Genes that promote risk for addiction have begun to 
emerge from large family and population studies, but all 
genes identiﬁed to date represent only a very small frac-
tion of the overall genetic risk for addiction. The best 
established susceptibility loci are regions on chromo-
somes 4 and 5 containing GABAA receptor gene clusters 
linked to alcohol use disorders and the nicotinic acetyl-
choline receptor gene cluster on chromosome 15 asso-
ciated with nicotine and alcohol dependence. There are 
reports of numerous other addiction susceptibility genes 
(e.g., variants in COMT, the μ-opioid receptor, and 
the serotonin transporter), but further work is needed 
to validate these ﬁndings. In addition, several genes 
have been implicated in impulsivity, which is strongly 
associated with substance abuse. These include variants 
in genes for the D4 dopamine receptor, the dopamine 
transporter, monoamine oxidase A, COMT, and the 
5-HT1B serotonin receptor.
PATHOGENESIS
Work in rodents and nonhuman primates has estab-
lished the brain’s reward regions as key neural substrates 
for the acute actions of drugs of abuse and for addiction 
induced by repeated drug administration (Fig. 53-1). 
Midbrain dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA) function normally as rheostats of reward: 
They are activated by natural rewards (food, sex, social 
interaction) or even by the expectation of such rewards, 
and many are suppressed by the absence of an expected 
reward or by aversive stimuli. These neurons thereby 
transmit crucial survival signals to the rest of the limbic 
brain to promote reward-related behavior, including 
motor responses to seek and obtain the rewards (nucleus 
accumbens), memories of reward-related cues (amyg-
dala, hippocampus), and executive control of obtaining 
rewards (prefrontal cortex).
Drugs of abuse alter neurotransmission through ini-
tial actions at different classes of ion channels, neu-
rotransmitter receptors, or neurotransmitter transporters 
(Table 53-2). Although the initial targets differ, the 
actions of these drugs converge on the brain’s reward 
circuitry by promoting dopamine neurotransmission 
in the nucleus accumbens and other limbic targets of 
the VTA. In addition, some drugs promote activation 
of opioid and cannabinoid receptors, which modulate 
this reward circuitry. By these mechanisms, drugs of 
abuse produce powerful rewarding signals, which, after 
repeated drug administration, corrupt the brain’s reward 
circuitry in ways that promote addiction. Three major 
pathologic adaptations have been described. First, drugs 
produce tolerance and dependence in reward circuits, 
which promote escalating drug intake and a negative 
emotional state during drug withdrawal that promotes 
relapse. Second, sensitization to the rewarding effects of 
the drugs and associated cues is seen during prolonged 
abstinence and also triggers relapse. Third, executive 
function is impaired in such a way as to increase impul-
sivity and compulsivity, both of which promote relapse.
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
718
TABLE 53-2
INITIAL ACTIONS OF DRUGS OF ABUSE
DRUG
NEUROTRANSMITTER AFFECTED
DRUG TARGET (ACTION)
Opiates
Endorphins, enkephalins
μ- and δ-opioid receptors (agonist)
Psychostimulants 
(cocaine, amphetamine 
methamphetamine)
Dopamine
Dopamine transporter (antagonist—cocaine; reverse  
transport—amphetamine, methamphetamine)
Nicotine
Acetylcholine
Nicotinic cholinergic receptors (agonist)
Ethanol
GABA
Glutamate
Acetylcholine
Serotonin
—
GABAA receptors (positive allosteric modulator) NMDA 
glutamate receptors (antagonist)
Nicotinic cholinergic receptors (allosteric modulator)
5HT-3 receptor (positive allosteric modulator)
Calcium-activated K+ channel (acivator)
Marijuana
Endocannabinoids (anandamide, 
2-arachidonoylglycerol)
CB1 receptor (agonist)
Phencyclidine
Glutamate
NMDA glutamate receptor (antagonist)
Repeated intake of abused drugs induces speciﬁc 
changes in cellular signal transduction, synaptic strength 
(long-term potentiation or depression), and neuronal 
structure (altered dendritic branching or cell soma size) 
within the brain’s reward circuitry. These modiﬁcations 
are mediated in part by changes in gene expression, 
achieved by drug regulation of transcription factors 
(e.g., CREB [cAMP response element binding protein] 
and ΔFosB) and their target genes. Together, these 
drug-induced adaptations underlie alterations in numerous 
neurotransmitter systems (e.g., glutamate, GABA, dopa-
mine), growth factors (e.g., BDNF), neuropeptides (e.g. 
corticotrophin releasing factor), and intracellular signal-
ing cascades. These adaptations provide opportunities 
for developing treatments targeted to drug-addicted 
individuals. The fact that the spectrum of these adapta-
tions partly differ depending on the particular addictive 
substance used creates opportunities for treatments that 
are speciﬁc for different classes of addictive drugs and 
that may, therefore, be less likely to disturb basic mech-
anisms that govern motivation and reward.
Increasingly, causal relationships are being estab-
lished between individual molecular-cellular adaptations 
and speciﬁc behavioral abnormalities that characterize 
the addicted state. For example, acute activation of 
μ-opioid receptors by morphine or other opiates acti-
vates Gi/o proteins leading to inhibition of adenylyl 
cyclase, resulting in reduced cAMP production, pro-
tein kinase A (PKA) activation, and activation of the 
transcription factor CREB. Repeated administration of 
these drugs (Fig. 53-2) evokes a homeostatic response 
resulting in upregulation of adenylyl cyclases, increased 
production of cAMP, and increased activation of PKA 
and CREB. Such upregulation of cAMP signaling has 
been identiﬁed in the locus coeruleus, periaqueductal 
gray, VTA, and nucleus accumbens and contributes to 
opiate craving and signs of opiate withdrawal. The fact 
that endogenous opioid peptides do not produce toler-
ance and dependence while morphine and heroin do 
may relate to the recent observation that, unlike endog-
enous opioids, morphine and heroin are weak inducers 
of μ-opioid receptor desensitization and endocytosis. 
Therefore, these drugs cause prolonged receptor activa-
tion and inhibition of adenylyl cyclases, which provides 
a powerful stimulus for the upregulation of cAMP sig-
naling that characterizes the opiate-dependent state.
 
CHAPTER 53
Biology of Psychiatric Disorders
719
CREB
Altered gene expression
Nucleus
Regulation of
proteins by PKA
phosphorylation
Increased
excitability
Ca2+
AC
cAMP
PKA
-opioid
receptor
C
C
R
R
C
C
+
+
+
–
–
P
Gi/o
FIGURE 53-2 
Opiate action in the locus coeruleus (LC). Binding of 
opiate agonists to μ-opioid receptors catalyzes nucleotide 
exchange on Gi and Go proteins, leading to inhibition of 
adenylyl cyclase, neuronal hyperpolarization via activation 
of K+ channels, and inhibition of neurotransmitter release via 
inhibition of Ca2/+ channels. Activation of Gi/o also inhibits 
adenylyl cyclase (AC), reducing protein kinase A (PKA) 
activity and phosphorylation of several PKA substrate pro-
teins, thereby altering their function. For example, opiates 
reduce phosphorylation of the cAMP response element-
binding protein (CREB), which appears to initiate long-term 
changes in neuronal function. Chronic administration of opi-
ates increases levels of AC isoforms, PKA catalytic (C) and 
regulatory (R) subunits, and the phosphorylation of several 
proteins, including CREB (indicated by red arrows). These 
changes contribute to the altered phenotype of the drug-
addicted state. For example, the excitability of LC neurons 
is increased by enhanced cAMP signaling, although the 
ionic basis of this effect remains unknown. Activation of 
CREB causes upregulation of AC isoforms and tyrosine 
hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine 
biosynthesis.
720
 MENTAL DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 54 
 Victor I. Reus 
 Mental disorders are common in medical practice and 
may present either as a primary disorder or as a comor-
bid condition. The prevalence of mental or substance 
use disorders in the United States is approximately 30%, 
only one-third of whom are currently receiving treat-
ment. Global burden of disease statistics indicate that 4 
of the 10 most important causes of disease worldwide 
are psychiatric in origin. 
 The revised fourth edition for use by primary care 
physicians of the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-
IV-PC) provides a useful synopsis of mental disorders 
most likely to be seen in primary care practice. The 
current system of classiﬁ cation is multiaxial and includes 
the presence or absence of a major mental disorder (axis I), 
any underlying personality disorder (axis II), general 
medical condition (axis III), psychosocial and environ-
mental problems (axis IV), and overall rating of general 
psychosocial functioning (axis V). 
 Changes in health care delivery underscore the need 
for primary care physicians to assume responsibility for 
the initial diagnosis and treatment of the most common 
mental disorders. Prompt diagnosis is essential to ensure 
that patients have access to appropriate medical ser-
vices and to maximize the clinical outcome. Validated 
patient-based questionnaires have been developed that 
systematically probe for signs and symptoms associated 
with the most prevalent psychiatric diagnoses and guide 
the clinician into targeted assessment. Prime MD (and 
a self-report form, the PHQ) and the Symptom-Driven 
Diagnostic System for Primary Care (SDDS-PC) are 
inventories that require only 10 min to complete and 
link patient responses to the formal diagnostic criteria of 
anxiety, mood, somatoform, and eating disorders and to 
alcohol abuse or dependence. 
 A physician who refers patients to a psychiatrist 
should know not only when doing so is appropriate but 
also how to refer, since societal misconceptions and the 
stigma of mental illness impede the process. Primary 
care physicians should base referrals to a psychiatrist on 
the presence of signs and symptoms of a mental disorder 
and not simply on the absence of a physical explanation 
for a patient’s complaint. The physician should discuss 
with the patient the reasons for requesting the referral 
or consultation and provide reassurance that he or she 
will continue to provide medical care and work collabor-
atively with the mental health professional. Consultation 
with a psychiatrist or transfer of care is appropriate when 
physicians encounter evidence of psychotic symptoms, 
mania, severe depression, or anxiety; symptoms of post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD); suicidal or homicidal 
preoccupation; or a failure to respond to ﬁ rst-order 
treatment.  The biology of psychiatric and addictive dis-
orders is discussed in  Chap. 53 . 
 ANXIETY DISORDERS 
 Anxiety disorders, the most prevalent psychiatric ill-
nesses in the general community, are present in 15–20% 
of medical clinic patients. Anxiety, deﬁ ned as a subjec-
tive sense of unease, dread, or foreboding, can indicate 
a primary psychiatric condition or can be a component 
of, or reaction to, a primary medical disease. The pri-
mary anxiety disorders are classiﬁ ed according to their 
duration and course and the existence and nature of 
precipitants. 
 When evaluating the anxious patient, the clinician 
must ﬁ rst determine whether the anxiety antedates or 
postdates a medical illness or is due to a medication side 
effect. Approximately one-third of patients presenting 
with anxiety have a medical etiology for their psychi-
atric symptoms, but an anxiety disorder can also present 
with somatic symptoms in the absence of a diagnosable 
medical condition. 
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
721
PANIC DISORDER
Clinical manifestations
Panic disorder is deﬁned by the presence of recurrent and 
unpredictable panic attacks, which are distinct episodes 
of intense fear and discomfort associated with a variety 
of physical symptoms, including palpitations, sweating, 
trembling, shortness of breath, chest pain, dizziness, and 
a fear of impending doom or death (Table 54-1). Par-
esthesias, gastrointestinal distress, and feelings of unreal-
ity are also common. Diagnostic criteria require at least 1 
month of concern or worry about the attacks or a change 
in behavior related to them. The lifetime prevalence of 
panic disorder is 1–3%. Panic attacks have a sudden onset, 
developing within 10 min and usually resolving over the 
course of an hour, and they occur in an unexpected fash-
ion. The frequency and severity of panic attacks vary, 
ranging from once a week to clusters of attacks separated 
by months of well-being. The ﬁrst attack is usually out-
side the home, and onset is typically in late adolescence to 
early adulthood. In some individuals, anticipatory anxiety 
develops over time and results in a generalized fear and 
a progressive avoidance of places or situations in which 
a panic attack might recur. Agoraphobia, which occurs 
commonly in patients with panic disorder, is an acquired 
irrational fear of being in places where one might feel 
trapped or unable to escape (Table 54-2). Typically, it 
leads the patient into a progressive restriction in lifestyle 
and, in a literal sense, in geography. Frequently, patients 
are embarrassed that they are housebound and depen-
dent on the company of others to go out into the world 
and do not volunteer this information; thus physicians 
TABLE 54-1 
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR PANIC ATTACK
A discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which 
four or more of the following symptoms developed 
abruptly and reached a peak within 10 min:
 1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate
 2. Sweating
 3. Trembling or shaking
 4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
 5. Feeling of choking
 6. Chest pain or discomfort
 7. Nausea or abdominal distress
 8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint
 9.  Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonaliza-
tion (being detached from oneself)
10. Fear of losing control or going crazy
11. Fear of dying
12. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
13. Chills or hot ﬂushes
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. vghghg 
© 2000 American Psychiatric Association.
TABLE 54-2 
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR AGORAPHOBIA
1.  Anxiety about being in places or situations from which 
escape might be difﬁcult (or embarrassing) or in which 
help may not be available in the event of having an 
unexpected or situationally predisposed panic attack 
or panic-like symptoms. Agoraphobic fears typically 
involve characteristic clusters of situations that include 
being outside the home alone; being in a crowd or 
standing in a line; being on a bridge; and traveling in a 
bus, train, or automobile.
2.  The situations are avoided (e.g., travel is restricted) or 
else are endured with marked distress or with anxiety 
about having a panic attack or panic-like symptoms, or 
require the presence of a companion.
3.  The anxiety or phobic avoidance is not better 
accounted for by another mental disorder such as 
social phobia (e.g., avoidance limited to social situ-
ations because of fear of embarrassment), speciﬁc 
phobia (e.g., avoidance limited to a single situation 
like elevators), obsessive-compulsive disorder (e.g., 
avoidance of dirt in someone with an obsession about 
contamination), posttraumatic stress disorder (e.g., 
avoidance of stimuli associated with a severe stressor), 
or separation anxiety disorder (e.g., avoidance of leaving 
home or relatives).
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. vghghg 
© 2000 American Psychiatric Association.
will fail to recognize the syndrome if direct questioning is 
not pursued.
Differential diagnosis
A diagnosis of panic disorder is made after a medical eti-
ology for the panic attacks has been ruled out. A variety 
of cardiovascular, respiratory, endocrine, and neurologic 
conditions can present with anxiety as the chief com-
plaint. Patients with true panic disorder will often focus 
on one speciﬁc feature to the exclusion of others. For 
example, 20% of patients who present with syncope as 
a primary medical complaint have a primary diagnosis 
of a mood, anxiety, or substance-abuse disorder, the 
most common being panic disorder. The differential 
diagnosis of panic disorder is complicated by a high rate 
of comorbidity with other psychiatric conditions, espe-
cially alcohol and benzodiazepine abuse, which patients 
initially use in an attempt at self-medication. Some 75% 
of panic disorder patients will also satisfy criteria for 
major depression at some point in their illness.
When the history is nonspeciﬁc, physical examina-
tion and focused laboratory testing must be used to rule 
out anxiety states resulting from medical disorders such 
as pheochromocytoma, thyrotoxicosis, or hypoglycemia. 
Electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram may 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
722
detect some cardiovascular conditions associated with 
panic such as paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and mitral 
valve prolapse. In two studies, panic disorder was the 
primary diagnosis in 43% of patients with chest pain 
who had normal coronary angiograms and was present 
in 9% of all outpatients referred for cardiac evaluation. 
Panic disorder has also been diagnosed in many patients 
referred for pulmonary function testing or with symp-
toms of irritable bowel syndrome.
Etiology and pathophysiology
The etiology of panic disorder is unknown but appears 
to involve a genetic predisposition, altered auto-
nomic responsivity, and social learning. Panic disorder 
shows familial aggregation; the disorder is concordant 
in 30–45% of monozygotic twins, and genomewide 
screens have identiﬁed suggestive risk loci. Acute panic 
attacks appear to be associated with increased noradren-
ergic discharges in the locus coeruleus. Intravenous infu-
sion of sodium lactate evokes an attack in two-thirds of 
panic disorder patients, as do the α2-adrenergic antago-
nist yohimbine, cholecystokinin tetrapeptide (CCK-4), 
and carbon dioxide inhalation. It is hypothesized that 
each of these stimuli activates a pathway involving norad-
renergic neurons in the locus coeruleus and serotonergic 
neurons in the dorsal raphe. Agents that block serotonin 
reuptake can prevent attacks. Panic-disorder patients have 
a heightened sensitivity to somatic symptoms, which 
triggers increasing arousal, setting off the panic attack; 
accordingly, therapeutic intervention involves altering 
the patient’s cognitive interpretation of anxiety-produc-
ing experiences as well as preventing the attack itself.
TREATMENT 
Panic Disorder
Achievable goals of treatment are to decrease the fre-
quency of panic attacks and to reduce their intensity. 
The cornerstone of drug therapy is antidepressant med-
ication (Tables 54-3 through 54-5). Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) benefit the majority of panic 
disorder patients and do not have the adverse effects of 
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). Fluoxetine, paroxetine, 
sertraline, and the selective serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine have received 
approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for this indication. These drugs should be started 
at one-third to one-half of their usual antidepressant 
dose (e.g., 5–10 mg fluoxetine, 25–50 mg sertraline, 10 mg 
paroxetine, 37.5 mg venlafaxine). Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs) are also effective and may specifically 
benefit patients who have comorbid features of atypical 
depression (i.e., hypersomnia and weight gain). Insomnia,  
orthostatic hypotension, and the need to maintain 
a low-tyramine diet (avoidance of cheese and wine) 
have limited their use, however. Antidepressants typi-
cally take 2–6 weeks to become effective, and doses 
may need to be adjusted based upon the clinical 
response.
Because of anticipatory anxiety and the need for 
immediate relief of panic symptoms, benzodiazepines 
are useful early in the course of treatment and sporadi-
cally thereafter (Table 54-6). For example, alprazolam, 
starting at 0.5 mg qid and increasing to 4 mg/d in 
divided doses, is effective, but patients must be moni-
tored closely, as some develop dependence and begin 
to escalate the dose of this medication. Clonazepam, 
at a final maintenance dose of 2–4 mg/d, is also helpful;  
its longer half-life permits twice-daily dosing, and 
patients appear less likely to develop dependence on 
this agent.
Early psychotherapeutic intervention and education 
aimed at symptom control enhances the effectiveness 
of drug treatment. Patients can be taught breathing 
techniques, be educated about physiologic changes 
that occur with panic, and learn to expose themselves 
voluntarily to precipitating events in a treatment pro-
gram spanning 12–15 sessions. Homework assign-
ments and monitored compliance are important 
components of successful treatment. Once patients 
have achieved a satisfactory response, drug treatment 
should be maintained for 1–2 years to prevent relapse. 
Controlled trials indicate a success rate of 75–85%, 
although the likelihood of complete remission is some-
what lower.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Clinical manifestations
Patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) have 
persistent, excessive, and/or unrealistic worry associated 
with muscle tension, impaired concentration, autonomic 
arousal, feeling “on edge” or restless, and insomnia 
(Table 54-7). Onset is usually before age 20 years, and 
a history of childhood fears and social inhibition may 
be present. The lifetime prevalence of GAD is 5–6%; 
the risk is higher in ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with 
the diagnosis. Interestingly, family studies indicate that 
GAD and panic disorder segregate independently. More 
than 80% of patients with GAD also suffer from major 
depression, dysthymia, or social phobia. Comorbid sub-
stance abuse is common in these patients, particularly 
alcohol and/or sedative/hypnotic abuse. Patients with 
GAD worry excessively over minor matters, with life-
disrupting effects; unlike in panic disorder, complaints 
of shortness of breath, palpitations, and tachycardia are 
relatively rare.
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
723
TABLE 54-3 
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
NAME
USUAL DAILY DOSE, mg
SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
SSRIs
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
Escitalopram (Lexapro)
  10–80
 50–200
  20–60
100–300
  20–60
  10–30
Headache; nausea and other 
GI effects; jitteriness; insom-
nia; sexual dysfunction; can 
affect plasma levels of other 
medicines (except sertraline); 
akathisia rare
Once-daily dosing, usually in 
the morning; ﬂuoxetine has 
very long half-life; must not 
be combined with MAOIs
TCAs
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
Nortriptyline (Pamelor)
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Desipramine (Norpramin)
Doxepin (Sinequan)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
150–300
 50–200
150–300
150–300
150–300
150–300
Anticholinergic (dry mouth, 
tachycardia, constipation,  
urinary retention, blurred 
vision); sweating; tremor; 
postural hypotension; cardiac 
conduction delay; sedation; 
weight gain
Once-daily dosing, usually 
qhs; blood levels of most 
TCAs available; can be lethal 
in O.D. (lethal dose = 2 g); 
nortriptyline best tolerated, 
especially by elderly
Mixed Norepinephrine/Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and Receptor Blockers
Venlafaxine (Effexor)
75–375
Nausea; dizziness; dry mouth; 
headaches; increased blood 
pressure; anxiety and  
insomnia
Bid-tid dosing (extended 
release available); lower 
potential for drug interac-
tions than SSRIs; contraindi-
cated with MAOIs
Desvenlafaxine, (Pristiq)
50–400
Nausea, dizziness, insomnia
Primary metabolite of  
venlafaxine. No increased 
efﬁcacy with higher dosing
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)
40–60
Nausea, dizziness, headache, 
insomnia, constipation
May have utility in treatment 
of neuropathic pain and 
stress incontinence
Mirtazapine (Remeron)
15–45
Somnolence; weight gain;  
neutropenia rare
Once daily dosing
Mixed-Action Drugs
Bupropion (Wellbutrin)
250–450
Jitteriness; ﬂushing; seizures 
in at-risk patients; anorexia; 
tachycardia; psychosis
Tid dosing, but sustained 
release also available; fewer 
sexual side effects than 
SSRIs or TCAs; may be  
useful for adult ADD
Trazodone (Desyrel)
200–600
Sedation; dry mouth;  
ventricular irritability; postural 
hypotension; priapism rare
Useful in low doses for sleep 
because of sedating effects 
with no anticholinergic side 
effects
Nefazodone (Serzone)
300–600
Sedation; headache; dry 
mouth; nausea; constipation
Discontinued sale in United 
States and several other 
countries due to risk of liver 
failure
Amoxapine (Asendin)
200–600
Sexual dysfunction
Lethality in overdose; EPS 
possible
MAOIs
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Transdermal selegiline 
(Emsam)
45–90
20–50
20–60
6–12
Insomnia; hypotension;  
anorgasmia; weight gain; 
hypertensive crisis; toxic reac-
tions with SSRIs; narcotics
Local skin reaction,  
hypertension
May be more effective in 
patients with atypical  
features or treatment- 
refractory depression
No dietary restrictions with  
6 mg dose
Abbreviations: ADD, attention deﬁcit disorder; EPS, extrapyramidal symptoms; MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; SSRIs, selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors;TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
724
TABLE 54-4 
MANAGEMENT OF ANTIDEPRESSANT SIDE EFFECTS
SYMPTOMS
COMMENTS AND MANAGEMENT 
STRATEGIES
Gastrointestinal
  Nausea, loss of 
appetite
Usually short-lived and dose-related; 
consider temporary dose reduc-
tion or administration with food and 
antacids
 Diarrhea
Famotidine, 20–40 mg/d
 Constipation
Wait for tolerance; try diet change, 
stool softener, exercise; avoid  
laxatives
Sexual  
dysfunction
Consider dose reduction; drug  
holiday
  Anorgasmia/
impotence; 
impaired  
ejaculation
Bethanechol, 10–20 mg, 2 h before 
activity, or cyproheptadine, 4–8 mg 2 h 
before activity, or bupropion, 100 mg 
bid or amantadine, 100 mg bid/tid
Orthostasis
Tolerance unlikely; increase ﬂuid 
intake, use calf exercises/support 
hose; ﬂudrocortisone, 0.025 mg/d
Anticholinergic
Wait for tolerance
 Dry mouth, eyes
Maintain good oral hygiene; use  
artiﬁcial tears, sugar-free gum
Tremor/jitteriness
Antiparkinsonian drugs not effective; 
use dose reduction/slow increase; 
lorazepam, 0.5 mg bid, or  
propranolol, 10–20 mg bid
Insomnia
Schedule all doses for the morning; 
trazodone, 50–100 mg qhs
Sedation
Caffeine; schedule all dosing for 
bedtime; bupropion, 75–100 mg in 
afternoon
Headache
Evaluate diet, stress, other drugs; try 
dose reduction; amitriptyline,  
50 mg/d
Weight gain
Decrease carbohydrates; exercise; 
consider ﬂuoxetine
Loss of therapeutic 
beneﬁt over time
Related to tolerance? Increase dose 
or drug holiday; add amantadine, 
100 mg bid, buspirone, 10 mg tid, 
or pindolol, 2.5 mg bid
TABLE 54-5 
POSSIBLE DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH SELECTIVE 
SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
AGENT
EFFECT
Monoamine oxidase  
inhibitors
Serotonin syndrome—
absolute contraindication
Serotonergic agonists, e.g., 
tryptophan, fenﬂuramine
Potential serotonin  
syndrome
Drugs that are metabolized 
by P450 isoenzymes: tri-
cyclics, other SSRIs, anti-
psychotics, beta blockers, 
codeine, triazolobenzodi-
azepines, calcium channel 
blockers
Delayed metabolism  
resulting in increased 
blood levels and potential 
toxicity
Drugs that are bound tightly 
to plasma proteins, e.g., 
warfarin
Increased bleeding  
secondary to  
displacement
Drugs that inhibit the 
metabolism of SSRIs by 
P450 isoenzymes, e.g., 
quinidine
Increased SSRI side effects
Abbreviation: SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
Etiology and pathophysiology
All anxiogenic agents act on the γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)A receptor/chloride ion channel complex, impli-
cating this neurotransmitter system in the pathogenesis of 
anxiety and panic attacks. Benzodiazepines are thought to 
bind two separate GABAA receptor sites: type I, which 
has a broad neuroanatomic distribution, and type II, 
which is concentrated in the hippocampus, striatum, 
and neocortex. The antianxiety effects of the various 
benzodiazepines and side effects such as sedation and 
memory impairment are inﬂuenced by their relative 
binding to type I and type II receptor sites. Serotonin 
[5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT)] and 3α-reduced neura-
ctive steroids (allosteric modulators of GABAA) also 
appear to have a role in anxiety, and buspirone, a partial 
5HT1A receptor agonist, and certain 5HT2A and 5HT2C 
receptor antagonists (e.g., nefazodone) may have ben-
eﬁcial effects.
TREATMENT 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
A combination of pharmacologic and psychotherapeu-
tic interventions is most effective in GAD, but complete 
symptomatic relief is rare. A short course of a benzo-
diazepine is usually indicated, preferably lorazepam, 
oxazepam, or temazepam. (The first two of these agents 
are metabolized via conjugation rather than oxida-
tion and thus do not accumulate if hepatic function is 
impaired.) Treatment should be initiated at the lowest 
dose possible and prescribed on an as-needed basis as 
symptoms warrant. Benzodiazepines differ in their mil-
ligram per kilogram potency, half-life, lipid solubility, 
metabolic pathways, and presence of active metabo-
lites. Agents that are absorbed rapidly and are lipid 
soluble, such as diazepam, have a rapid onset of action 
and a higher abuse potential. Benzodiazepines should 
generally not be prescribed for >4–6 weeks because of 
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
725
TABLE 54-6 
ANXIOLYTICS
NAME
EQUIVALENT PO 
DOSE, mg
ONSET OF ACTION
HALF-LIFE, h
COMMENTS
Benzodiazepines
 Diazepam (Valium)
5
Fast
20–70
Active metabolites; quite sedating
  Flurazepam  
(Dalmane)
15
Fast
30–100
Flurazepam is a prodrug; metabolites 
are active; quite sedating
 Triazolam (Halcion)
0.25
Intermediate
1.5–5
No active metabolites; can induce 
confusion and delirium, especially in 
elderly
 Lorazepam (Ativan)
1
Intermediate
10–20
No active metabolites; direct hepatic 
glucuronide conjugation; quite sedating
 Alprazolam (Xanax)
0.5
Intermediate
12–15
Active metabolites; not too sedating; 
may have speciﬁc antidepressant 
and antipanic activity; tolerance and 
dependence develop easily
  Chlordiazepoxide  
(Librium)
10
Intermediate
5–30
Active metabolites; moderately  
sedating
 Oxazepam (Serax)
15
Slow
5–15
No active metabolites; direct glucuro-
nide conjugation; not too sedating
  Temazepam  
(Restoril)
15
Slow
9–12
No active metabolites; moderately 
sedating
  Clonazepam  
(Klonopin)
0.5
Slow
18–50
No active metabolites; moderately 
sedating
Nonbenzodiazepines
 Buspirone (BuSpar)
7.5
2 weeks
2–3
Active metabolites; tid dosing—usual 
daily dose 10–20 mg tid; nonsedating; 
no additive effects with alcohol; useful 
for controlling agitation in demented or 
brain-injured patients
TABLE 54-7 
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
A.  Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more days than not for at least 6 months, about a  
number of events or activities (such as work or school performance).
B. The person ﬁnds it difﬁcult to control the worry.
C.  The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six symptoms (with at least some symptoms 
present for more days than not for the past 6 months): (1) restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge; (2) being easily 
fatigued; (3) difﬁculty concentrating or mind going blank; (4) irritability; (5) muscle tension; (6) sleep disturbance (difﬁculty 
falling or staying asleep, or restless unsatisfying sleep).
D.  The focus of the anxiety and worry is not conﬁned to features of an axis I disorder [e.g., the anxiety or worry is not about 
having a panic attack (as in panic disorder), being embarrassed in public (as in social phobia), being contaminated (as 
in obsessive-compulsive disorder), being away from home or close relatives (as in separation anxiety disorder), gaining 
weight (as in anorexia nervosa), having multiple physical complaints (as in somatization disorder), or having a serious  
illness (as in hypochondriasis)], and the anxiety and worry do not occur exclusively during posttraumatic stress disorder.
E.  The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically signiﬁcant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other 
important areas of functioning.
F.  The disturbance is not due to the direct physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general 
medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism) and does not occur exclusively during a mood disorder, a psychotic disorder, or a 
pervasive developmental disorder.
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. vghghg © 
2000 American Psychiatric Association.
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
726
the development of tolerance and the risk of abuse and 
dependence. Withdrawal must be closely monitored as 
relapses can occur. It is important to warn patients that 
concomitant use of alcohol or other sedating drugs 
may be neurotoxic and impair their ability to function. 
An optimistic approach that encourages the patient to 
clarify environmental precipitants, anticipate his or her 
reactions, and plan effective response strategies is an 
essential element of therapy.
Adverse effects of benzodiazepines generally parallel  
their relative half-lives. Longer-acting agents, such as  
diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, flurazepam, and clonazepam, 
tend to accumulate active metabolites, with resultant 
sedation, impairment of cognition, and poor psychomotor 
performance. Shorter-acting compounds, such as alpra-
zolam and oxazepam, can produce daytime anxiety, early 
morning insomnia, and, with discontinuation, rebound 
anxiety and insomnia. Although patients develop toler-
ance to the sedative effects of benzodiazepines, they 
are less likely to habituate to the adverse psychomotor 
effects. Withdrawal from the longer half-life benzodi-
azepines can be accomplished through gradual, step-
wise dose reduction (by 10% every 1–2 weeks) over 
6–12 weeks. It is usually more difficult to taper patients 
off shorter-acting benzodiazepines. Physicians may 
need to switch the patient to a benzodiazepine with a 
longer half-life or use an adjunctive medication such as 
a beta blocker or carbamazepine, before attempting to 
discontinue the benzodiazepine. Withdrawal reactions 
vary in severity and duration; they can include depres-
sion, anxiety, lethargy, diaphoresis, autonomic arousal, 
and, rarely, seizures.
Buspirone is a nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic agent. 
It is nonsedating, does not produce tolerance or depen-
dence, does not interact with benzodiazepine receptors 
or alcohol, and has no abuse or disinhibition potential. 
However, it requires several weeks to take effect and 
requires thrice-daily dosing. Patients who were previ-
ously responsive to a benzodiazepine are unlikely to 
rate buspirone as equally effective, but patients with 
head injury or dementia who have symptoms of anxiety 
and/or agitation may do well with this agent. Escitalo-
pram, paroxetine, and venlafaxine are FDA approved for 
the treatment of GAD, usually at doses that are compara-
ble to their efficacy in major depression. Benzodiazepines 
are contraindicated during pregnancy and breast-feeding.
Anticonvulsants with GABAergic properties may also 
be effective against anxiety. Gabapentin, oxcarbazepine, 
tiagabine, pregabalin, and divalproex have all shown 
some degree of benefit in a variety of anxiety-related 
syndromes. Agents that selectively target GABAA recep-
tor subtypes are currently under development, and it is 
hoped that these will lack the sedating, memory-impairing, 
and addicting properties of benzodiazepines.
PHOBIC DISORDERS
Clinical manifestations
The cardinal feature of phobic disorders is a marked 
and persistent fear of objects or situations, exposure to 
which results in an immediate anxiety reaction. The 
patient avoids the phobic stimulus, and this avoidance 
usually impairs occupational or social functioning. Panic 
attacks may be triggered by the phobic stimulus or may 
occur spontaneously. Unlike patients with other anxiety 
disorders, individuals with phobias usually experience 
anxiety only in speciﬁc situations. Common phobias 
include fear of closed spaces (claustrophobia), fear of 
blood, and fear of ﬂying. Social phobia is distinguished 
by a speciﬁc fear of social or performance situations in 
which the individual is exposed to unfamiliar individu-
als or to possible examination and evaluation by others. 
Examples include having to converse at a party, use 
public restrooms, and meet strangers. In each case, the 
affected individual is aware that the experienced fear is 
excessive and unreasonable given the circumstance. The 
speciﬁc content of a phobia may vary across gender, 
ethnic, and cultural boundaries.
Phobic disorders are common, affecting ∼10% of the 
population. Full criteria for diagnosis are usually satis-
ﬁed ﬁrst in early adulthood, but behavioral avoidance 
of unfamiliar people, situations, or objects dating from 
early childhood is common.
In one study of female twins, concordance rates for 
agoraphobia, social phobia, and animal phobia were 
found to be 23% for monozygotic twins and 15% for 
dizygotic twins. A twin study of fear conditioning, a 
model for the acquisition of phobias, demonstrated a 
heritability of 35–45%, and a genomewide linkage scan 
identiﬁed a risk locus on chromosome 14 in a region 
previously implicated in a mouse model of fear. Animal 
studies of fear conditioning have indicated that processing 
of the fear stimulus occurs through the lateral nucleus of 
the amygdala, extending through the central nucleus 
and projecting to the periaqueductal gray region, lateral 
hypothalamus, and paraventricular hypothalamus.
TREATMENT 
Phobic Disorders
Beta blockers (e.g., propranolol, 20–40 mg orally 2 h 
before the event) are particularly effective in the treat-
ment of “performance anxiety” (but not general social 
phobia) and appear to work by blocking the peripheral 
manifestations of anxiety such as perspiration, tachycar-
dia, palpitations, and tremor. MAOIs alleviate social pho-
bia independently of their antidepressant activity, and 
paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine have received FDA 
approval for treatment of social anxiety. Benzodiazepines 
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
727
can be helpful in reducing fearful avoidance, but the 
chronic nature of phobic disorders limits their usefulness.
Behaviorally focused psychotherapy is an important 
component of treatment, as relapse rates are high when 
medication is used as the sole treatment. Cognitive-
behavioral strategies are based upon the finding that dis-
torted perceptions and interpretations of fear-producing 
stimuli play a major role in perpetuation of phobias. 
Individual and group therapy sessions teach the patient 
to identify specific negative thoughts associated with 
the anxiety-producing situation and help to reduce the 
patient’s fear of loss of control. In desensitization therapy, 
hierarchies of feared situations are constructed and the 
patient is encouraged to pursue and master gradual expo-
sure to the anxiety-producing stimuli.
Patients with social phobia, in particular, have a high 
rate of comorbid alcohol abuse, as well as of other psy-
chiatric conditions (e.g., eating disorders), necessitating 
the need for parallel management of each disorder if 
anxiety reduction is to be achieved.
STRESS DISORDERS
Clinical manifestations
Patients may develop anxiety after exposure to extreme 
traumatic events such as the threat of personal death or 
injury or the death of a loved one. The reaction may 
occur shortly after the trauma (acute stress disorder) or be 
delayed and subject to recurrence (PTSD) (Table 54-8). 
In both syndromes, individuals experience associated 
symptoms of detachment and loss of emotional respon-
sivity. The patient may feel depersonalized and unable to 
recall speciﬁc aspects of the trauma, though typically it 
is reexperienced through intrusions in thought, dreams, 
or ﬂashbacks, particularly when cues of the original 
event are present. Patients often actively avoid stimuli 
that precipitate recollections of the trauma and demon-
strate a resulting increase in vigilance, arousal, and star-
tle response. Patients with stress disorders are at risk for 
the development of other disorders related to anxiety, 
mood, and substance abuse (especially alcohol). Between 
5 and 10% of Americans will at some time in their life 
satisfy criteria for PTSD, with women more likely to be 
affected than men.
Risk factors for the development of PTSD include a 
past psychiatric history and personality characteristics of 
high neuroticism and extroversion. Twin studies show 
a substantial genetic inﬂuence on all symptoms associ-
ated with PTSD, with less evidence for an environmen-
tal effect.
Etiology and pathophysiology
It is hypothesized that in PTSD there is excessive 
release of norepinephrine from the locus coeruleus in 
TABLE 54-8 
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR POSTTRAUMATIC 
STRESS DISORDER
A.  The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in 
which both of the following were present:
    1.  The person experienced, witnessed, or was con-
fronted with an event or events that involved actual 
or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to 
the physical integrity of self or others.
    2.  The person’s response involved intense fear,  
helplessness, or horror.
B.  The traumatic event is persistently reexperienced in 
one (or more) of the following ways:
    1.  Recurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of 
the event, including images, thoughts, or perceptions.
    2. Recurrent distressing dreams of the event.
    3.  Acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were 
recurring (includes a sense of reliving the experi-
ence, illusions, hallucinations, and dissociative 
ﬂashback episodes, including those that occur on 
awakening or when intoxicated).
    4.  Intense psychological distress at exposure to internal 
or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect 
of the traumatic event.
    5.  Physiologic reactivity on exposure to internal or 
external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect 
of the traumatic event.
C.  Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the 
trauma and numbing of general responsiveness (not 
present before the trauma), as indicated by three or 
more of the following:
    1.  Efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversations 
associated with the trauma
    2.  Efforts to avoid activities, places, or people that 
arouse recollections of the trauma
    3. Inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma
    4.  Markedly diminished interest or participation in  
signiﬁcant activities
    5. Feeling of detachment or estrangement from others
    6.  Restricted range of affect (e.g., unable to have loving 
feelings)
    7.  Sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., does not expect 
to have a career, marriage, children, or a normal life 
span)
D.  Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present 
before the trauma), as indicated by two (or more) of the 
following:
    1. Difﬁculty falling or staying asleep
    2. Irritability or outbursts of anger
    3. Difﬁculty concentrating
    4. Hypervigilance
    5. Exaggerated startle response
E.  Duration of the disturbance (symptoms in criteria B, C, 
and D) is more than 1 month
F.  The disturbance causes clinically signiﬁcant distress or 
impairment in social, occupational, or other important 
areas of functioning.
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. vghghg 
© 2000 American Psychiatric Association.
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
728
response to stress and increased noradrenergic activ-
ity at projection sites in the hippocampus and amyg-
dala. These changes theoretically facilitate the encoding 
of fear-based memories. Greater sympathetic responses 
to cues associated with the traumatic event occur in 
PTSD, although pituitary adrenal responses are blunted.
TREATMENT 
Stress Disorders
Acute stress reactions are usually self-limited, and treatment 
typically involves the short-term use of benzodiazepines 
and supportive/expressive psychotherapy. The chronic 
and recurrent nature of PTSD, however, requires a more 
complex approach employing drug and behavioral 
treatments. PTSD is highly correlated with peritraumatic 
dissociative symptoms and the development of an acute 
stress disorder at the time of the trauma. TCAs such as 
imipramine and amitriptyline, the MAOI phenelzine, 
and the SSRIs can all reduce anxiety, symptoms of intru-
sion, and avoidance behaviors, as can prazosin, an α1 
antagonist. Propranolol and opiates such as morphine, 
given during the acute stress period may have beneficial 
effects in preventing the development of PTSD. Trazo-
done, a sedating antidepressant, is frequently used at 
night to help with insomnia (50–150 mg qhs). Carbam-
azepine, valproic acid, or alprazolam have also indepen-
dently produced improvement in uncontrolled trials. 
Psychotherapeutic strategies for PTSD help the patient 
overcome avoidance behaviors and demoralization and 
master fear of recurrence of the trauma; therapies that 
encourage the patient to dismantle avoidance behaviors 
through stepwise focusing on the experience of the 
traumatic event are the most effective.
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
Clinical manifestations
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized 
by obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors that 
impair everyday functioning. Fears of contamination 
and germs are common, as are handwashing, counting 
behaviors, and having to check and recheck such actions 
as whether a door is locked. The degree to which the 
disorder is disruptive for the individual varies, but in all 
cases obsessive-compulsive activities take up >1 h per 
day and are undertaken to relieve the anxiety triggered 
by the core fear. Patients often conceal their symptoms, 
usually because they are embarrassed by the content of 
their thoughts or the nature of their actions. Physicians 
must ask speciﬁc questions regarding recurrent thoughts 
and behaviors, particularly if physical clues such as 
chafed and reddened hands or patchy hair loss (from 
repetitive hair pulling, or trichotillomania) are present. 
Comorbid conditions are common, the most frequent 
being depression, other anxiety disorders, eating disor-
ders, and tics. OCD has a lifetime prevalence of 2–3% 
worldwide. Onset is usually gradual, beginning in early 
adulthood, but childhood onset is not rare. The disor-
der usually has a waxing and waning course, but some 
cases may show a steady deterioration in psychosocial 
functioning.
Etiology and pathophysiology
A genetic contribution to OCD is suggested by twin 
studies. A genomewide association study (GWAS) 
reported linkage to chromosome 2p23.2; however, 
no susceptibility gene for OCD has been identiﬁed to 
date. Family studies show an aggregation of OCD with 
Tourette’s disorder, and both are more common in 
males and in ﬁrst-born children.
The anatomy of obsessive-compulsive behavior 
is thought to include the orbital frontal cortex, cau-
date nucleus, and globus pallidus. The caudate nucleus 
appears to be involved in the acquisition and mainte-
nance of habit and skill learning, and interventions that 
are successful in reducing obsessive-compulsive behav-
iors also decrease metabolic activity measured in the 
caudate.
TREATMENT 
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Clomipramine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and sertraline 
are approved for the treatment of OCD. Clomipramine 
is a TCA that is often tolerated poorly owing to anticho-
linergic and sedative side effects at the doses required 
to treat the illness (25–250 mg/d); its efficacy in OCD 
is unrelated to its antidepressant activity. Fluoxetine 
(5–60 mg/d), fluvoxamine (25–300 mg/d), and sertra-
line (50–150 mg/d) are as effective as clomipramine and 
have a more benign side effect profile. Only 50–60% of 
patients with OCD show adequate improvement with 
pharmacotherapy alone. In treatment-resistant cases, 
augmentation with other serotonergic agents such as 
buspirone, or with a neuroleptic or benzodiazepine may 
be beneficial and in severe cases deep brain stimula-
tion has been found to be effective. When a therapeutic 
response is achieved, long-duration maintenance ther-
apy is usually indicated.
For many individuals, particularly those with time-
consuming compulsions, behavior therapy will result in 
as much improvement as that afforded by medication. 
Effective techniques include the gradual increase in 
exposure to stressful situations, maintenance of a diary 
to clarify stressors, and homework assignments that 
substitute new activities for compulsive behaviors.
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
729
MOOD DISORDERS
Mood disorders are characterized by a disturbance in the 
regulation of mood, behavior, and affect. Mood disorders 
are subdivided into (1) depressive disorders, (2) bipolar 
disorders, and (3) depression in association with medical 
illness or alcohol and substance abuse (Chaps. 56 through 
58). Major depressive disorder (MDD) is differenti-
ated from bipolar disorder by the absence of a manic 
or hypomanic episode. The relationship between pure 
depressive syndromes and bipolar disorders is not well 
understood; MDD is more frequent in families of bipolar 
individuals, but the reverse is not true. In the Global 
Burden of Disease Study conducted by the World Health 
Organization, unipolar major depression ranked fourth 
among all diseases in terms of disability-adjusted life-years 
and was projected to rank second by the year 2020. In 
the United States, lost productivity directly related to 
mood disorders has been estimated at $55.1 billion per 
year.
DEPRESSION IN ASSOCIATION WITH 
MEDICAL ILLNESS
Depression occurring in the context of medical illness 
is difﬁcult to evaluate. Depressive symptomatology may 
reﬂect the psychological stress of coping with the dis-
ease, may be caused by the disease process itself or by 
the medications used to treat it, or may simply coexist 
in time with the medical diagnosis.
Virtually every class of medication includes some agent 
that can induce depression. Antihypertensive drugs, 
anticholesterolemic agents, and antiarrhythmic agents 
are common triggers of depressive symptoms. Iatrogenic 
depression should also be considered in patients receiv-
ing glucocorticoids, antimicrobials, systemic analge-
sics, antiparkinsonian medications, and anticonvulsants. 
To decide whether a causal relationship exists between 
pharmacologic therapy and a patient’s change in mood, 
it may sometimes be necessary to undertake an empirical 
trial of an alternative medication.
Between 20 and 30% of cardiac patients manifest a 
depressive disorder; an even higher percentage experi-
ence depressive symptomatology when self-reporting 
scales are used. Depressive symptoms following unstable 
angina, myocardial infarction, cardiac bypass surgery, or 
heart transplant impair rehabilitation and are associated 
with higher rates of mortality and medical morbidity. 
Depressed patients often show decreased variability in 
heart rate (an index of reduced parasympathetic nervous 
system activity), which may predispose individuals to 
ventricular arrhythmia and increased morbidity. Depres-
sion also appears to increase the risk of developing cor-
onary heart disease, possibly through increased platelet 
aggregation. TCAs are contraindicated in patients with 
bundle branch block, and TCA-induced tachycardia is 
an additional concern in patients with congestive heart 
failure. SSRIs appear not to induce ECG changes or 
adverse cardiac events and thus are reasonable ﬁrst-line 
drugs for patients at risk for TCA-related complications. 
SSRIs may interfere with hepatic metabolism of antico-
agulants, however, causing increased anticoagulation.
In patients with cancer, the mean prevalence of 
depression is 25%, but depression occurs in 40–50% of 
patients with cancers of the pancreas or oropharynx. 
This association is not due to the effect of cachexia 
alone, as the higher prevalence of depression in patients 
with pancreatic cancer persists when compared to those 
with advanced gastric cancer. Initiation of antidepres-
sant medication in cancer patients has been shown to 
improve quality of life as well as mood. Psychothera-
peutic approaches, particularly group therapy, may have 
some effect on short-term depression, anxiety, and pain 
symptoms.
Depression occurs frequently in patients with neurologic 
disorders, particularly cerebrovascular disorders, Parkin-
son’s disease, dementia, multiple sclerosis, and traumatic 
brain injury. One in ﬁve patients with left-hemisphere 
stroke involving the dorsolateral frontal cortex experiences 
major depression. Late-onset depression in otherwise 
cognitively normal individuals increases the risk of a sub-
sequent diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Both TCA and 
SSRI agents are effective against these depressions, as are 
stimulant compounds and, in some patients, MAOIs.
The reported prevalence of depression in patients 
with diabetes mellitus varies from 8 to 27%, with the 
severity of the mood state correlating with the level of 
hyperglycemia and the presence of diabetic complica-
tions. Treatment of depression may be complicated by 
effects of antidepressive agents on glycemic control. 
MAOIs can induce hypoglycemia and weight gain, 
while TCAs can produce hyperglycemia and carbohy-
drate craving. SSRIs, like MAOIs, may reduce fasting 
plasma glucose, but they are easier to use and may also 
improve dietary and medication compliance.
Hypothyroidism is frequently associated with fea-
tures of depression, most commonly depressed mood and 
memory impairment. Hyperthyroid states may also present 
in a similar fashion, usually in geriatric populations. 
Improvement in mood usually follows normalization of 
thyroid function, but adjunctive antidepressant medication 
is sometimes required. Patients with subclinical hypothy-
roidism can also experience symptoms of depression and 
cognitive difﬁculty that respond to thyroid replacement.
The lifetime prevalence of depression in HIV-positive 
individuals has been estimated at 22–45%. The rela-
tionship between depression and disease progression is 
multifactorial and likely to involve psychological and 
social factors, alterations in immune function, and central 
nervous system (CNS) disease. Chronic hepatitis C 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
730
infection is also associated with depression, which may 
worsen with interferon-α treatment.
Some chronic disorders of uncertain etiology, such 
as chronic fatigue syndrome (Chap. 52) and ﬁbromyal-
gia, are strongly associated with depression and anxiety; 
patients may beneﬁt from antidepressant treatment or 
anticonvulsant agents such as pregabalin.
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS
Clinical manifestations
Major depression is deﬁned as depressed mood on a daily 
basis for a minimum duration of 2 weeks (Table 54-9). 
An episode may be characterized by sadness, indiffer-
ence, apathy, or irritability and is usually associated with 
changes in sleep patterns, appetite, and weight; motor 
agitation or retardation; fatigue; impaired concentration 
and decision making; feelings of shame or guilt; and 
thoughts of death or dying. Patients with depression have a 
profound loss of pleasure in all enjoyable activities, exhibit 
early morning awakening, feel that the dysphoric mood 
state is qualitatively different from sadness, and often 
notice a diurnal variation in mood (worse in morning 
hours).
Approximately 15% of the population experiences 
a major depressive episode at some point in life, and 
6–8% of all outpatients in primary care settings satisfy 
diagnostic criteria for the disorder. Depression is often 
undiagnosed, and, even more frequently, it is treated 
inadequately. If a physician suspects the presence of a 
major depressive episode, the initial task is to determine 
whether it represents unipolar or bipolar depression or 
is one of the 10–15% of cases that are secondary to gen-
eral medical illness or substance abuse. Physicians should 
also assess the risk of suicide by direct questioning, as 
patients are often reluctant to verbalize such thoughts 
without prompting. If speciﬁc plans are uncovered or if 
signiﬁcant risk factors exist (e.g., a past history of suicide 
attempts, profound hopelessness, concurrent medical 
illness, substance abuse, or social isolation), the patient 
must be referred to a mental health specialist for imme-
diate care. The physician should speciﬁcally probe each 
of these areas in an empathic and hopeful manner, being 
sensitive to denial and possible minimization of distress. 
The presence of anxiety, panic, or agitation signiﬁcantly 
increases near-term suicidal risk. Approximately 4–5% 
of all depressed patients will commit suicide; most will 
have sought help from physicians within 1 month of 
their deaths.
In some depressed patients, the mood disorder does 
not appear to be episodic and is not clearly associated 
with either psychosocial dysfunction or change from 
the individual’s usual experience in life. Dysthymic dis-
order consists of a pattern of chronic (at least 2 years), 
ongoing, mild depressive symptoms that are less severe 
and less disabling than those found in major depression; 
the two conditions are sometimes difﬁcult to separate, 
however, and can occur together (“double depression”). 
Many patients who exhibit a proﬁle of pessimism, dis-
interest, and low self-esteem respond to antidepressant 
treatment. Dysthymic disorder exists in ∼5% of pri-
mary care patients. The term minor depression is used 
for individuals who experience at least two depressive 
TABLE 54-9 
CRITERIA FOR A MAJOR DEPRESSIVE EPISODE
A.  Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been 
present during the same 2-week period and represent 
a change from previous functioning; at least one of the 
symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of 
interest or pleasure. Note: Do not include symptoms 
that are clearly due to a general medical condition, or 
mood-incongruent delusions or hallucinations.
    1.  Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, 
as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels 
sad or empty) or observation made by others (e.g., 
appears tearful)
    2.  Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or 
almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every 
day (as indicated by either subjective account or 
observation made by others)
    3.  Signiﬁcant weight loss when not dieting or weight 
gain (e.g., a change of >5% of body weight in a 
month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly 
every day
    4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day
    5.  Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every 
day (observable by others, not merely subjective 
feelings of restlessness or being slowed down)
    6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day
    7.  Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropri-
ate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day 
(not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick)
    8.  Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or inde-
cisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective 
account or as observed by others)
    9.  Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of 
dying), recurrent suicidal ideation without a spe-
ciﬁc plan, or a suicide attempt or a speciﬁc plan 
for committing suicide
B. The symptoms do not meet criteria for a mixed episode
C.  The symptoms cause clinically signiﬁcant distress or 
impairment in social, occupational, or other important 
areas of functioning
D.  The symptoms are not due to the direct physiologic 
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medica-
tion) or a general medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism)
E.  The symptoms are not better accounted for by 
bereavement (i.e., after the loss of a loved one), the 
symptoms persist for >2 months or are characterized 
by marked functional impairment, morbid preoccupa-
tion with worthlessness, suicidal ideation, psychotic 
symptoms, or psychomotor retardation
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. vghghg 
© 2000 American Psychiatric Association.
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
731
symptoms for 2 weeks but who do not meet the full 
criteria for major depression. Despite its name, minor 
depression is associated with signiﬁcant morbidity and 
disability and also responds to pharmacologic treatment.
Depression is approximately twice as common in 
women as in men, and the incidence increases with age 
in both sexes. Twin studies indicate that the liability 
to major depression of early onset (before age 25) is 
largely genetic in origin. Negative life events can pre-
cipitate and contribute to depression, but genetic factors 
inﬂuence the sensitivity of individuals to these stressful 
events. In most cases, both biologic and psychosocial 
factors are involved in the precipitation and unfolding 
of depressive episodes. The most potent stressors appear 
to involve death of a relative, assault, or severe marital 
or relationship problems.
Unipolar depressive disorders usually begin in early 
adulthood and recur episodically over the course of a 
lifetime. The best predictor of future risk is the number 
of past episodes; 50–60% of patients who have a ﬁrst 
episode have at least one or two recurrences. Some 
patients experience multiple episodes that become 
more severe and frequent over time. The duration of 
an untreated episode varies greatly, ranging from a few 
months to ≤1 year. The pattern of recurrence and clinical 
progression in a developing episode are also variable. 
Within an individual, the nature of episodes (e.g., spe-
ciﬁc presenting symptoms, frequency and duration) 
may be similar over time. In a minority of patients, a 
severe depressive episode may progress to a psychotic 
state; in elderly patients, depressive symptoms may be 
associated with cognitive deﬁcits mimicking dementia 
(“pseudodementia”). A seasonal pattern of depression, 
called seasonal affective disorder, may manifest with onset 
and remission of episodes at predictable times of the 
year. This disorder is more common in women, whose 
symptoms are anergy, fatigue, weight gain, hypersomnia, 
and episodic carbohydrate craving. The prevalence 
increases with distance from the equator, and improve-
ment may occur by altering light exposure.
Etiology and pathophysiology
Although evidence for genetic transmission of unipolar 
depression is not as strong as in bipolar disorder, mono-
zygotic twins have a higher concordance rate (46%) 
than dizygotic siblings (20%), with little support for any 
effect of a shared family environment.
Neuroendocrine abnormalities that reﬂect the neu-
rovegetative signs and symptoms of depression include: 
(1) increased cortisol and corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH) secretion, (2) an increase in adrenal size, 
(3) a decreased inhibitory response of glucocorticoids to 
dexamethasone, and (4) a blunted response of thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) level to infusion of thyroid-
releasing hormone (TRH). Antidepressant treatment leads 
to normalization of these abnormalities. Major depression 
is also associated with an upregulation of proinﬂamma-
tory cytokines, which also normalizes with antidepressant 
treatment.
Diurnal variations in symptom severity and alterations 
in circadian rhythmicity of a number of neurochemical 
and neurohumoral factors suggest that biologic differ-
ences may be secondary to a primary defect in regulation 
of biologic rhythms. Patients with major depression show 
consistent ﬁndings of a decrease in rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep onset (REM latency), an increase in REM 
density, and, in some subjects, a decrease in stage IV delta 
slow-wave sleep.
Although antidepressant drugs inhibit neurotransmit-
ter uptake within hours, their therapeutic effects typically 
emerge over several weeks, implicating adaptive changes 
in second messenger systems and transcription factors as 
possible mechanisms of action.
The pathogenesis of depression is discussed in detail 
in Chap. 53.
TREATMENT 
Depressive Disorders
Treatment planning requires coordination of short-term 
strategies to induce remission combined with longer 
term maintenance designed to prevent recurrence. The 
most effective intervention for achieving remission and 
preventing relapse is medication, but combined treat-
ment, incorporating psychotherapy to help the patient 
cope with decreased self-esteem and demoralization, 
improves outcome (Fig. 54-1). Approximately 40% 
of primary care patients with depression drop out of 
treatment and discontinue medication if symptomatic 
improvement is not noted within a month, unless addi-
tional support is provided. Outcome improves with (1) 
increased intensity and frequency of visits during the 
first 4–6 weeks of treatment, (2) supplemental educa-
tional materials, and (3) psychiatric consultation as indi-
cated. Despite the widespread use of SSRIs and other 
second-generation antidepressant drugs, there is no 
convincing evidence that this class of antidepressant is 
more efficacious than TCAs. Between 60 and 70% of all 
depressed patients respond to any drug chosen, if it is 
given in a sufficient dose for 6–8 weeks. There is no ideal 
antidepressant; no current compound combines rapid 
onset of action, moderate half-life, a meaningful rela-
tionship between dose and blood level, a low side effect 
profile, minimal interaction with other drugs, and safety 
in overdose.
A rational approach to selecting which antidepres-
sant to use involves matching the patient’s preference 
and medical history withthe metabolic and side effect 
profile of the drug (Tables 54-4 and 54-5). A previous 
response, or a family history of a positive response, to 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
732
a specific antidepressant often suggests that that drug 
be tried first. Before initiating antidepressant therapy, the 
physician should evaluate the possible contribution of 
comorbid illnesses and consider their specific treatment. 
In individuals with suicidal ideation, particular attention 
should be paid to choosing a drug with low toxicity if 
taken in overdose. The SSRIs, and other newer antidepres-
sant drugs are distinctly safer in this regard; neverthe-
less, the advantages of TCAs have not been completely 
superseded. The existence of generic equivalents make 
TCAs relatively cheap, and for secondary tricyclics, par-
ticularly nortriptyline and desipramine, well-defined 
relationships among dose, plasma level, and thera-
peutic response exist. The steady-state plasma level 
achieved for a given drug dose can vary more than ten-
fold between individuals and plasma levels may help 
in interpreting apparent resistance to treatment and/
or unexpected drug toxicity. The principal side effects 
of TCAs are antihistamine (sedation) and anticholiner-
gic (constipation, dry mouth, urinary hesitancy, blurred 
vision). TCAs are contraindicated in patients with seri-
ous cardiovascular risk factors and overdoses of tricy-
clic agents can be lethal, with desipramine carrying the 
greatest risk. It is judicious to prescribe only a 10-day 
supply when suicide is a risk. Most patients require a 
daily dose of 150–200 mg of imipramine or amitriptyline 
or its equivalent to achieve a therapeutic blood level 
of 150–300 ng/mL and a satisfactory remission; some 
patients show a partial effect at lower doses. Geriatric 
patients may require a low starting dose and slow esca-
lation. Ethnic differences in drug metabolism are signifi-
cant, with Hispanic, Asian, and black patients generally 
requiring lower doses than whites to achieve a compa-
rable blood level. P450 profiling using genetic chip tech-
nology may be clinically useful in predicting individual 
sensitivity.
Second-generation antidepressants include amoxap-
ine, maprotiline, trazodone, and bupropion. Amoxapine 
is a dibenzoxazepine derivative that blocks norepineph-
rine and serotonin reuptake and has a metabolite that 
shows a degree of dopamine blockade. Long-term use 
of this drug carries a risk of tardive dyskinesia. Maproti-
line is a potent noradrenergic reuptake blocker that has 
little anticholinergic effect but may produce seizures. 
Bupropion is a novel antidepressant whose mechanism 
of action is thought to involve enhancement of norad-
renergic function. It has no anticholinergic, sedating, or 
orthostatic side effects and has a low incidence of sexual 
side effects. It may, however, be associated with stimu-
lant-like side effects, may lower seizure threshold, and 
has an exceptionally short half-life, requiring frequent 
dosing. An extended-release preparation is available.
SSRIs such as fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalo-
pram, and escitalopram cause a lower frequency of anti-
cholinergic, sedating, and cardiovascular side effects 
but a possibly greater incidence of gastrointestinal com-
plaints, sleep impairment, and sexual dysfunction than 
do TCAs. Akathisia, involving an inner sense of restless-
ness and anxiety in addition to increased motor activ-
ity, may also be more common, particularly during the 
first week of treatment. One concern is the risk of “sero-
tonin syndrome,” thought to result from hyperstimula-
tion of brainstem 5HT1A receptors and characterized by 
myoclonus, agitation, abdominal cramping, hyperpy-
rexia, hypertension, and potentially death. Serotoner-
gic agonists taken in combination should be monitored 
closely for this reason. Considerations such as half-life, 
compliance, toxicity, and drug-drug interactions may 
guide the choice of a particular SSRI. Fluoxetine and its 
principal active metabolite, norfluoxetine, for example, 
have a combined half-life of almost 7 days, resulting in a 
delay of 5 weeks before steady-state levels are achieved 
and a similar delay for complete drug excretion once 
its use is discontinued. All the SSRIs may impair sexual 
function, resulting in diminished libido, impotence, or 
difficulty in achieving orgasm. Sexual dysfunction fre-
quently results in noncompliance and should be asked 
about specifically. Sexual dysfunction can sometimes be 
ameliorated by lowering the dose, by instituting weekend 
Determine whether there is a history of good response to a medication 
in the patient or a first-degree relative; if yes, consider treatment with 
this agent if compatible with considerations in step 2
Evaluate patient characteristics and match to drug; consider health 
status, side effect profile, convenience, cost, patient preference, drug 
interaction risk, suicide potential, and medication compliance history.
Begin new medication at 1/3 to 1/2 target dose if drug is a TCA, 
bupropion, venlafaxine, or mirtazapine, or full dose as tolerated if drug 
is an SSRI. 
If problem side effects occur, evaluate possibility of tolerance; consider 
temporary decrease in dose or adjunctive treatment.
If unacceptable side effects continue, taper drug over 1 week and 
initiate new trial; consider potential drug interactions in choice. 
Evaluate response after 6 weeks at target dose; if response is 
inadequate, increase dose in stepwise fashion as tolerated.
If inadequate response after maximal dose, consider tapering and 
switching to a new drug vs adjunctive treatment; if drug is a TCA, 
obtain plasma level to guide further treatment.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
ALGORITHM
FIGURE 54-1 
A guideline for the medical management of major 
depressive disorder. SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
733
drug holidays (two or three times a month), or by treat-
ment with amantadine (100 mg tid), bethanechol (25 
mg tid), buspirone (10 mg tid), or bupropion (100–150 
mg/d). Paroxetine appears to be more anticholinergic 
than either fluoxetine or sertraline, and sertraline carries 
a lower risk of producing an adverse drug interaction 
than the other two. Rare side effects of SSRIs include 
angina due to vasospasm and prolongation of the pro-
thrombin time. Escitalopram is the most specific of cur-
rently available SSRIs and appears to have no specific 
inhibitory effects on the P450 system.
Venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, and duloxetine block 
the reuptake of both norepinephrine and serotonin 
but produce relatively little in the way of traditional tri-
cyclic side effects. Unlike the SSRIs, venlafaxine has a 
relatively linear dose-response curve. Patients should 
be monitored for a possible increase in diastolic blood 
pressure, and multiple daily dosing is required because 
of the drug’s short half-life. An extended-release form is 
available and has a somewhat lower incidence of gas-
trointestinal side effects. Mirtazapine is a TCA that has a 
unique spectrum of activity. It increases noradrenergic 
and serotonergic neurotransmission through a block-
ade of central α2-adrenergic receptors and postsynaptic 
5HT2 and 5HT3 receptors. It is also strongly antihista-
minic and, as such, may produce sedation.
With the exception of citalopram and escitalopram, 
each of the SSRIs may inhibit one or more cytochrome 
P450 enzymes. Depending on the specific isoenzyme 
involved, the metabolism of a number of concomitantly 
administered medications can be dramatically affected. 
Fluoxetine and paroxetine, for example, by inhibiting 
2D6, can cause dramatic increases in the blood level of 
type 1C antiarrhythmics, while sertraline, by acting on 
3A4, may alter blood levels of carbamazepine, or digoxin.
The MAOIs are highly effective, particularly in atypical 
depression, but the risk of hypertensive crisis following 
intake of tyramine-containing food or sympathomimetic 
drugs makes them inappropriate as first-line agents. 
Transdermal selegiline may avert this risk at low dose. 
Common side effects include orthostatic hypotension, 
weight gain, insomnia, and sexual dysfunction. MAOIs 
should not be used concomitantly with SSRIs, because 
of the risk of serotonin syndrome, or with TCAs, because 
of possible hyperadrenergic effects.
Electroconvulsive therapy is at least as effective as 
medication, but its use is reserved for treatment-resistant 
cases and delusional depressions. Transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) is approved for treatment-resistant 
depression and has been shown to have efficacy in several 
controlled trials. Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) has also 
recently been approved for treatment-resistant depres-
sion, but its degree of efficacy is controversial. Deep brain 
stimulation is another treatment that is being used experi-
mentally in treatment-resistant cases.
Regardless of the treatment undertaken, the response 
should be evaluated after ∼2 months. Three-quarters of 
patients show improvement by this time, but if remission 
is inadequate the patient should be questioned about 
compliance and an increase in medication dose should 
be considered if side effects are not troublesome. If this 
approach is unsuccessful, referral to a mental health spe-
cialist is advised. Strategies for treatment then include 
selection of an alternative drug, combinations of anti-
depressants, and/or adjunctive treatment with other 
classes of drugs, including lithium, thyroid hormone, 
atypical antipsychotic agents, and dopamine agonists. 
A large randomized trial (STAR-D) was unable to show 
preferential efficacy, but the addition of atypical anti-
psychotic drugs has received FDA approval. Patients 
whose response to an SSRI wanes over time may benefit 
from the addition of buspirone (10 mg tid) or pindolol 
(2–5 mg tid) or small amounts of a TCA such as desipra-
mine (25 mg bid or tid). Most patients will show some 
degree of response but aggressive treatment should be 
pursued until remission is achieved, and drug treatment 
should be continued for at least 6–9 more months to 
prevent relapse. In patients who have had two or more 
episodes of depression, indefinite maintenance treat-
ment should be considered.
It is essential to educate patients both about depres-
sion and the benefits and side effects of medications 
they are receiving. Advice about stress reduction and 
cautions that alcohol may exacerbate depressive symp-
toms and impair drug response are helpful. Patients 
should be given time to describe their experience, their 
outlook, and the impact of the depression on them and 
their families. Occasional empathic silence may be as 
helpful for the treatment alliance as verbal reassurance. 
Controlled trials have shown that cognitive-behavioral 
and interpersonal therapies are effective in improving 
psychological and social adjustment and that a com-
bined treatment approach is more successful than med-
ication alone for many patients.
BIPOLAR DISORDER
Clinical manifestations
Bipolar disorder is characterized by unpredictable 
swings in mood from mania (or hypomania) to depres-
sion. Some patients suffer only from recurrent attacks 
of mania, which in its pure form is associated with 
increased psychomotor activity; excessive social extro-
version; decreased need for sleep; impulsivity and 
impairment in judgment; and expansive, grandiose, and 
sometimes irritable mood (Table 54-10). In severe 
mania, patients may experience delusions and paranoid 
thinking indistinguishable from schizophrenia. One-half 
of patients with bipolar disorder present with a mixture 
of psychomotor agitation and activation with dysphoria, 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
734
anxiety, and irritability. It may be difﬁcult to distinguish 
mixed mania from agitated depression. In some bipolar 
patients (bipolar II disorder), the full criteria for mania are 
lacking, and the requisite recurrent depressions are sepa-
rated by periods of mild activation and increased energy 
(hypomania). In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous 
hypomanic periods, usually of relatively short duration, 
alternating with clusters of depressive symptoms that 
fail, either in severity or duration, to meet the criteria 
of major depression. The mood ﬂuctuations are chronic 
and should be present for at least 2 years before the 
diagnosis is made.
Manic episodes typically emerge over a period of days 
to weeks, but onset within hours is possible, usually in 
the early morning hours. An untreated episode of either 
depression or mania can be as short as several weeks or 
last as long as 8–12 months, and rare patients have an 
unremitting chronic course. The term rapid cycling is used 
for patients who have four or more episodes of either 
depression or mania in a given year. This pattern occurs 
in 15% of all patients, almost all of whom are women. 
In some cases, rapid cycling is linked to an underlying 
thyroid dysfunction and, in others, it is iatrogenically trig-
gered by prolonged antidepressant treatment. Approxi-
mately one-half of patients have sustained difﬁculties in 
work performance and psychosocial functioning, with 
depressive phases being more responsible for impairment 
than mania.
Bipolar disorder is common, affecting ∼1.5% of 
the population in the United States. Onset is typically 
between 20 and 30 years of age, but many individuals 
report premorbid symptoms in late childhood or early 
adolescence. The prevalence is similar for men and 
women; women are likely to have more depressive and 
men more manic episodes over a lifetime.
Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of mania includes secondary 
mania induced by stimulant or sympathomimetic drugs, 
hyperthyroidism, AIDS, neurologic disorders, such as 
Huntington’s or Wilson’s disease, and cerebrovascu-
lar accidents. Comorbidity with alcohol and substance 
abuse is common, either because of poor judgment and 
increased impulsivity or because of an attempt to self-treat 
the underlying mood symptoms and sleep disturbances.
Etiology and pathophysiology
Genetic predisposition to bipolar disorder is evident from 
family studies; the concordance rate for monozygotic 
twins approaches 80%. Patients with bipolar disorder also 
appear to have altered circadian rhythmicity, and lithium 
may exert its therapeutic beneﬁt through a resynchroni-
zation of intrinsic rhythms keyed to the light/dark cycle. 
A detailed discussion of the pathogenesis of bipolar disor-
der is presented in Chap. 53.
TREATMENT 
Bipolar Disorder
(Table 54-11) Lithium carbonate is the mainstay of 
treat ment in bipolar disorder, although sodium valpro-
ate and olanzapine are equally effective in acute mania, 
as is lamotrigine in the depressed phase. The response 
rate to lithium carbonate is 70–80% in acute mania, 
with beneficial effects appearing in 1–2 weeks. Lithium 
also has a prophylactic effect in prevention of recur-
rent mania and, to a lesser extent, in the prevention of 
recurrent depression. A simple cation, lithium is rapidly 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and remains 
unbound to plasma or tissue proteins. Some 95% of a 
given dose is excreted unchanged through the kidneys 
within 24 h.
TABLE 54-10 
CRITERIA FOR A MANIC EPISODE
A.  A distinct period of abnormally and persistently ele-
vated, expansive, or irritable mood, lasting at least 1 
week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary)
B.  During the period of mood disturbance, three (or more) of 
the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood 
is only irritable) and have been present to a signiﬁcant 
degree:
    1. Inﬂated self-esteem or grandiosity
    2.  Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after 
only 3 h of sleep)
    3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking
    4.  Flight of ideas or subjective experience that 
thoughts are racing
    5.  Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to  
unimportant or irrelevant external stimuli)
    6.  Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at 
work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation
    7.  Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that 
have a high potential for painful consequences (e.g., 
engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual  
indiscretions, or foolish business investments)
C.  The symptoms do not meet criteria for a mixed episode.
D.  The mood disturbance is sufﬁciently severe to cause 
marked impairment in occupational functioning or in 
usual social activities or relationships with others, or to 
necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or 
others, or there are psychotic features.
E.  The symptoms are not due to the direct physiologic effects 
of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or 
other treatment) or a general medical condition (e.g., 
hyperthyroidism).
Note: Manic-like episodes that are clearly caused by somatic antide-
pressant treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy, light 
therapy) should not count toward a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Sta-
tistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. 
vghghg © 2000 American Psychiatric Association.
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
735
Serious side effects from lithium are rare, but minor 
complaints such as gastrointestinal discomfort, nausea, 
diarrhea, polyuria, weight gain, skin eruptions, alopecia, 
and edema are common. Over time, urine-concentrating 
ability may be decreased, but significant nephrotoxicity 
does not usually occur. Lithium exerts an antithyroid 
TABLE 54-11 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF MOOD STABILIZERS
AGENT AND DOSING
SIDE EFFECTS AND OTHER 
EFFECTS
Lithium
Common Side Effects
 Starting dose: 300 mg 
bid or tid
 Therapeutic blood level: 
0.8–1.2 meq/L
Nausea/anorexia/diarrhea, 
ﬁne tremor, thirst, polyuria, 
fatigue, weight gain, acne, 
folliculitis, neutrophilia, 
hypothyroidism
Blood level is increased by 
thiazides, tetracyclines, 
and NSAIDs
Blood level is decreased by 
bronchodilators, verapamil, 
and carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors
Rare side effects: Neurotox-
icity, renal toxicity, hyper-
calcemia, ECG changes
Valproic Acid
Common Side Effects
Starting dose: 250 mg tid
 Therapeutic blood level: 
50–125 μg/mL
Nausea/anorexia, weight 
gain, sedation, tremor, 
rash, alopecia
Inhibits hepatic metabolism 
of other medications
Rare side effects: Pancre-
atitis, hepatotoxicity, Ste-
vens-Johnson syndrome
Carbamazepine/
Oxcarbazepine
Common Side Effects
Starting dose: 200 mg bid 
for carbamazepine, 150 mg 
bid for oxcarbazepine
Therapeutic blood level: 
4–12 μg/mL for carbam-
azepine
Nausea/anorexia, sedation, 
rash, dizziness/ataxia
Carbamazepine, but not 
oxcarbazepine, induces 
hepatic metabolism of 
other medications
Rare side effects: Hypona-
tremia, agranulocytosis, 
Stevens-Johnson  
syndrome
Lamotrigine
Common Side Effects
Starting dose: 25 mg/d
Rash, dizziness, headache, 
tremor, sedation, nausea
Rare side effect: Stevens-
Johnson syndrome
Abbreviations: NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs; ECG, 
electrocardiogram.
effect by interfering with the synthesis and release of 
thyroid hormones. More serious side effects include 
tremor, poor concentration and memory, ataxia, dysar-
thria, and incoordination. There is suggestive, but not 
conclusive, evidence that lithium is teratogenic, induc-
ing cardiac malformations in the first trimester.
In the treatment of acute mania, lithium is initiated 
at 300 mg bid or tid, and the dose is then increased 
by 300 mg every 2–3 days to achieve blood levels of 
0.8–1.2 meq/L. Because the therapeutic effect of lith-
ium may not appear until after 7–10 days of treatment, 
adjunctive usage of lorazepam (1–2 mg every 4 h) or 
clonazepam (0.5–1 mg every 4 h) may be beneficial 
to control agitation. Antipsychotics are indicated in 
patients with severe agitation who respond only par-
tially to benzodiazepines. Patients using lithium should 
be monitored closely, since the blood levels required 
to achieve a therapeutic benefit are close to those 
associated with toxicity.
Valproic acid may be better than lithium for patients 
who experience rapid cycling (i.e., more than four epi-
sodes a year) or who present with a mixed or dysphoric 
mania. Tremor and weight gain are the most common 
side effects; hepatotoxicity and pancreatitis are rare 
toxicities.
Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine, although not 
formally approved by the FDA for bipolar disorder, have 
clinical efficacy in the treatment of acute mania. Second-
generation antipsychotic drugs (olanzapine, quetiapine, 
risperidone, ziprasidone, aripiprazole, and asenapine) 
have also been shown to be effective, either alone or in 
combination with a mood stabilizer. An increased risk of 
weight gain and other metabolic abnormalities is a con-
cern with these agents.
The recurrent nature of bipolar mood disorder 
necessitates maintenance treatment. A sustained 
blood lithium level of at least 0.8 meq/L is impor-
tant for optimal prophylaxis and has been shown to 
reduce risk of suicide, a finding not yet apparent for 
other mood stabilizers. Compliance is frequently an 
issue and often requires enlistment and education 
of concerned family members. Efforts to identify and 
modify psychosocial factors that may trigger epi-
sodes are important, as is an emphasis on lifestyle 
regularity. Antidepressant medications are some-
times required for the treatment of severe break-
through depressions, but their use should generally 
be avoided during maintenance treatment because 
of the risk of precipitating mania or accelerating 
the cycle frequency. Loss of efficacy over time may  
be observed with any of the mood-stabilizing agents. 
In such situations, an alternative agent or combina-
tion therapy is usually helpful.
Consensus guidelines for the treatment of acute mania 
and bipolar depression are described in Table 54-12.
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
736
of serious medical illness that persists despite reassurance 
and appropriate medical evaluation. As with somatiza-
tion disorder, patients with hypochondriasis have a his-
tory of poor relationships with physicians stemming from 
their sense that they have been evaluated and treated 
inappropriately or inadequately. Hypochondriasis can be 
disabling in intensity and is persistent, with waxing and 
waning symptomatology.
TABLE 54-12 
CONSENSUS GUIDELINES ON THE DRUG 
TREATMENT OF ACUTE MANIA AND BIPOLAR 
DEPRESSION
CONDITION
PREFERRED AGENTS
Euphoric mania
Lithium
Mixed/dysphoric mania
Valproic acid
Mania with psychosis
Valproic acid with olanzapine, 
aripiprazole, conventional 
antipsychotic, or risperidone
Hypomania
Lithium, lamotrigine, or  
valproic acid alone
Severe depression with 
psychosis
Venlafaxine, bupropion, or 
paroxetine plus lithium plus 
olanzapine, or risperidone; 
consider ECT
Severe depression without 
psychosis
Bupropion, paroxetine, 
sertraline, venlafaxine, or 
citalopram plus lithium
Mild to moderate  
depression
Lithium or lamotrigine 
alone; add bupropion if 
needed
Abbreviation: ECT, electroconvulsive therapy.
Source: From GS Sachs et al: Postgrad Med April, 2000.
SOMATOFORM DISORDERS
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Patients with multiple somatic complaints that can-
not be explained by a known medical condition or by 
the effects of alcohol or of recreational or prescription 
drugs are commonly seen in primary care practice; one 
survey indicated a prevalence of such complaints of 5%. 
In somatization disorder, the patient presents with multiple 
physical complaints referable to different organ systems 
(Table 54-13). Onset is usually before age 30 years, 
and the disorder is persistent. Formal diagnostic criteria 
require the recording of at least four pain, two gastroin-
testinal, one sexual, and one pseudoneurologic symptom. 
Patients with somatization disorder often present with 
dramatic complaints, but the complaints are inconsistent. 
Symptoms of comorbid anxiety and mood disorder are 
common and may be the result of drug interactions due 
to regimens initiated independently by different physi-
cians. Patients with somatization disorder may be impul-
sive and demanding and frequently qualify for a formal 
comorbid psychiatric diagnosis. In conversion disorder, the 
symptoms focus on deﬁcits that involve motor or sen-
sory function and on psychological factors that initiate 
or exacerbate the medical presentation. Like somatiza-
tion disorder, the deﬁcit is not intentionally produced 
or simulated, as is the case in factitious disorder (malin-
gering). In hypochondriasis, the essential feature is a belief 
TABLE 54-13 
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR SOMATIZATION 
DISORDER
A.  A history of many physical complaints beginning before 
age 30 years that occur over a period of several years 
and result in treatment being sought or signiﬁcant 
impairment in social, occupational, or other important 
areas of functioning.
B.  Each of the following criteria must have been met, with 
individual symptoms occurring at any time during the 
course of the disturbance:
    1.  Four pain symptoms: a history of pain related to 
at least four different sites or functions (e.g., head, 
abdomen, back, joints, extremities, chest, rectum, 
during menstruation, during sexual intercourse, or 
during urination)
    2.  Two gastrointestinal symptoms: a history of at least 
two gastrointestinal symptoms other than pain (e.g., 
nausea, bloating, vomiting other than during preg-
nancy, diarrhea, or intolerance of several different 
foods)
    3.  One sexual symptom: a history of at least one sexual 
or reproductive symptom other than pain (e.g., sexual 
indifference, erectile or ejaculatory dysfunction, 
irregular menses, excessive menstrual bleeding, 
vomiting throughout pregnancy)
    4.  One pseudoneurologic symptom: a history of at least 
one symptom or deﬁcit suggesting a neurologic con-
dition not limited to pain (conversion symptoms such 
as impaired coordination or balance, paralysis or 
localized weakness, difﬁculty swallowing or lump in 
throat, aphonia, urinary retention, hallucinations, loss 
of touch or pain sensation, double vision, blindness, 
deafness, seizures; dissociative symptoms such as 
amnesia; or loss of consciousness other than fainting)
C. Either of the following:
    1.  After appropriate investigation, each of the symp-
toms in criterion B cannot be fully explained by 
a known general medical condition or the direct 
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a 
medication)
    2.  When there is a related general medical condition, the 
physical complaints or resulting social or occupational 
impairment are in excess of what would be expected 
from the history, physical examination, or laboratory 
ﬁndings
D.  The symptoms are not intentionally produced or 
feigned (as in factitious disorder or malingering).
Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. vghghg 
© 2000 American Psychiatric Association.
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
737
In factitious illnesses, the patient consciously and vol-
untarily produces physical symptoms of illness. The term 
Munchausen’s syndrome is reserved for individuals with 
particularly dramatic, chronic, or severe factitious illness. 
In true factitious illness, the sick role itself is gratifying. A 
variety of signs, symptoms, and diseases have been either 
simulated or caused by factitious behavior, the most com-
mon including chronic diarrhea, fever of unknown origin, 
intestinal bleeding or hematuria, seizures, and hypoglyce-
mia. Factitious disorder is usually not diagnosed until 5–10 
years after its onset, and it can produce signiﬁcant social 
and medical costs. In malingering, the fabrication derives 
from a desire for some external reward such as a narcotic 
medication or disability reimbursement.
TREATMENT 
Somatoform Disorders
Patients with somatization disorders are frequently sub-
jected to many diagnostic tests and exploratory surgeries 
in an attempt to find their “real” illness. Such an approach 
is doomed to failure and does not address the core issue. 
Successful treatment is best achieved through behavior 
modification, in which access to the physician is tightly 
regulated and adjusted to provide a sustained and pre-
dictable level of support that is less clearly contingent 
on the patient’s level of presenting distress. Visits can 
be brief and should not be associated with a need for a 
diagnostic or treatment action. Although the literature 
is limited, some patients with somatization disorder may 
benefit from antidepressant treatment.
Any attempt to confront the patient usually creates 
a sense of humiliation and causes the patient to aban-
don treatment from that caregiver. A better strategy is to 
introduce psychological causation as one of a number of 
possible explanations and to include factitious illness as an 
option in the differential diagnoses that are discussed. 
Without directly linking psychotherapeutic intervention 
to the diagnosis, the patient can be offered a face-saving 
means by which the pathologic relationship with the 
health care system can be examined and alternative 
approaches to life stressors developed.
PERSONALITY DISORDERS
Clinical manifestations
Personality disorders are characteristic patterns of 
thinking, feeling, and interpersonal behavior that are 
relatively inﬂexible and cause signiﬁcant functional 
impairment or subjective distress for the individual. 
The observed behaviors are not secondary to another 
mental disorder, nor are they precipitated by substance 
abuse or a general medical condition. This distinc-
tion is often difﬁcult to make in clinical practice, as 
personality change may be the ﬁrst sign of serious neu-
rologic, endocrine, or other medical illness. Patients 
with frontal lobe tumors, for example, can present with 
changes in motivation and personality while the results 
of the neurologic examination remain within normal 
limits. Individuals with personality disorders are often 
regarded as “difﬁcult patients” in clinical medical prac-
tice because they are seen as excessively demanding 
and/or unwilling to follow recommended treatment 
plans. Although DSM-IV portrays personality disorders 
as qualitatively distinct categories, there is an alternative 
perspective that personality characteristics vary as a con-
tinuum between normal functioning and formal mental 
disorder.
Personality disorders have been grouped into three 
overlapping clusters. Cluster A includes paranoid, schiz-
oid, and schizotypal personality disorders. It includes 
individuals who are odd and eccentric and who main-
tain an emotional distance from others. Individuals have 
a restricted emotional range and remain socially isolated. 
Patients with schizotypal personality disorder frequently 
have unusual perceptual experiences and express magical 
beliefs about the external world. The essential feature of 
paranoid personality disorder is a pervasive mistrust and 
suspiciousness of others to an extent that is unjustiﬁed by 
available evidence. Cluster B disorders include antisocial, 
borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic types and describe 
individuals whose behavior is impulsive, excessively 
emotional, and erratic. Cluster C incorporates avoid-
ant, dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality 
types; enduring traits are anxiety and fear. The bound-
aries between cluster types are to some extent artiﬁcial, 
and many patients who meet criteria for one personal-
ity disorder also meet criteria for aspects of another. The 
risk of a comorbid major mental disorder is increased 
in patients who qualify for a diagnosis of personality 
disorder.
TREATMENT 
Personality Disorders
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is a cognitive-behavioral 
approach that focuses on behavioral change while pro-
viding acceptance, compassion, and validation of the 
patient. Several randomized trials have demonstrated 
the efficacy of DBT in the treatment of personality disorders. 
Antidepressant medications and low-dose antipsychotic 
drugs have some efficacy in cluster A personality disor-
ders, while anticonvulsant mood-stabilizing agents and 
MAOIs may be considered for patients with cluster B 
diagnoses who show marked mood reactivity, behavioral 
dyscontrol, and/or rejection hypersensitivity. Anxious or 
fearful cluster C patients often respond to medications 
used for axis I anxiety disorders (discussed earlier). It is 
important that the physician and the patient have rea-
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
738
sonable expectations vis-à-vis the possible benefit of 
any medication used and its side effects. Improvement 
may be subtle and observable only over time.
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Clinical manifestations
Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous syndrome character-
ized by perturbations of language, perception, thinking, 
social activity, affect, and volition. There are no patho-
gnomonic features. The syndrome commonly begins 
in late adolescence, has an insidious (and less com-
monly acute) onset, and, often, a poor outcome, progress-
ing from social withdrawal and perceptual distortions 
to recurrent delusions and hallucinations. Patients may 
present with positive symptoms (such as conceptual dis-
organization, delusions, or hallucinations) or negative 
symptoms (loss of function, anhedonia, decreased emo-
tional expression, impaired concentration, and dimin-
ished social engagement) and must have at least two of 
these for a 1-month period and continuous signs for at 
least 6 months to meet formal diagnostic criteria. As 
individuals age, positive psychotic symptoms tend to 
attenuate and some measure of social and occupational 
function may be regained. “Negative” symptoms pre-
dominate in one-third of the schizophrenic population 
and are associated with a poor long-term outcome and 
a poor response to drug treatment. However, marked 
variability in the course and individual character of 
symptoms is typical.
The four main subtypes of schizophrenia are catatonic, 
paranoid, disorganized, and residual. Many individu-
als have symptoms of more than one type. Catatonic-type 
describes patients whose clinical presentation is dominated 
by profound changes in motor activity, negativism, and 
echolalia or echopraxia. Paranoid-type describes patients 
who have a prominent preoccupation with a speciﬁc 
delusional system and who otherwise do not qualify as 
having disorganized-type disease, in which disorganized 
speech and behavior are accompanied by a superﬁcial 
or silly affect. In residual-type disease, negative symptom-
atology exists in the absence of delusions, hallucinations, 
or motor disturbance. The term schizophreniform disorder 
describes patients who meet the symptom requirements 
but not the duration requirements for schizophrenia, and 
schizoaffective disorder is used for those who manifest symp-
toms of schizophrenia and independent periods of mood 
disturbance. Prognosis depends not on symptom sever-
ity but on the response to antipsychotic medication. A 
permanent remission without recurrence does occasion-
ally occur. About 10% of schizophrenic patients commit 
suicide.
Schizophrenia is present in 0.85% of individuals 
worldwide, with a lifetime prevalence of ∼1–1.5%. An 
estimated 300,000 episodes of acute schizophrenia occur 
annually in the United States, resulting in direct and 
indirect costs of $62.7 billion.
Differential diagnosis
The diagnosis is principally one of exclusion, requiring 
the absence of signiﬁcant associated mood symptoms, 
any relevant medical condition, and substance abuse. Drug 
reactions that cause hallucinations, paranoia, confusion, or 
bizarre behavior may be dose-related or idiosyncratic; par-
kinsonian medications, clonidine, quinacrine, and procaine 
derivatives are the most common prescription medi-
cations associated with these symptoms. Drug causes 
should be ruled out in any case of newly emergent psy-
chosis. The general neurologic examination in patients 
with schizophrenia is usually normal, but motor rigid-
ity, tremor, and dyskinesias are noted in one-quarter of 
untreated patients.
Epidemiology and pathophysiology
Epidemiologic surveys identify several risk factors for 
schizophrenia, including genetic susceptibility, early devel-
opmental insults, winter birth, and increasing parental age. 
Genetic factors are involved in at least a subset of individu-
als who develop schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is observed 
in ∼6.6% of all ﬁrst-degree relatives of an affected proband. 
If both parents are affected, the risk for offspring is 40%. 
The concordance rate for monozygotic twins is 50%, 
compared to 10% for dizygotic twins. Schizophrenia-
prone families are also at risk for other psychiatric dis-
orders, including schizoaffective disorder and schizotypal 
and schizoid personality disorders, the latter terms designating 
individuals who show a lifetime pattern of social and 
interpersonal deﬁcits characterized by an inability to form 
close interpersonal relationships, eccentric behavior, and 
mild perceptual distortions. The pathogenesis of schizo-
phrenia is discussed in detail in Chap. 53.
TREATMENT 
Schizophrenia
Antipsychotic agents (Table 54-14) are the cornerstone 
of acute and maintenance treatment of schizophre-
nia and are effective in the treatment of hallucinations, 
delusions, and thought disorders, regardless of etiology. 
The mechanism of action involves, at least in part, bind-
ing to dopamine D2/D3 receptors in the ventral striatum; 
the clinical potencies of traditional antipsychotic drugs 
parallel their affinities for the D2 receptor, and even the 
newer “atypical” agents exert some degree of D2 receptor 
blockade. All neuroleptics induce expression of the 
immediate-early gene c-fos in the nucleus accumbens, 
a dopaminergic site connecting prefrontal and limbic 
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
739
TABLE 54-14 
ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS
NAME
USUAL PO DAILY 
DOSE, mg
SIDE EFFECTS
SEDATION
COMMENTS
First-Generation Antipsychotics
Low-potency
  Chlorpromazine 
  (Thorazine)
 Thioridazine (Mellaril)
100–1000
100–600
Anticholinergic effects; ortho-
stasis; photosensitivity; cho-
lestasis; QT prolongation
+ + +
EPSEs usually not prominent; 
can cause anticholinergic 
delirium in elderly patients
Midpotency
 Triﬂuoperazine (Stelazine)
 Perphenazine (Trilafon)
 Loxapine (Loxitane)
 Molindone (Moban)
2–50
4–64
30–100
30–100
Fewer anticholinergic side 
effects
Fewer EPSEs than with higher 
potency agents.
Frequent EPSEs
Frequent EPSEs
+ +
++
+ +
0
Well tolerated by most 
patients
Little weight gain
High potency
 Haloperidol (Haldol)
 Fluphenazine (Prolixin)
 Thiothixene (Navane)
5–20
1–20
2–50
No anticholinergic side effects; 
EPSEs often prominent
Frequent EPSEs
Frequent EPSEs
0/+
0/+
0/+
Often prescribed in doses 
that are too high; long-acting 
injectable forms of haloperidol 
and ﬂuphenazine available
Second-Generation Antipsychotics
Clozapine (Clozaril)
150–600
Agranulocytosis (1%); weight 
gain; seizures; drooling; 
hyperthermia
+ +
Requires weekly WBC count 
for ﬁrst 6 months, then 
biweekly if stable
Risperidone (Risperdal)
2–8
Orthostasis
+
Requires slow titration;  
EPSEs observed with doses  
>6 mg qd
Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
10–30
Weight gain
+ +
Mild prolactin elevation
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
350–800
Sedation; weight gain; anxiety
+ + +
Bid dosing
Ziprasidone (Geodon)
120–200
Orthostatic hypotension
+/++
Minimal weight gain; increases 
QT interval
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
10–30
Nausea, anxiety, insomnia
0/+
Mixed agonist/antagonist
Paliperidone (Invega)
3–12
Restlessness, EPSEs
+
Active metabolite of  
risperidone
Iloperidone (Fanapt)
12–24
Dizziness, hypotension
0/+
Requires dose titration
Asenapine (Saphris)
10–20
Dizziness, EPSEs, weight gain
++
Sublingual tablets; bid dosing
Lurasidone (Latuda)
40–80
Nausea, EPSEs
++
Uses CYP3A4
Abbreviations: EPSEs, extrapyramidal side effects; WBC, white blood cell.
cortices. The clinical efficacy of newer atypical neurolep-
tics, however, may involve N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor blockade, α1- and α2-noradrenergic activity, 
altering the relationship between 5HT2 and D2 receptor 
activity, as well as faster dissociation of D2 binding and 
effects on neuroplasticity.
Conventional neuroleptics differ in their potency 
and side-effect profile. Older agents such as chlorproma-
zine and thioridazine, are more sedating and anticholin-
ergic and more likely to cause orthostatic hypotension, 
while higher potency antipsychotics such as haloperidol, 
perphenazine, and thiothixene, are more likely to induce 
extrapyramidal side effects. The model “atypical” anti-
psychotic agent is clozapine, a dibenzodiazepine that 
has a greater potency in blocking the 5HT2 than the D2 
receptor and a much higher affinity for the D4 than the 
D2 receptor. Its principal disadvantage is a risk of blood 
dyscrasias. Paliperidone is a recently approved agent 
that is a metabolite of risperidone and shares many of 
its properties. Unlike other antipsychotics, clozapine 
does not cause a rise in prolactin level. Approximately 
30% of patients who do not benefit from conventional 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
740
antipsychotic agents will have a better response to this 
drug, which also has a demonstrated superiority to 
other antipsychotic agents in preventing suicide; how-
ever, its side-effect profile makes it most appropriate for 
treatment-resistant cases. Risperidone, a benzisoxazole 
derivative, is more potent at 5HT2 than D2 receptor sites, 
like clozapine, but it also exerts significant α2 antago-
nism, a property that may contribute to its perceived 
ability to improve mood and increase motor activity. 
Risperidone is not as effective as clozapine in treatment-
resistant cases but does not carry a risk of blood dyscra-
sias. Olanzapine is similar neurochemically to clozapine 
but has a significant risk of inducing weight gain. Que-
tiapine is distinct in having a weak D2 effect but potent 
α1 and histamine blockade. Ziprasidone causes minimal 
weight gain and is unlikely to increase prolactin but may 
increase QT prolongation. Aripiprazole also has little risk 
of weight gain or prolactin increase but may increase 
anxiety, nausea, and insomnia as a result of its partial 
agonist properties.
Antipsychotic agents are effective in 70% of patients 
presenting with a first episode. Improvement may be 
observed within hours or days, but full remission usually 
requires 6–8 weeks. The choice of agent depends princi-
pally on the side effect profile and cost of treatment or on 
a past personal or family history of a favorable response 
to the drug in question. Atypical agents appear to be 
more effective in treating negative symptoms and 
improving cognitive function. An equivalent treat-
ment response can usually be achieved with relatively 
low doses of any drug selected (i.e., 4–6 mg/d of halo-
peridol, 10–15 mg of olanzapine, or 4–6 mg/d of risperi-
done). Doses in this range result in >80% D2 receptor 
blockade, and there is little evidence that higher doses 
increase either the rapidity or degree of response. Main-
tenance treatment requires careful attention to the pos-
sibility of relapse and monitoring for the development 
of a movement disorder. Intermittent drug treatment 
is less effective than regular dosing, but gradual dose 
reduction is likely to improve social functioning in many 
schizophrenic patients who have been maintained at 
high doses. If medications are completely discontinued, 
however, the relapse rate is 60% within 6 months. Long-
acting injectable preparations (risperidone) are consid-
ered when noncompliance with oral therapy leads to 
relapses. In treatment-resistant patients, a transition to 
clozapine usually results in rapid improvement, but a 
prolonged delay in response in some cases necessitates 
a 6- to 9-month trial for maximal benefit to occur.
Antipsychotic medications can cause a broad range 
of side effects, including lethargy, weight gain, postural 
hypotension, constipation, and dry mouth. Extrapyra-
midal symptoms such as dystonia, akathisia, and akine-
sia are also frequent with first-generation agents and 
may contribute to poor adherence if not specifically 
addressed. Anticholinergic and parkinsonian symptoms 
respond well to trihexyphenidyl, 2 mg bid, or benztro-
pine mesylate, 1–2 mg bid. Akathisia may respond to 
beta blockers. In rare cases, more serious and occasion-
ally life-threatening side effects may emerge, including 
hyperprolactinemia, ventricular arrhythmias, gastroin-
testinal obstruction, retinal pigmentation, obstructive 
jaundice, and neuroleptic malignant syndrome (char-
acterized by hyperthermia, autonomic dysfunction, 
muscular rigidity, and elevated creatine phosphokinase 
levels). The most serious adverse effects of clozapine 
are agranulocytosis, which has an incidence of 1%, and 
induction of seizures, which has an incidence of 10%. 
Weekly white blood cell counts are required, particularly 
during the first 3 months of treatment.
The risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus appears to be 
increased in schizophrenia, and second-generation agents 
as a group produce greater adverse effects on glucose 
regulation, independent of effects on obesity, than tra-
ditional agents. Clozapine, olanzapine, and quetiapine 
seem more likely to cause hyperglycemia, weight gain, 
and hypertriglyceridemia than other atypical antipsy-
chotic drugs. Close monitoring of plasma glucose and 
lipid levels are indicated with the use of these agents.
A serious side effect of long-term use of first gen-
eration antipsychotic agents is tardive dyskinesia, char-
acterized by repetitive, involuntary, and potentially 
irreversible movements of the tongue and lips (bucco-
linguo-masticatory triad), and, in approximately half 
of cases, choreoathetosis. Tardive dyskinesia has an 
incidence of 2–4% per year of exposure, and a preva-
lence of 20% in chronically treated patients. The 
prevalence increases with age, total dose, and dura-
tion of drug administration. The risk associated with 
second-generation agents appears to be much lower. 
The cause may involve formation of free radicals and 
perhaps mitochondrial energy failure. Vitamin E may 
reduce abnormal involuntary movements if given 
early in the syndrome.
The CATIE study, a large-scale investigation of the effec-
tiveness of antipsychotic agents in “real world” patients, 
revealed a high rate of discontinuation of treatment over 
18 months. Olanzapine showed greater effectiveness than 
quetiapine, risperidone, perphenazine, or ziprasidone 
but also a higher discontinuation rate due to weight gain 
and metabolic effects. Surprisingly, perphenazine, a first-
generation agent, showed little evidence of inferiority to 
newer drugs.
Drug treatment of schizophrenia is by itself insuffi-
cient. Educational efforts directed toward families and rel-
evant community resources have proved to be necessary 
to maintain stability and optimize outcome. A treatment 
model involving a multidisciplinary case-management 
 
CHAPTER 54
Mental Disorders
741
team that seeks out and closely follows the patient in 
the community has proved particularly effective.
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION OF 
VIOLENCE
Primary care physicians may encounter situations in 
which family, domestic, or societal violence is discov-
ered or suspected. Such an awareness can carry legal and 
moral obligations; many state laws mandate reporting of 
child, spousal, and elder abuse. Physicians are frequently 
the ﬁrst point of contact for both victim and abuser. 
Approximately 2 million older Americans and 1.5 mil-
lion U.S. children are thought to experience some 
form of physical maltreatment each year. Spousal abuse 
is thought to be even more prevalent. An interview 
study of 24,000 women in 10 countries found a lifetime 
prevalence of physical or sexual violence that ranged 
from 15 to 71%; these individuals are more likely to 
suffer from depression, anxiety, somatization disorder, 
and substance abuse and to have attempted suicide. In 
addition, abused individuals frequently express low self-
esteem, vague somatic symptomatology, social isolation, 
and a passive feeling of loss of control. Although it is 
essential to treat these elements in the victim, the ﬁrst 
obligation is to ensure that the perpetrator has taken 
responsibility for preventing any further violence. Sub-
stance abuse and/or dependence and serious mental ill-
ness in the abuser may contribute to the risk of harm 
and require direct intervention. Depending on the situ-
ation, law enforcement agencies, community resources 
such as support groups and shelters, and individual and 
family counseling can be appropriate components of a 
treatment plan. A safety plan should be formulated with 
the victim, in addition to providing information about 
abuse, its likelihood of recurrence, and its tendency 
to increase in severity and frequency. Antianxiety and 
antidepressant medications may sometimes be useful in 
treating the acute symptoms, but only if independent 
evidence for an appropriate psychiatric diagnosis exists.
MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS IN THE 
HOMELESS
There is a high prevalence of mental disorders and sub-
stance abuse among homeless and impoverished indi-
viduals. Depending on the deﬁnition used, estimates of 
the total number of homeless individuals in the United 
States range from 800,000 to 2 million, one-third of 
whom qualify as having a serious mental disorder. Poor 
hygiene and nutrition, substance abuse, psychiatric ill-
ness, physical trauma, and exposure to the elements 
combine to make the provision of medical care chal-
lenging. Only a minority of these individuals receive 
formal mental health care; the main points of contact 
are outpatient medical clinics and emergency depart-
ments. Primary care settings represent a critical site in 
which housing needs, treatment of substance depen-
dence, and evaluation and treatment of psychiatric illness 
can most efﬁciently take place. Successful intervention 
is dependent on breaking down traditional administra-
tive barriers to health care and recognizing the physical 
constraints and emotional costs imposed by homeless-
ness. Simplifying health care instructions and follow-up, 
allowing frequent visits, and dispensing medications in 
limited amounts that require ongoing contact are pos-
sible techniques for establishing a successful therapeutic 
relationship.
 Charles W. Hoge 
742
 Neuropsychiatric sequelae are common in combat vet-
erans. Advances in personal protective body armor, 
armored vehicles, battleﬁ eld resuscitation, and the speed 
of evacuation to tertiary care have considerably improved 
the survivability of battleﬁ eld injuries, resulting in a 
greater awareness of the “silent wounds” associated with 
service in a combat zone. Although psychiatric and neu-
rologic problems have been well documented in veterans 
of prior wars, the conﬂ icts in Iraq and Afghanistan have 
been unique in terms of the level of commitment by the 
U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) and Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA), Veterans Health Administration 
(VHA) to support research as the wars have unfolded, 
and to utilize that knowledge to guide population-level 
screening, evaluation, and treatment initiatives. 
 These conﬂ icts, like previous ones, have produced hun-
dreds of thousands of combat veterans, many of whom 
have received or will need care in government and civil-
ian medical facilities. Studies have shown that service in the 
Iraq and Afghanistan theaters is associated with signiﬁ cantly 
elevated rates of mental disorders. Two conditions in partic-
ular have been labeled the signature injuries related to these 
wars: posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and mild trau-
matic brain injury (mTBI)—also known as concussion. 
Although particular emphasis will be given in this chapter 
to PTSD and concussion/mTBI, it is important to under-
stand that service in all wars is associated with a number of 
health concerns that coexist and overlap, and a multidisci-
plinary patient-centered approach to care is necessary. 
 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF WAR-RELATED 
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND NEUROLOGIC 
CONDITIONS 
 Service members from the current decade of war have 
faced multiple deployments to two very different high-
intensity combat theaters, and the cumulative strain has 
negatively impacted marriages, parenting, educational 
goals, and civilian occupations. The stresses of service in 
these conﬂ icts have led to a signiﬁ cant increase in the 
rate of suicide in personnel from the two branches of 
service involved in the greatest level of ground combat 
(army, marines). 
 Service in a war zone can involve extreme physical 
stress in austere environments, prolonged sleep deprivation, 
physical injury, exposure to highly life-threatening events 
and hazards such as explosive devices, sniper ﬁ re, ambushes, 
indirect ﬁ re from rockets and mortars, and chemical 
pollutants. Certain events such as loss of a close friend in 
combat, leave indelible scars. All of these experiences have 
additive effects on health, likely mediated through physio-
logic mechanisms involving dysregulation of neuroendocrine 
and autonomic nervous system (ANS) functions. 
 Veterans of virtually all wars have reported elevated 
rates of generalized and multisystem physical, cognitive, 
and psychological health concerns that often become the 
focus of treatment months or years after returning home. 
These multisystem health concerns include sleep distur-
bance, memory and concentration problems, headaches, 
musculoskeletal pain, gastrointestinal symptoms (including 
gastroesophageal reﬂ ux), residual effects of war-time inju-
ries, fatigue, anger, hyperarousal symptoms, high blood 
pressure, rapid heart rate (sometimes associated with panic 
symptoms), sexual problems, and symptoms associated 
with PTSD and depression. In order to provide optimal 
care to veterans with these symptoms, it is important to 
understand how the symptoms interrelate, and to consider 
the possibility that there may be underlying combat-related 
physiologic effects. 
 POSTWAR SYMPTOMS 
 The overlapping and multisystem health symptoms 
reported by warriors from every generation have been 
 NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ILLNESSES 
IN WAR VETERANS 
 CHAPTER 55 
 
CHAPTER 55
Neuropsychiatric Illnesses in War Veterans 
743
given different labels, and have led to debates among 
medical professionals as to whether these are medi-
ated primarily by physical or psychological causes. For 
example, World War I produced extensive debate about 
whether “shell shock,” diagnosed in more than 80,000 
British soldiers, was neurologic (“commotional” from 
the brain being shaken in the skull by concussive blasts) 
or psychological (“emotional” or “neurasthenia”) in 
origin. World War II veterans were said to suffer from 
“battle fatigue,” Korean War veterans developed “com-
bat stress reactions,” and Vietnam veterans developed 
the “post-Vietnam syndrome.” The role of environ-
mental exposure (e.g., agent orange) and psychological 
causes (alcohol addiction, drug addiction, and PTSD) 
continue to be debated.
Gulf War I led to extensive debates as to whether 
Gulf War syndrome, also known as multisystem illness, 
was best explained by environmental exposures (e.g., 
oil ﬁres, depleted uranium, nerve gas, multiple vaccina-
tions) or the psychological stress of deployment to a war 
zone where there was anticipation of high casualty rates 
from chemical and biologic weapons and stressful train-
ing exercises involving the use of impermeable full-body 
protective uniforms (made from rubber, vinyl, charcoal 
impregnated polyurethane, and other materials) in des-
ert conditions under extreme temperatures. Although no 
clinical syndrome was ever deﬁnitively conﬁrmed among 
the nearly 1 million service members who deployed in 
1990–1991, studies consistently found that military per-
sonnel who served in the Gulf experienced elevations 
in generalized symptoms across all health domains (e.g. 
physical, cognitive, neurologic, psychological) compared 
with service members who deployed elsewhere or did not 
deploy. In addition, there is good evidence that deploy-
ment to the Persian Gulf region during this period was 
associated with subsequent development of PTSD; other 
psychiatric disorders including generalized anxiety disor-
der, depression, and substance abuse, particularly alcohol 
abuse (Chap. 56); functional gastrointestinal symptoms 
such as irritable bowel syndrome; and chronic fatigue syn-
drome (Chap. 52).
The conﬂicts in Iraq and Afghanistan have led to 
similar debates as to whether postwar symptoms such as 
headaches, irritability, sleep disturbance, dizziness, and 
concentration problems are best attributed to concus-
sion/mTBI or to PTSD. Several studies have shown that 
either PTSD or depression explains the majority of the 
postdeployment “postconcussive” symptoms attributed 
to concussion/mTBI, a ﬁnding not well received by 
some experts in traumatic brain injury (TBI) but con-
sistent with civilian studies on risk factors for developing 
persistent symptoms after concussion. As in past wars, it 
has taken years to understand how PTSD and concus-
sion/mTBI interrelate with other deployment-related 
health concerns, and the implications for designing 
effective evaluation and treatment strategies.
Veterans understandably may become angry at the sug-
gestion that their postwar health concerns are stress-related 
or psychological, and thus it is necessary for primary care 
professionals to be sensitive to this concern.
PTSD
PTSD is the most common mental disorder docu-
mented following war-zone service. Studies from the 
conﬂicts in Iraq and Afghanistan have found PTSD 
prevalence rates of 2–6% before deployment (compa-
rable to civilian general population samples) and rates 
of 6–20% postdeployment, depending primarily on the 
level of combat frequency and intensity. Many other 
veterans experience subclinical PTSD symptoms after 
war-zone service, sometimes termed posttraumatic 
stress (PTS) or combat stress. These subclinical symp-
toms can contribute to distress and affect health, even 
if overall functioning is not as impaired as in the full 
disorder.
PTSD is deﬁned by the American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation as persistent (>1 month) symptoms occur-
ring after a life-threatening traumatic event in which 
there was an immediate response of fear, helplessness, 
or horror. The symptoms must be associated with sig-
niﬁcant distress or impairment in social or occupa-
tional functioning. Symptoms are grouped into three 
categories: (1) re-experiencing symptoms in which 
the person has nightmares, ﬂashbacks, or intrusive 
thoughts and memories connected with the trau-
matic event; (2) hyperarousal symptoms in which the 
person is physiologically revved up, hyperalert, startles 
easily, and experiences sleep disturbance, anger, and/
or concentration problems; and (3) avoidance symp-
toms where the person loses interest in things that pre-
viously brought enjoyment, and avoids places, situa-
tions, or other stimuli that serve as reminders of the 
traumatic event (e.g., a crowded mall that triggers 
heightened alertness to threat). Additional symptoms, 
currently categorized with the avoidance cluster, but 
which will likely become a fourth category in future 
deﬁnitions of PTSD, include emotional numbing, feel-
ing distant or cutoff from others, and a foreshortened 
sense of future (Chap. 54). While PTSD is a clinical 
symptom-based case deﬁnition, it is best to think of 
PTSD not as an emotional or psychological/psychiatric 
condition, but rather as a physiologic-based response 
to life-threatening trauma that is associated with physi-
cal, cognitive, emotional, and psychological symptoms.
PTSD has strong biologic correlates, based in fear-
conditioning responses to threat and responses to extreme 
stress involving neuroendocrine dysregulation and ANS 
reactivity. Numerous studies have shown that PTSD is 
highly correlated with generalized physical and cognitive 
symptoms—including hypertension, chronic pain, and 
cardiovascular disease—as well as cell-mediated immune 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
744
dysfunction and shortened life expectancy. PTSD is fre-
quently comorbid with other mental disorders such as 
major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety, substance 
use disorders (SUDs), as well as risky behaviors (e.g., 
aggression, accidents); it has been estimated that up to 80% 
of patients with PTSD exhibit one or more comorbid 
conditions. Misuse of alcohol or substances is most preva-
lent, often reﬂecting self-medication. PTSD is also associ-
ated with tolerance and withdrawal symptoms related to 
prescription pain and sleep medications, as well as nicotine 
dependence.
Clinicians should understand the limitations of the 
deﬁnition of PTSD when applied to responses to trauma 
occurring in the occupational context of military service 
(similar to police, ﬁreﬁghters, and other ﬁrst responders). 
Service members are trained to respond to traumatic 
events, and relatively rarely report fear, helplessness, 
or horror, which are characteristic responses of civil-
ian victims of trauma. In addition, the reactions that are 
labeled as symptoms of PTSD are based on the adaptive 
survival responses of warriors in a combat environment. 
For example, physiologic hyperarousal, use of anger, and 
being able to shut down other emotions are very useful 
skills in combat, and can be present prior to traumatic 
events when there is tough realistic training. These 
responses only become symptoms when they impair 
functioning after warriors return home.
CONCUSSION/mTBI
TBI (Chap. 36) gained increased recognition during 
the conﬂicts in Iraq and Afghanistan because of the 
widespread exposure of troops to improvised explo-
sive devices. Contributing to heightened concern were 
high prevalence estimates of deployment-related TBI 
that did not distinguish concussion/mTBI from mod-
erate or severe TBI; data from animal models of blast 
suggesting that explosions may cause a different kind 
of concussion associated with inﬂammatory changes; 
and speculation that repetitive blast exposure may lead 
to future dementia, based on case series of professional 
athletes (e.g., boxers, football players) exposed to highly 
repetitive injuries linked to chronic traumatic encepha-
lopathy (previously termed dementia pugilistica). Many 
veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan reported experiencing 
multiple concussions during deployments, and many 
also reported ignoring concussions and not seeking 
treatment at the time of injury.
TBI includes closed and penetrating head injuries; 
closed head injuries are categorized as mild (mTBI or 
concussion), moderate, or severe based on the duration of 
loss of consciousness, duration of posttraumatic amnesia, 
and the Glasgow coma score (GCS) (Table 36-2). Several 
studies have estimated that 10–20% of all military per-
sonnel deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan sustained one or 
more concussion/mTBI events during deployment, most 
commonly from exposure to blasts.
Although there is a neurophysiologic continuum of 
injury, there are stark clinical and epidemiologic dis-
tinctions between concussion/mTBI and moderate or 
severe TBI (Table 55-1). Concussion/mTBI is deﬁned 
as a blow or jolt to the head that results in brief loss 
of consciousness (LOC) for <30 min (most commonly 
only a few seconds to minutes), posttraumatic amnesia 
(PTA) of <24 h (most commonly <1 h), or tran-
sient alteration in consciousness (AOC) without loss 
of consciousness. The majority of concussions in Iraq 
or Afghanistan have involved AOC without LOC or 
PTA (which soldiers may refer to as getting their “bell 
rung”). GCSs are usually normal (15 out of 15). Con-
cussion is treated with rest to allow the brain time to 
heal, and almost never results in air-evacuation from the 
battleﬁeld unless there are other injuries.
In contrast, moderate, severe, or penetrating TBI, 
which account for <1% of all battleﬁeld head injuries 
in Iraq and Afghanistan, are characterized by LOC 
≥30 min (up to permanent coma), PTA ≥24 h (also 
may be permanent), and GCSs as low as 3 (the mini-
mum value). These virtually always result in air-evac-
uation from the battleﬁeld and can result in severe 
long-term neurologic impairment and requirement for 
rehabilitative care.
Symptoms following concussion/mTBI can include 
headache; fatigue; concentration, memory, or attention 
problems; sleep disturbance; irritability; balance difﬁcul-
ties; and tinnitus, among other symptoms. Recovery 
is usually rapid, with symptoms usually resolving in a 
few hours to days, but in a small percentage of patients, 
symptoms may persist for a longer period or become 
chronic (referred to as persistent “postconcussive symp-
toms” or “PCS”).
Establishing a clear causal connection between a 
deployment concussion injury and persistent PCS 
months or years after return from deployment is dif-
ﬁcult and often confounded by other postwar condi-
tions that cause similar symptoms, including injuries 
not involving the head, other medical disorders, sleep 
disorders, PTSD, depression, substance use disorders, 
chronic pain, and the general physiologic effects of 
wartime service. Contributing to the difﬁculty in estab-
lishing causation is the fact that the concussion/mTBI 
case deﬁnition refers only to the acute injury event and 
lacks symptoms, time-course or impairment; case deﬁ-
nitions for persistent postconcussion syndrome are not 
well validated. Several studies found that PTSD was a 
much stronger predictor of postdeployment PCS after 
combat deployment than concussions/mTBIs, and one 
study even found that objective neuropsychological 
impairment after deployment was entirely explained by 
PTSD. These data do not minimize the importance of 
 
CHAPTER 55
Neuropsychiatric Illnesses in War Veterans 
745
concussion/mTBI, but highlight the complex interrela-
tionships of war-related health problems.
Studies of veterans who sustained concussions in Iraq 
or Afghanistan have suggested that blast mechanisms 
produce similar clinical outcomes as nonblast mecha-
nisms, in contrast to expectations based on animal 
models. An explosion can produce serious injury from 
rapid atmospheric pressure changes (primary blast wave 
mechanism), as well as from ﬂying debris (secondary 
blast mechanism) or by being thrown into a hard object 
(tertiary blast mechanism). Secondary and tertiary 
mechanisms are similar to other mechanical mechanisms 
of concussions sustained during accidents. The possibil-
ity of a unique head injury from the primary blast wave 
in otherwise uninjured soldiers appears to be low, but 
cannot be discounted.
Multisystem health problems that lack clear case deﬁ-
nitions do not lend themselves well to uniform public 
health strategies such as screening. Nevertheless, mass 
population screening for concussion/mTBI was man-
dated for all U.S. service members returning from Iraq 
or Afghanistan and all veterans presenting for care at VA 
health care facilities. These screening processes, which 
attempt to apply the acute concussion case deﬁnition 
(lacking symptoms, time-course, or impairment) months 
or years after injury, led to sharp criticism that they 
were encouraging clinicians to misattribute common 
postwar symptoms to concussion/mTBI.
Management is largely symptom-focused, and ideally 
carried out within primary-care based structures of care. 
Optimal care avoids unnecessary specialty referrals, use 
of nonevidence-based interventions, or poor communi-
cation that results in negative expectations. Concussion 
research has shown that negative expectations are one of 
the most important risk factors for persistent symptoms.
While many questions remain regarding the long-
term health effects of concussions (particularly multiple 
concussions) sustained during deployment, these are 
important battleﬁeld injuries that require careful atten-
tion. However, they need to be addressed within the 
context of all other war-related health concerns.
STIGMA AND BARRIERS TO CARE
Adding to the complexity of treating veterans is stigma 
and other barriers to care. Despite extensive education 
efforts among military leaders and service members, 
perceptions of stigma have shown little change over the 
many years of war; warriors are concerned that they will 
be perceived as weak by peers or leaders if they seek 
care. Studies showed that less than one-half of service 
members with serious mental health problems receive 
needed care. Many factors contribute to this, including 
the pervasive nature of stigma in society in general (par-
ticularly among men), the critical importance of group 
TABLE 55-1
COMPARISON BETWEEN CONCUSSION/mTBI AND MODERATE/SEVERE TBI
MILD TBI (CONCUSSION)
MOD/SEVERE TBI
Clinical case deﬁnition
 Loss of consciousness
<30 min (usually few seconds to minutes)
≥30 min to indeﬁnite
 Altered consciousness
<24 h (usually <30 min)
≥24 h to indeﬁnite
 Posttraumatic amnesia
<24 h (usually <30 min)
≥24 h to indeﬁnite
 Glasgow coma score
13–15 (usually 15)
As low as 3
Focal neurologic signs
None or transient
Frequently present
Traditional neuroimaging (CT/MRI)
Usually negative
Diagnostic
Clinical usefulness of neurocognitive 
testing after acute injury period
Usually inconclusive
Essential and valuable
Neuronal cell damage
Metabolic/ionic processes associated  
with axonal swelling, which can lead  
to disconnection
Direct injury effects plus metabolic/ionic 
effects
Sequelae, natural history, and 
recovery
Full recovery expected in majority of  
individuals; no consensus on natural  
history; the percentage who develop  
persistent symptoms is debated
Based directly on injury characteristics; 
may be severely disabling
Predictors of persistent  
postconcussive symptoms or  
disability
Intensely debated; risk factors found to  
be most predictive include psychiatric  
conditions (e.g., depression, PTSD)  
and negative expectations
Not debated, predictors are directly 
related to injury severity and clinical 
progress with rehabilitation treatment
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
746
cohesiveness of military teams, the nature of avoidance 
symptoms in PTSD, and sometimes skepticism that 
mental health professionals will be able to help.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
 Evaluation of Veterans with 
Neuropsychiatric Health Concerns
Evaluation should begin with a careful occupational 
history as part of the routine medical evaluation; this 
includes the number of years served, military occu-
pation, deployment locations and dates, illnesses or 
injuries resulting from service, and significant combat 
traumatic experiences that may be continuing to affect 
the individual (Table 55-2). The clinician should evalu-
ate the degree to which the patient’s current difficul-
ties reflect the normal course of readjusting after the 
intense occupational experience of combat. It is helpful 
to reinforce the many strengths associated with being 
a professional in the military: courage, honor, service to 
country, resiliency in combat, leadership, ability to work 
as cohesive workgroup with peers, and demonstrated 
skills in handling extreme stress.
One of the challenges with current medical practice is 
that there may be multiple providers with different clinical 
perspectives. Care should be coordinated through the pri-
mary care clinician, with the assistance of a care manager 
if needed. It is particularly important to continually evaluate  
all medications prescribed by other practitioners and 
assess for possible long-term side effects, dependency, 
or drug-drug interactions. Particular attention should be 
given to the level of chronic pain and sleep disturbance, 
TABLE 55-2
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS IN THE MEDICAL EVALUATION OF VETERANS
Occupational context of 
health concerns
Deployment locations and dates, combat experiences or other deployment stressors, frequent 
moves, separations from family, impact of deployment on civilian occupation (for reservists)
Medical problems during 
deployment
History of deployment-related injuries (including concussions), environmental exposures, sleep 
pattern during deployment, use of caffeine/energy drinks, use of other substances
Current medical history
Current symptoms, level of chronic pain, sleep problems, evidence of persistent physiologic hyper-
arousal (hypertension, tachycardia, panic symptoms, concentration/memory problems, irritability/
anger, sleep disturbance), chronic use of caffeine or energy drinks, chronic use of nonsteroidal 
anti-inﬂammatory medications, chronic use of narcotic pain medications, chronic use of nonben-
zodiazepine sedative-hypnotic medications, chronic use of benzodiazepines for sleep or anxiety
Mental health assessment
Screen for PTSD, major depressive disorder. Ask about suicidal or homicidal ideation, intent, or 
plans, as well as access to ﬁrearms
Alcohol/substance use
Screen for alcohol and substance use disorders, quantity and frequency of use, and evidence of 
tolerance. Inquire about “self-medication” (e.g., use of alcohol for sleep or to “calm down” or  
“forget” war-zone experiences)
Functional impairment
Impact of current symptoms on social and occupational functioning. High-risk behaviors  
(e.g., drinking and driving, reckless driving, aggression)
Social support, impact  
of military service on  
marriage and family
Level of social support. Readjustment stress on spouse, children, or other family members
self-medication with alcohol or substances, chronic use of 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (which can contrib-
ute to rebound headaches or pain), chronic use of sedative-
hypnotic agents, chronic use of narcotic pain medications, 
and the impact of war-related health concerns on social and 
occupational functioning.
Screening for PTSD, depression, and alcohol misuse 
should be performed routinely in all combat veterans. 
Three screening tools, which are in the public domain, 
have been validated for use in primary care, and have 
been used frequently in veterans: the four-question 
Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD), the two-question 
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2), and the three-
question Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test-
Consumption module (AUDIT-C) (Table 55-3).
Since the clinical definition of an acute concus-
sion/mTBI does not include symptoms, time-course, 
or impairment, there is currently no clinically validated 
screening process for use months or years after injury. 
However, it is important to gather information about 
all injuries sustained during deployment, including any 
that resulted in loss or alteration of consciousness or 
loss of memory around the time of the event. If concus-
sion injuries have occurred, the clinician should assess 
the number of such injuries, the duration of time uncon-
scious, and injury mechanisms. This should be followed 
by an assessment of any postconcussive symptoms 
immediately following the injury event (e.g., headaches, 
dizziness, tinnitus, nausea, irritability, insomnia, and 
concentration or memory problems), and the severity 
and duration of such symptoms.
 
CHAPTER 55
Neuropsychiatric Illnesses in War Veterans 
747
TABLE 55-3
PRIMARY CARE MENTAL HEALTH SCREENING TOOLS
PC-PTSD Screen
1. Have you ever had any experience that was so frightening, horrible, or upsetting that, in the past month, you:
Have had nightmares about it or thought about it when you did not want to?
Tried hard not to think about it or went out of your way to avoid situations 
that remind you of it?
Were constantly on guard, watchful, or easily startled?
Felt numb or detached from others, activities, or your surroundings?
   Yes
   Yes
   Yes
   Yes
   No
   No
   No
   No
Note: Two or more “yes” responses (three or more a more speciﬁc cutoff) is considered a positive screen.
Source: A Prins et al: The Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD): Development and operating characteristics. Prim Care Psychiatr 9:9, 2004.
PHQ-2 Depression Screen
2. Over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been 
bothered by any of the following problems?
Not at 
all (0)
Few or several 
days (1)
More than half 
the days (2)
Nearly every 
day (3)
Little interest or pleasure in doing things.
Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless.
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
Note: If either (or both) questions are marked 2 or 3 (“more than half the days or higher), this is considered a positive screen for depression.
Source: K Kroenke et al: The Patient Health Questionnaire-2: Validity of a two-item depression screener. Med Care 41:1284, 2003.
AUDIT-C Alcohol Screen
3a. How often do you have a drink containing alcohol?
Never (0)
Monthly or less (1)
Two or four times a month (2)
Two to three times per week (3)
Four or more times a week (4)
3b. How many drinks containing alcohol do you have on a typical day when you are drinking?
1 or 2 (0)
3 or 4 (1)
5 or 6 (2)
7 or 9 (3)
10 or more (4)
3c. How often do you have six or more drinks on one occasion?
Never (0)
Less than Monthly (1)
Monthly (2)
Two to three times per week (3)
Four or more times a week (4)
Note: A positive AUDIT-C screen is deﬁned as a total score for men ≥4; for women ≥3. A report of drinking 6 or more drinks on one occasion 
should prompt an in-depth assessment of drinking.
Source: K Bush et al: The AUDIT Alcohol Consumption Questions (AUDIT-C): An effective brief screening test for problem drinking. Arch Intern 
Med 158:1789, 1998.
TREATMENT 
 Neuropsychiatric Illnesses in War 
Veterans
Given the interrelationship of postwar health concerns, 
care needs to be carefully coordinated. Specific tech-
niques that have been found to be helpful include 
scheduling regular primary care visits instead of as 
needed visits, establishing care management, utilizing 
good risk-communication principles, establishing a con-
sultative step care approach that draws on the exper-
tise of specialists in a collaborative manner (instead of 
immediately referring the patient to a specialist and 
relying on the specialist to provide care), and having 
behavioral health support directly within primary care 
clinics (both for referrals and to provide education and 
support to primary care professionals prescribing treat-
ment for depression or PTSD).
It is important not to implicitly or explicitly convey 
the message that physical or cognitive symptoms are 
psychological or due to stress. Even if depression or anx-
iety plays a large role in the etiology of physical health 
symptoms, the treatment approach should be designed 
within a patient-centered primary care structure, and 
referrals managed from within this framework. For 
example, it might help to explain that the primary goal 
of referral to a mental health professional is to improve 
sleep and reduce physiologic hyperarousal, which in 
turn will help with treatment of war-related chronic 
headaches, concentration problems, or chronic fatigue. 
If however, the primary care professional conveys the 
message that the cause of headaches or concentration 
problems is anxiety or depression, and this conflicts 
with the patient’s own viewpoint, then this could dam-
age therapeutic rapport and in turn exacerbate the 
symptoms.
Specific questions related to military service (Table 55-2) 
combined with screening for depression, PTSD, and alco-
hol use disorders (Table 55-3) should be a routine part of 
SECTION V
Psychiatric Disorders
748
care for all veterans. A positive screen for depression or 
PTSD should prompt follow-up questions related to these 
disorders (or use of a longer screening tool such as the 
[PHQ-9] or National Center for PTSD Checklist), as well as 
risk assessment for suicide or homicide. It is important to 
assess the impact of depression or PTSD symptoms on 
occupational functioning and interpersonal relationships.
A positive screen for alcohol misuse should prompt 
a brief motivational intervention that includes bringing 
attention to the elevated level of drinking, informing 
the veteran about the effects of alcohol on health, rec-
ommending limiting use or abstaining, exploring and 
setting goals related to drinking behavior, and follow-up 
and referral to specialty care if needed. This type of brief 
primary care intervention has been found to be effec-
tive, and should be incorporated into routine practice. 
One way to facilitate dialogue about this topic with vet-
erans is to point out how hyperarousal associated with 
combat service can lead to increased craving for alcohol 
as the body searches for ways to modulate this. Veter-
ans may consciously or unconsciously drink more to 
help with sleep, reduce arousal, or avoid thinking about 
events that happened “downrange.” A key educational 
strategy is to help the veteran to learn that drinking to 
get to sleep actually damages sleep architecture and 
makes sleep worse (e.g., reduces rapid eye movement 
[REM] sleep initially followed by rebound REM activity 
and early morning wakening).
SPECIFIC TREATMENT STRATEGIES FOR 
PTSD AND COMORBID DEPRESSION PTSD 
and depression are highly comorbid in combat veter-
ans, and the evidence-based treatments are similar, 
involving either antidepressant medications, cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT), or both. Psychoeducation that 
assists veterans to understand that their symptoms of 
PTSD have a basis in adaptive survival mechanisms and 
skills they exhibited in combat can facilitate therapeutic 
rapport. Remaining hypervigilant to threat, being able 
to shut down emotions, being able to function on less 
sleep, and using anger to help focus and control fear are 
all adaptive beneficial survival skills in a combat envi-
ronment. Therefore, PTSD for warriors is both a medical 
disorder and a set of reactions that have their roots in 
the physiologic adaptation and skills they successfully 
applied in combat.
It is important to know that combat is not the only 
important trauma in a war-zone environment. Rape, 
assault, and accidents also occur. Rape or assault by a fel-
low service member, which affects a greater number of 
women veterans, can be particularly devastating because 
it destroys the vital feeling of safety that individuals 
derive from their own unit peers in a war environment.
The treatments for PTSD considered by most consen-
sus guideline committees to have an A level of evidence 
include CBTs and medications, specifically selective  
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (of which paroxetine 
and sertraline received FDA approval for PTSD). Although 
lacking a specific FDA indication, there is increasing evi-
dence that serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs) (e.g., venlafaxine and duloxetine) and mirtazapine 
are also effective. (See Table 54-3 for recommended dos-
ages.)
CBT interventions include narrative therapy (often 
called “imaginal exposure”), in vivo exposure focused 
on retraining the body not to react to stimuli related to 
traumatic reminders (e.g., a crowded mall), and tech-
niques to modulate physiologic hyperarousal (e.g., dia-
phragmatic breathing, progressive muscle relaxation). 
A number of complementary alternative medicine 
approaches including acupuncture, mindfulness medi-
tation, yoga, and massage are also being tested in PTSD. 
Although not evidence-based treatments per se, if they 
facilitate a relaxation response and alleviation of hyper-
arousal symptoms, they can be considered useful adjunctive 
modalities.
There have been no head-to-head comparisons of 
medication compared with psychotherapy for treatment 
of PTSD. It is reasonable for primary care clinicians to 
consider initiating treatment for mild to moderate PTSD 
symptoms with an SSRI, and refer patients to a mental 
health professional if there are more severe symptoms, 
significant comorbidity, safety concerns, or limited 
response to initial treatment. All PTSD treatments are 
associated with a sizable proportion of individuals who 
fail to respond adequately, and it is often necessary to 
add modalities or switch treatment. SNRIs may be use-
ful alternatives to SSRIs if there has been nonresponse, 
side effects, or if there is comorbid pain (duloxetine, in 
particular, has indications for pain). Both SSRIs and SNRIs 
can increase anxiety initially; patients should be warned 
about this possibility and treatment should be initiated 
with the lowest recommended dose (or even one-half of 
the lowest dose for a few days) and gradually increased 
thereafter. Mirtazapine use can cause drowsiness and 
weight gain. Antidepressants also are likely to be useful 
in comorbid depression, which is common in veterans 
with PTSD. All antidepressants have potential drug-drug 
interactions that must be considered.
Many other medications have been used in PTSD, 
including tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines, 
atypical antipsychotics, and anticonvulsants. In general, 
these should be prescribed in conjunction with psychiat-
ric consultation, because of their greater side effects and 
risks. Benzodiazepines, in particular, should be avoided 
in combat veterans. Studies have shown that they do 
not reduce core PTSD symptoms, are likely to exacer-
bate substance use disorders that are common in veterans 
with PTSD, and may produce significant rebound anxiety. 
Veterans with PTSD often report symptomatic relief 
 
CHAPTER 55
Neuropsychiatric Illnesses in War Veterans 
749
upon initiation of a benzodiazepine, but this is generally 
short lived and associated with a high risk of tolerance 
and dependence that can worsen recovery. Atypical 
antipsychotics, which have gained widespread popular-
ity as adjunctive treatment for depression, anxiety, or 
sleep problems, have significant long-term side effects, 
including metabolic effects (e.g., glucose dysregulation), 
weight gain, and cardiovascular risks.
Sleep disturbance should be addressed initially with 
sleep hygiene education, followed by consideration of 
an antihistamine, trazodone, or non-benzodiazepine 
sedative-hypnotic such as zolpidem, eszopiclone, or 
zaleplon. However, the non-benzodiazepine sedative-
hypnotics should be used with caution in veterans as 
they can lead to tolerance and rebound sleep problems 
similar to those seen with benzodiazepine use.
TREATMENT STRATEGIES FOR CONCUS-
SION/mTBI AND POSTDEPLOYMENT POST-
CONCUSSIVE SYMPTOMS Concussion/mTBI is 
best treated at the time of injury with education and rest 
to allow time for the brain to heal and protect against 
a second impact syndrome (a rare but life-threatening 
event involving brain swelling that can occur when a 
second concussion occurs before the brain has ade-
quately healed from an initial event). Randomized trials 
have shown that education regarding concussion that 
informs the patient of what to expect and promotes the 
expectation of recovery is the most effective treatment 
in preventing persistent symptoms.
Once service members return from deployment 
and seek care for postwar health problems, treatment 
is largely symptom focused, following the principles of 
patient-centered and collaborative care models. Cognitive 
rehabilitation, which is very useful in moderate and severe 
TBI to improve memory, attention, and concentration, has 
generally not been shown to be effective for mTBI in ran-
domized clinical studies, though consensus groups have 
supported its use.
General recommendations for the clinical manage-
ment of persistent, chronic postconcussive symptoms 
include treating physical and cognitive health prob-
lems based on symptom presentation, coexisting health 
problems, and individual preferences; and addressing 
coexisting depression, PTSD, substance use disorders, or 
other factors that may be contributing to symptom per-
sistence. Headache is the most common symptom asso-
ciated with concussion/mTBI, and the evaluation and 
treatment of headache parallels those for other causes 
of headache (Chap. 8). Stimulant medications for allevi-
ating neurocognitive effects attributed to concussion/
mTBI are not recommended. Clinicians should be aware 
of the potential for cognitive or sedative side effects of 
certain medications that may be prescribed for depres-
sion, anxiety, sleep, or chronic pain.
Treatment of neuropsychiatric problems must be 
coordinated with care for other war-related health con-
cerns, with the goal of treatment to reduce the severity 
of symptoms, improve social and occupational function-
ing, and prevent long-term disability. Understanding 
the occupational context of war-related health concerns 
is important in communicating with veterans and devel-
oping a comprehensive treatment strategy.
DISCLOSURE
This material has been reviewed by the Walter Reed Army 
Institute of Research. There is no objection to its presentation 
and/or publication. The opinions or assertions contained herein 
are the private views of the author and are not to be construed 
as ofﬁcial, or as reﬂecting true views of the Department of the 
Army or the Department of Defense.
This page intentionally left blank 
SECTION VI
ALCOHOLISM  
AND DRUG  
DEPENDENCY
 Marc A. Schuckit 
752
 INTRODUCTION 
 Alcohol (beverage ethanol) distributes throughout 
the body, affecting almost all systems and altering 
nearly every neurochemical process in the brain. This 
drug is likely to exacerbate most medical conditions, 
affect almost any medication metabolized in the liver, 
and temporarily mimic many medical (e.g., diabetes) 
and psychiatric (e.g., depression) conditions. Because 
∼80% of people in Western countries have consumed 
alcohol, and two-thirds have been drunk in the prior 
year, the lifetime risk for serious, repetitive alcohol 
problems is almost 20% for men and 10% for women, 
regardless of a person’s education or income. While 
low doses of alcohol have some healthful beneﬁ ts, the 
intake of more than three standard drinks per day on 
a regular basis enhances the risk for cancer and vascu-
lar disease, and alcohol use disorders decrease the life 
span by about 10 years. Unfortunately, most clinicians 
have had only limited education regarding these con-
ditions. This chapter presents a brief overview of clini-
cally useful information about alcohol use, abuse, and 
dependence. 
 PHARMACOLOGY AND NUTRITIONAL 
IMPACT OF ETHANOL 
 Blood levels of ethanol are expressed as milligrams or 
grams of ethanol per deciliter (e.g., 100 mg/dL = 0.10 
g/dL), with values of ∼0.02 g/dL resulting from the 
ingestion of one typical drink. In round ﬁ gures, 340 mL 
(12 oz) of beer, 115 mL (4 oz) of nonfortiﬁ ed wine, and 
43 mL (1.5 oz) (a shot) of 80-proof beverage such as 
whisky, gin, or vodka each contain ∼10–15 g of eth-
anol and represent a standard drink; 0.5 L (1 pint) of 
80-proof beverage contains ∼160 g (about 16 standard 
drinks), and 750 mL of wine contains ∼60 g of ethanol. 
These beverages also have additional components 
known as  congeners that affect the drink’s taste and 
might contribute to adverse effects on the body. Con-
geners include methanol, butanol, acetaldehyde, hista-
mine, tannins, iron, and lead. Alcohol acutely decreases 
neuronal activity and has similar behavioral effects and 
cross-tolerance with other depressants, including benzo-
diazepines and barbiturates. 
 Alcohol is absorbed from mucous membranes of 
the mouth and esophagus (in small amounts), from the 
stomach and large bowel (in modest amounts), and 
from the proximal portion of the small intestine (the 
major site). The rate of absorption is increased by rapid 
gastric emptying (as can be induced by carbonated bev-
erages); by the absence of proteins, fats, or carbohy-
drates (which interfere with absorption); and by dilution 
to a modest percentage of ethanol (maximum at ∼20% 
by volume). 
 Between 2% (at low blood alcohol concentra-
tions) and 10% (at high blood alcohol concentra-
tions) of ethanol is excreted directly through the lungs, 
urine, or sweat, but the greater part is metabolized to 
acetaldehyde, primarily in the liver. The most important 
pathway occurs in the cell cytosol where alcohol dehy-
drogenase (ADH) produces acetaldehyde, which is then 
rapidly destroyed by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 
in the cytosol and mitochondria  ( Fig. 56-1 ) . A second 
pathway in the microsomes of the smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum (the microsomal ethanol-oxidizing system, or 
MEOS) is responsible for v10% of ethanol oxidation at 
high blood alcohol concentrations. 
 While alcohol supplies calories (a drink contains 
∼300 kJ, or 70–100 kcal), these are devoid of nutrients 
such as minerals, proteins, and vitamins. In addition, 
alcohol can also interfere with absorption of vitamins 
in the small intestine and decreases their storage in the 
liver with modest effects on folate (folacin or folic acid), 
pyridoxine (B 6 ), thiamine (B 1 ), nicotinic acid (niacin, 
B 3 ), and vitamin A. 
 ALCOHOL AND ALCOHOLISM 
 CHAPTER 56 
 
CHAPTER 56
Alcohol and Alcoholism
753
A heavy ethanol load in a fasting, healthy individual is 
likely to produce transient hypoglycemia within 6–36 h, 
secondary to the acute actions of ethanol on gluconeo-
genesis. This can result in temporary abnormal glucose 
tolerance tests (with a resulting erroneous diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus) until the alcoholic has abstained for 
2–4 weeks. Alcohol ketoacidosis, probably reﬂecting a 
decrease in fatty acid oxidation coupled with poor diet or 
recurrent vomiting, can be misdiagnosed as diabetic keto-
sis. With the former, patients show an increase in serum 
ketones along with a mild increase in glucose but a large 
anion gap, a mild to moderate increase in serum lactate, 
and a β-hydroxybutyrate/lactate ratio of between 2:1 and 
9:1 (with normal being 1:1).
In the brain, alcohol affects almost all neurotransmit-
ter systems, with acute actions that are often the opposite 
of those seen following desistance after a period of heavy 
drinking. The most prominent actions relate to boosting 
gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity, especially in 
GABAA receptors. Enhancement of this complex chlo-
ride channel system contributes to anticonvulsant, sleep-
inducing, antianxiety, and muscle relaxation effects of 
all GABA-boosting drugs. Acutely administered alcohol 
produces a release of GABA, and continued use of this 
drug increases density of GABAA receptors, while alco-
hol withdrawal states are characterized by decreases in 
GABA-related activity. Equally important is the abil-
ity of acute alcohol to inhibit postsynaptic N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) excitatory glutamate receptors, while 
chronic drinking and desistance are associated with an 
upregulation of these excitatory receptor subunits. The 
relationships between greater GABA and diminished 
NMDA receptor activity during acute intoxication and 
diminished GABA with enhanced NMDA actions dur-
ing alcohol withdrawal explain much of intoxication and 
withdrawal phenomena.
As with all pleasurable activities, drinking alcohol 
acutely increases dopamine levels in the brain, especially 
in the ventral tegmentum and related brain regions, and 
this effect plays an important role in continued alco-
hol use, craving, and relapse. The changes in dopa-
mine pathways are also linked to increases in “stress 
hormones,” including cortisol and adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) during intoxication and decreases 
in these hormones during withdrawal. Such alterations 
are likely to contribute to both feelings of reward dur-
ing intoxication and depression during falling blood 
alcohol concentrations. Also closely linked to alterations 
in dopamine (especially in the nucleus accumbens) are 
alcohol-induced changes in opioid receptors, with acute 
alcohol also causing release of beta endorphins.
Additional important neurochemical changes include 
increases in synaptic levels of serotonin during acute 
intoxication, and subsequent upregulation of serotonin 
receptors. Acute increases in nicotinic acetylcholine 
systems also contribute to the impact of alcohol in the 
ventral tegmental region, which occur in concert with 
enhanced dopamine activity. In the same regions, alco-
hol impacts on cannabinol receptors, with resulting 
release of dopamine, GABA, and glutamate as well as 
subsequent effects on brain reward circuits.
BEHAVIORAL EFFECTS, TOLERANCE,  
AND DEPENDENCE
The acute effects of a drug depend on the dose, the 
rate of increase in plasma, the concomitant presence 
of other drugs, and the past experience with the agent. 
“Legal intoxication” with alcohol in most states requires 
a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 g/dL, while lev-
els of 0.04 or even lower are cited in other countries. 
However, behavioral, psychomotor, and cognitive 
changes are seen at levels as low as 0.02–0.03 g/dL (i.e., 
after one to two drinks) (Table 56-1). Deep but dis-
turbed sleep can be seen at twice the legal intoxication 
level, and death can occur with levels between 0.30 and 
Ethanol
MEOS
20%
Acetaldehyde
Alcohol
dehydrogenase
Aldehyde
dehydrogenase
80%
Acetaldehyde
Acetate
Citric acid
cycle
CO2 + Water
Acetyl CoA
Fatty acids
FIGURE 56-1 
The metabolism of alcohol. MEOS, microsomal ethanol-
oxidizing system.
TABLE 56-1
EFFECTS OF BLOOD ALCOHOL LEVELS IN THE 
ABSENCE OF TOLERANCE
BLOOD LEVEL, g/dL
USUAL EFFECT
0.02
Decreased inhibitions, a slight 
feeling of intoxication
0.08
Decrease in complex cognitive 
functions and motor 
performance
0.20
Obvious slurred speech, motor 
incoordination, irritability, and 
poor judgment
0.30
Light coma and depressed vital 
signs
0.40
Death
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
754
0.40 g/dL. Beverage alcohol is probably responsible for 
more overdose deaths than any other drug.
Repeated use of alcohol contributes to acquired tol-
erance, a complex phenomenon involving at least three 
types of compensatory mechanisms. (1) After 1–2 weeks 
of daily drinking, metabolic or pharmacokinetic tolerance can 
be seen, with up to 30% increase in the rate of hepatic 
ethanol metabolism. This alteration disappears almost 
as rapidly as it develops. (2) Cellular or pharmacodynamic 
tolerance develops through neurochemical changes that 
maintain relatively normal physiologic functioning 
despite the presence of alcohol. Subsequent decreases in 
blood levels contribute to symptoms of withdrawal. (3) 
Individuals learn to adapt their behavior so that they can 
function better than expected under inﬂuence of the 
drug (learned or behavioral tolerance).
The cellular changes caused by chronic ethanol expo-
sure may not resolve for several weeks or longer fol-
lowing cessation of drinking. Rapid decreases in blood 
alcohol levels before that time can result in a withdrawal 
syndrome, which is most intense during the ﬁrst 5 days, 
but some symptoms (e.g., disturbed sleep and anxiety) 
can take up to 4–6 months to resolve.
THE EFFECTS OF ETHANOL ON ORGAN 
SYSTEMS
Relatively low doses of alcohol (one or two drinks per 
day) have potential beneﬁcial effects of increasing high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol and decreasing aggregation 
of platelets, with a resulting decrease in risk for occlu-
sive coronary disease and embolic strokes. Red wine has 
additional potential health-promoting qualities at rela-
tively low doses due to ﬂavinols and related substances, 
which may work by inhibiting platelet activation. Modest 
drinking might also decrease the risk for vascular demen-
tia and, possibly, Alzheimer’s disease. However, any 
potential healthful effects disappear with the regular con-
sumption of three or more drinks per day, and knowl-
edge about the deleterious effects of alcohol can both 
help the physician to identify patients with alcohol abuse 
and dependence, and to supply them with information 
that might help motivate a change in behavior.
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Approximately 35% of drinkers (and a much higher 
proportion of alcoholics) experience a blackout, an epi-
sode of temporary anterograde amnesia, in which the 
person forgets all or part of what occurred during a 
drinking evening. Another common problem, one seen 
after as few as one or two drinks shortly before bedtime, 
is disturbed sleep. Although alcohol might initially help 
a person to fall asleep, it disrupts sleep throughout the 
rest of the night. The stages of sleep are also altered, and 
time spent in rapid eye movement (REM) and deep 
sleep is reduced. Alcohol relaxes muscles in the phar-
ynx, which can cause snoring and exacerbate sleep 
apnea; symptoms of the latter occur in 75% of alcoholic 
men older than age 60 years. Patients may also experi-
ence prominent and sometimes disturbing dreams. All 
of these sleep problems are more pronounced in alco-
holics, and their persistence may contribute to relapse.
Another common consequence of alcohol use is 
impaired judgment and coordination, increasing the risk 
of accidents and injury. In the United States, ∼40% of 
drinkers have at some time driven while intoxicated. 
Heavy drinking can also be associated with headache, 
thirst, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue the following day, a 
hangover syndrome that is responsible for much missed 
time and temporary cognitive deﬁcits at work and school.
The effect of alcohol on the nervous system is even 
more pronounced among alcohol-dependent individuals. 
Chronic high doses cause peripheral neuropathy in ∼10% 
of alcoholics: similar to diabetes, patients experience 
bilateral limb numbness, tingling, and paresthesias, all 
of which are more pronounced distally. Approximately 
1% of alcoholics develop cerebellar degeneration or atrophy. 
This is a syndrome of progressive unsteady stance and 
gait often accompanied by mild nystagmus; neuroimag-
ing studies reveal atrophy of the cerebellar vermis. Fortu-
nately, very few alcoholics (perhaps as few as 1 in 500 for 
the full syndrome) develop Wernicke’s (ophthalmoparesis, 
ataxia, and encephalopathy) and Korsakoff’s (retrograde 
and anterograde amnesia) syndromes, although a higher 
proportion have one or more neuropathologic ﬁndings 
related to these syndromes. These occur as the result of 
low levels of thiamine, especially in predisposed individu-
als, e.g., those with transketolase deﬁciency. Alcoholics 
can manifest cognitive problems and temporary memory 
impairment lasting for weeks to months after drinking 
very heavily for days or weeks. Brain atrophy, evident 
as ventricular enlargement and widened cortical sulci on 
MRI and CT scans, occurs in ∼50% of chronic alcohol-
ics; these changes are usually reversible if abstinence is 
maintained. There is no single alcoholic dementia syn-
drome; rather, this label is used to describe patients who 
have apparently irreversible cognitive changes (possibly 
from diverse causes) in the context of chronic alcoholism.
Psychiatric comorbidity
As many as two-thirds of alcohol-dependent individu-
als meet the criteria for a psychiatric syndrome in the 
fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) of the American Psychi-
atric Association (Chap. 54). Half of these relate to a 
preexisting antisocial personality manifesting as impul-
sivity and disinhibition that contribute to both alcohol 
 
CHAPTER 56
Alcohol and Alcoholism
755
and drug dependence. The lifetime risk is 3% in males, 
and v80% of such individuals demonstrate alcohol and/
or drug dependence. Another common comorbid-
ity occurs with dependence on illicit substances. The 
remainder of alcoholics with psychiatric syndromes have 
preexisting conditions such as schizophrenia or manic-
depressive disease and anxiety disorders such as panic 
disorder. The comorbidities of alcoholism with inde-
pendent psychiatric disorders might represent an overlap 
in genetic vulnerabilities, impaired judgment in the use 
of alcohol from the independent psychiatric condition, 
or an attempt to use alcohol to alleviate some of the 
symptoms of the disorder or side effects of medications.
Many psychiatric syndromes can be seen temporar-
ily during heavy drinking and subsequent withdrawal. 
These alcohol-induced conditions include an intense 
sadness lasting for days to weeks in the midst of heavy 
drinking seen in 40% of alcoholics, which tends to 
disappear over several weeks of abstinence (alcohol-
induced mood disorder); temporary severe anxiety in 
10–30% of alcoholics, often beginning during alcohol 
withdrawal, which can persist for a month or more after 
cessation of drinking (alcohol-induced anxiety disorder); 
and auditory hallucinations and/or paranoid delusions 
in a person who is alert and oriented, seen in 3–5% of 
alcoholics (alcohol-induced psychotic disorder).
Treatment of all forms of alcohol-induced psycho-
pathology includes helping patients achieve abstinence 
and offering supportive care, as well as reassurance and 
“talk therapy” such as cognitive-behavioral approaches. 
However, with the exception of short-term antipsychot-
ics or similar drugs for substance-induced psychoses, sub-
stance-induced psychiatric conditions only rarely require 
medications. Recovery is likely within several days to 
4 weeks of abstinence. Conversely, because alcohol-
induced conditions are temporary and do not indicate a 
need for long-term pharmacotherapy, a history of alco-
hol intake is an important part of the workup for any 
patient with one of these psychiatric symptoms.
THE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Esophagus and stomach
Alcohol intake can result in inﬂammation of the esoph-
agus and stomach causing epigastric distress and gas-
trointestinal bleeding, making alcohol one of the most 
common causes of hemorrhagic gastritis. Violent vom-
iting can produce severe bleeding through a Mallory-
Weiss lesion, a longitudinal tear in the mucosa at the 
gastroesophageal junction.
Pancreas and liver
The incidence of acute pancreatitis (∼25 per 1000 per 
year) is almost threefold higher in alcoholics than in the 
general population, accounting for an estimated 10% or 
more of the total cases. Alcohol impairs gluconeogenesis 
in the liver, resulting in a fall in the amount of glucose 
produced from glycogen, increased lactate production, 
and decreased oxidation of fatty acids. This contrib-
utes to an increase in fat accumulation in liver cells. In 
healthy individuals these changes are reversible, but with 
repeated exposure to ethanol, especially daily heavy 
drinking, more severe changes in the liver occur, includ-
ing alcohol-induced hepatitis, perivenular sclerosis, and 
cirrhosis, with the latter observed in an estimated 15% of 
alcoholics. Perhaps through an enhanced vulnerability to 
infections, alcoholics have an elevated rate of hepatitis C, 
and drinking in the context of that disease is associated 
with more severe liver deterioration.
CANCER
As few as 1.5 drinks per day increases a woman’s risk 
of breast cancer 1.4-fold. For both genders, four drinks 
per day increases the risk for oral and esophageal cancers 
approximately threefold and rectal cancers by a factor 
of 1.5; seven to eight or more drinks per day enhances 
approximately ﬁvefold the risks for many cancers. 
These consequences may result directly from cancer-
promoting effects of alcohol and acetaldehyde or indi-
rectly by interfering with immune homeostasis.
HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
Ethanol causes an increase in red blood cell size (mean 
corpuscular volume [MCV]), which reﬂects its effects 
on stem cells. If heavy drinking is accompanied by folic 
acid deﬁciency, there can also be hypersegmented neu-
trophils, reticulocytopenia, and a hyperplastic bone 
marrow; if malnutrition is present, sideroblastic changes 
can be observed. Chronic heavy drinking can decrease 
production of white blood cells, decrease granulocyte 
mobility and adherence, and impair delayed-hyper-
sensitivity responses to novel antigens (with a possible 
false-negative tuberculin skin test). Associated immune 
deﬁciencies can contribute to vulnerability toward 
infections, including hepatitis and HIV, and interfere 
with their treatment. Finally, many alcoholics have 
mild thrombocytopenia, which usually resolves within 
a week of abstinence unless there is hepatic cirrhosis or 
congestive splenomegaly.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Acutely, ethanol decreases myocardial contractility and 
causes peripheral vasodilation, with a resulting mild 
decrease in blood pressure and a compensatory increase 
in cardiac output. Exercise-induced increases in cardiac 
oxygen consumption are higher after alcohol intake. 
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
756
These acute effects have little clinical signiﬁcance for 
the average healthy drinker but can be problematic 
when persisting cardiac disease is present.
The consumption of three or more drinks per day 
results in a dose-dependent increase in blood pressure, 
which returns to normal within weeks of abstinence. 
Thus, heavy drinking is an important factor in mild to 
moderate hypertension. Chronic heavy drinkers also 
have a sixfold increased risk for coronary artery disease, 
related, in part, to increased low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, and carry an increased risk for cardiomyop-
athy through direct effects of alcohol on heart muscle. 
Symptoms of the latter include unexplained arrhythmias 
in the presence of left ventricular impairment, heart fail-
ure, hypocontractility of heart muscle, and dilation of all 
four heart chambers with associated mural thrombi and 
mitral valve regurgitation. Atrial or ventricular arrhyth-
mias, especially paroxysmal tachycardia, can also occur 
temporarily after heavy drinking in individuals showing 
no other evidence of heart disease—a syndrome known 
as the “holiday heart.”
GENITOURINARY SYSTEM CHANGES, 
SEXUAL FUNCTIONING, AND FETAL 
DEVELOPMENT
Drinking in adolescence can affect normal sexual devel-
opment and reproductive onset. At any age, mod-
est ethanol doses (e.g., blood alcohol concentrations of 
0.06 g/dL) can increase sexual drive but also decrease 
erectile capacity in men. Even in the absence of liver 
impairment, a signiﬁcant minority of chronic alcoholic 
men show irreversible testicular atrophy with shrinkage 
of the seminiferous tubules, decreases in ejaculate vol-
ume, and a lower sperm count.
The repeated ingestion of high doses of ethanol by 
women can result in amenorrhea, a decrease in ovarian 
size, absence of corpora lutea with associated infertility, 
and an increased risk of spontaneous abortion. Heavy 
drinking during pregnancy results in the rapid placen-
tal transfer of both ethanol and acetaldehyde, which 
may have serious consequences for fetal development. 
One severe result is the fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), seen 
in ∼5% of children born to heavy-drinking mothers, 
which can include any of the following: facial changes 
with epicanthal eye folds; poorly formed ear concha; 
small teeth with faulty enamel; cardiac atrial or ven-
tricular septal defects; an aberrant palmar crease and 
limitation in joint movement; and microcephaly with 
mental retardation. A less severe condition is the fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), which can include low 
birth weight, a lower IQ, hyperactive behavior, and 
some modest cognitive deﬁcits. The amount of ethanol 
required and the time of vulnerability during pregnancy 
have not been deﬁned, making it advisable for pregnant 
women to abstain completely.
OTHER EFFECTS
Between one-half and two-thirds of alcoholics have 
skeletal muscle weakness caused by acute alcoholic myop-
athy, a condition that improves but which might not 
fully remit with abstinence. Effects of repeated heavy 
drinking on the skeletal system include changes in cal-
cium metabolism, lower bone density, and decreased 
growth in the epiphyses, leading to an increased risk 
for fractures and osteonecrosis of the femoral head. 
Hormonal changes include an increase in cortisol levels, 
which can remain elevated during heavy drinking; inhi-
bition of vasopressin secretion at rising blood alcohol 
concentrations and enhanced secretion at falling blood 
alcohol concentrations (with the ﬁnal result that most 
alcoholics are likely to be slightly overhydrated); a mod-
est and reversible decrease in serum thyroxine (T4); and 
a more marked decrease in serum triiodothyronine (T3). 
Hormone irregularities should be reevaluated as they 
may disappear after a month of abstinence.
ALCOHOLISM (ALCOHOL ABUSE OR 
DEPENDENCE)
Because many drinkers occasionally imbibe to excess, 
temporary alcohol-related pathology is common in 
nonalcoholics, especially in the late teens to the late 
twenties. When repeated problems in multiple life areas 
develop, the individual is likely to meet criteria for 
alcohol abuse or dependence.
DEFINITIONS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Alcohol dependence is deﬁned in DSM-IV as repeated 
alcohol-related difﬁculties in at least three of seven life 
areas that cluster together at about the same time (e.g., 
over the same 12-month period). Two of these seven 
items, tolerance and withdrawal, may have special 
importance as they are associated with a more severe 
clinical course. Dependence predicts a course of recur-
rent problems with the use of alcohol and the conse-
quent shortening of the life span by a decade.
Alcohol abuse is deﬁned as repetitive problems with 
alcohol in any one of four life areas—social, interper-
sonal, legal, and occupational—or repeated use in haz-
ardous situations such as driving while intoxicated in 
an individual who is not alcohol dependent. About 
50% of those with alcohol abuse continue to have alco-
hol problems 2–5 years later, but only ∼10% of these 
patients—including adolescents—go on to develop 
alcohol dependence.
The lifetime risk for alcohol dependence in most 
Western countries is about 10–15% for men and 5–8% 
for women. Rates are generally similar in the United 
 
CHAPTER 56
Alcohol and Alcoholism
757
States, Canada, Germany, Australia, and the United 
Kingdom; tend to be lower in most Mediterranean 
countries, such as Italy, Greece, and Israel; and may be 
higher in Ireland, France, and Scandinavia. An even 
higher lifetime prevalence has been reported for most 
native cultures, including American Indians, Eskimos, 
Maori groups, and aboriginal tribes of Australia. These 
differences reﬂect both cultural and genetic inﬂuences, 
as described later. In Western countries, the typical 
alcoholic is more often a blue- or white-collar worker 
or homemaker. The lifetime risk for alcoholism among 
physicians is similar to that of the general population.
GENETICS
Approximately 60% of the risk for alcohol use disor-
ders is attributed to genes, as indicated by the fourfold 
higher risk for alcohol abuse and dependence in chil-
dren of alcoholics (even if these children were adopted 
early in life and raised by nonalcoholics) and a higher 
risk in identical twins as compared to fraternal twins of 
alcoholics. The genetic variations appear to operate pri-
marily through intermediate characteristics that sub-
sequently relate to the environment in altering the risk 
for heavy drinking and alcohol problems. These include 
genes relating to a high risk for all substance use disor-
ders that operate through impulsivity, schizophrenia, and 
bipolar disorder. Another characteristic, an intense ﬂush-
ing response when drinking, decreases the risk for only 
alcohol use disorders through gene variations for sev-
eral alcohol-metabolizing enzymes, especially aldehyde 
dehydrogenase (a mutation only seen in Asians), and to a 
lesser extent, variations in alcohol dehydrogenase.
An additional genetically inﬂuenced characteristic, 
a low sensitivity to alcohol, affects the risk for heavy 
drinking and may operate, in part, through variations 
in genes relating to potassium channels, GABA, nico-
tinic, and serotonin systems. A low response per drink 
is observed early in the drinking career and before alco-
hol use disorders have developed. All follow-up stud-
ies have demonstrated that this need for higher doses of 
alcohol to achieve desired effects predicts future heavy 
drinking, alcohol problems, and alcohol use disorders. 
The impact of a low response to alcohol on adverse 
drinking outcomes is mediated, at least in part, by a 
range of environmental inﬂuences, including the selec-
tion of heavier-drinking friends, the development of 
more positive expectations of the effects of high doses 
of alcohol, and suboptimal ways of coping with stress.
NATURAL HISTORY
Although the age of the ﬁrst drink (∼15 years) is similar 
in most alcoholics and nonalcoholics, a slightly earlier 
onset of regular drinking and drunkenness, especially 
in the context of conduct problems, is associated with 
a higher risk for later alcohol use disorders. By the early 
to midtwenties, most nonalcoholic men and women 
moderate their drinking (perhaps learning from more 
minor problems), whereas alcoholics are likely to esca-
late their patterns of drinking despite difﬁculties. The 
ﬁrst major life problem from alcohol often appears in 
the late teens to early twenties, and a pattern of multi-
ple alcohol difﬁculties by the midtwenties. Once estab-
lished, the course of alcoholism is likely to be one of 
exacerbations and remissions, with little difﬁculty in 
temporarily stopping or controlling alcohol use when 
problems develop, but without help, desistance usually 
gives way to escalations in alcohol intake and subse-
quent problems. Following treatment, between half and 
two-thirds of alcoholics maintain abstinence for years, 
and often permanently. Even without formal treatment 
or self-help groups there is also at least a 20% chance 
of spontaneous remission with long-term abstinence. 
However, should the alcoholic continue to drink, the 
life span is shortened by ∼10 years on average, with the 
leading causes of death, heart disease, cancer, accidents, 
and suicide.
TREATMENT
The approach to treating alcohol-related conditions 
is relatively straightforward: (1) recognize that at least 
20% of all patients have alcohol abuse or dependence; 
(2) learn how to identify and treat acute alcohol-related 
conditions; (3) know how to help patients begin to 
address their alcohol problems; and (4) know enough 
about treating alcoholism to appropriately refer patients 
for additional help.
IDENTIFICATION OF THE ALCOHOLIC
Even in afﬂuent locales, ∼20% of patients have an alco-
hol use disorder. These men and women can be identi-
ﬁed by asking questions about alcohol problems and not-
ing laboratory test results that are likely to be abnormal 
in the context of regular consumption of six to eight or 
more drinks per day. The two blood tests with v60% 
sensitivity and speciﬁcity for heavy alcohol consump-
tion are γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) (>35 U) and 
carbohydrate-deﬁcient transferrin (CDT) (>20 U/L 
or >2.6%); the combination of the two is likely to be 
more accurate than either alone. The values for these 
serologic markers are likely to return toward normal 
within several weeks of abstinence. Other useful blood 
tests include high-normal MCVs (v91 μm3) and serum 
uric acid (>416 mol/L, or 7 mg/dL).
The diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence ulti-
mately rests on the documentation of a pattern of 
repeated difﬁculties associated with alcohol use. Thus, 
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
758
in screening it is important to probe for marital or 
job problems, legal difﬁculties, histories of accidents, 
medical problems, evidence of tolerance, etc., and 
then attempt to tie in use of alcohol or another sub-
stance. Some standardized questionnaires can be help-
ful, including the 10-item Alcohol Use Disorders Iden-
tiﬁcation Test (AUDIT) (Table 56-2), but these are 
only screening tools, and a face-to-face interview is still 
required for a meaningful diagnosis.
TREATMENT 
Alcohol-Related Conditions
Acute Intoxication The first priority in treating 
severe intoxication is to assess vital signs and manage 
respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmia, or blood 
pressure instability, if present. The possibility of intoxica-
tion with other drugs should be considered by obtain-
ing toxicology screens for opioids or other CNS depres-
sants such as benzodiazepines. Aggressive behavior 
should be handled by offering reassurance but also by 
considering the possibility of a show of force with an 
intervention team. If the aggressive behavior continues, 
relatively low doses of a short-acting benzodiazepine 
such as lorazepam (e.g., 1–2 mg PO or IV) may be used 
and can be repeated as needed, but care must be taken 
not to destabilize vital signs or worsen confusion. An 
alternative approach is to use an antipsychotic medica-
tion (e.g., 0.5–5 mg of haloperidol PO or IM every 4–8 
h as needed, or olanzapine 2.5–10 mg IM repeated at 2 
and 6 h, if needed).
Intervention There are two main elements to inter-
vention in a person with alcoholism: motivational inter-
viewing and brief interventions. During motivational 
interviewing, the clinician helps the patient to think 
through the assets (e.g., comfort in social situations) and 
liabilities (e.g., health and interpersonal related prob-
lems) of the current pattern of drinking. The patient’s 
responses are key, and the clinician should listen empa-
thetically, helping to weigh options and encouraging 
the patient to take responsibility for changes that need 
to be made. Patients should be reminded that only they 
can decide to avoid the consequences that will occur 
without changes in drinking. The process of motiva-
tional interviewing has been summarized by the acro-
nym FRAMES: Feedback to the patient; Responsibility to 
be taken by the patient; Advice, rather than orders, on 
what needs to be done; Menus of options that might be 
considered; Empathy for understanding of the patient’s 
thoughts and feelings; and Self-efficacy, i.e., offering 
support for the capacity of the patient to succeed in 
making changes.
Once the patient begins to consider change, the 
emphasis shifts to brief interventions designed to help 
the patient understand more about potential action. 
Discussions focus on consequences of high alcohol con-
sumption, suggested approaches to stopping drinking, 
and help in recognizing and avoiding situations likely 
to lead to heavy drinking. Both motivational interview-
ing and brief interventions can be carried out in 15-min 
sessions, but because patients do not always change 
behavior right away, multiple meetings are often 
required to explain the problem, discuss optimal treat-
ments, and explain the benefits of abstinence.
TABLE 56-2
THE ALCOHOL USE DISORDERS IDENTIFICATION 
TEST (AUDIT)a
ITEM
5-POINT SCALE  
(LEAST TO MOST)
 1.  How often do you have a drink 
containing alcohol?
Never (0) to 4+ per 
week (4)
 2.  How many drinks containing 
alcohol do you have on a typical 
day?
1 or 2 (0) to 10+ (4)
 3.  How often do you have six or 
more drinks on one occasion?
Never (0) to daily or 
almost daily (4)
 4.  How often during the last year 
have you found that you were 
not able to stop drinking once 
you had started?
Never (0) to daily or 
almost daily (4)
 5.  How often during the last year 
have you failed to do what was 
normally expected from you 
because of drinking?
Never (0) to daily or 
almost daily (4)
 6.  How often during the last year 
have you needed a ﬁrst drink in 
the morning to get yourself going 
after a heavy drinking session?
Never (0) to daily or 
almost daily (4)
 7.  How often during the last year 
have you had a feeling of guilt or 
remorse after drinking?
Never (0) to daily or 
almost daily (4)
 8.  How often during the last year 
have you been unable to remem-
ber what happened the night 
before because you had been 
drinking?
Never (0) to daily or 
almost daily (4)
 9.  Have you or someone else been 
injured as a result of your drink-
ing?
No (0) to yes, during 
the last year (4)
10.  Has a relative, friend, doctor 
or other health worker been 
concerned about your drinking 
or suggested that you should cut 
down?
No (0) to yes, during 
the last year (4)
aThe AUDIT is scored by summing the 10 values. A score >8 may 
indicate harmful alcohol use.
Source: Adapted from DF Reinert, GP Allen: Alcoholism: Clinical & 
Experimental Research 26:272, 2002, and from MA Schuckit: Drug 
and Alcohol Abuse: A Clinical Guide to Diagnosis and Treatment, 
6th ed. New York, Springer 2006.
 
CHAPTER 56
Alcohol and Alcoholism
759
Alcohol Withdrawal If the patient agrees to stop 
drinking, sudden decreases in alcohol intake can pro-
duce withdrawal symptoms, many of which are the 
opposite of those produced by intoxication. Features 
include tremor of the hands (shakes); agitation and 
anxiety; autonomic nervous system overactivity includ-
ing an increase in pulse, respiratory rate, and body tem-
perature; and insomnia. These symptoms usually begin 
within 5–10 h of decreasing ethanol intake, peak on day 
2 or 3, and improve by day 4 or 5, although mild levels 
of these problems may persist for 4–6 months as a pro-
tracted abstinence syndrome.
About 2–5% of alcoholics experience a withdrawal 
seizure, with the risk increasing in the context of con-
comitant medical problems, misuse of additional drugs, 
and higher alcohol quantities. The same risk factors also 
contribute to a similar rate of delirium tremens (DTs), 
where the withdrawal includes delirium (mental confu-
sion, agitation, and fluctuating levels of consciousness) 
associated with a tremor and autonomic overactivity 
(e.g., marked increases in pulse, blood pressure, and res-
pirations). The risks for seizures and DTs can be dimin-
ished by identifying and treating any underlying medi-
cal conditions early in the course of withdrawal.
The first step in treating withdrawal is to perform a 
thorough physical examination in all alcoholics who 
are considering stopping drinking, including a search 
for evidence of liver failure, gastrointestinal bleeding, 
cardiac arrhythmia, infection, and glucose or electro-
lyte imbalance. It is also important to offer adequate 
nutrition and oral multiple B vitamins, including 50–100 
mg of thiamine daily for a week or more. Because most 
alcoholics who enter withdrawal are either normally 
hydrated or mildly overhydrated, IV fluids should be 
avoided unless there is a relevant medical problem or 
significant recent bleeding, vomiting, or diarrhea.
The next step is to recognize that because with-
drawal symptoms reflect the rapid removal of a CNS 
depressant, alcohol, the symptoms can be controlled by 
administering any depressant in doses that decrease the 
agitation and then gradually tapering the dose over 3–5 
days. While most CNS depressants are effective, benzo-
diazepines (Chap. 54) have the highest margin of safety 
and lowest cost and are, therefore, the preferred class 
of drugs. Short-half-life benzodiazepines can be consid-
ered for patients with serious liver impairment or evi-
dence of brain damage, but they must be given every 
4 h to avoid abrupt blood-level fluctuations that may 
increase the risk for seizures. Therefore, most clinicians 
use drugs with longer half-lives (e.g., chlordiazepox-
ide), adjusting the dose if signs of withdrawal escalate, 
and withholding the drug if the patient is sleeping or 
has evidence of orthostatic hypotension. The average 
patient requires doses of 25–50 mg of chlordiazepoxide 
or 10 mg of diazepam given PO every 4–6 h on the first 
day, with doses then decreased to zero over the next 5 
days. While alcohol withdrawal can be treated in a hos-
pital, patients in good physical condition who demon-
strate mild signs of withdrawal despite low blood alco-
hol concentrations and who have no prior history of DTs 
or withdrawal seizures can be considered for outpatient 
detoxification. These patients should return daily for 
evaluation of vital signs and can be hospitalized if signs 
and symptoms of withdrawal escalate.
Treatment of the patient with DTs can be challeng-
ing, and the condition is likely to run a course of 3–5 
days regardless of the therapy employed. The focus of 
care is to identify and correct medical problems and to 
control behavior and prevent injuries. Many clinicians 
recommend the use of high doses of a benzodiazepine 
(as much as 800 mg/d of chlordiazepoxide has been 
reported), a treatment that will decrease agitation and 
raise the seizure threshold but probably does little to 
improve the confusion. Other clinicians recommend the 
use of antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol or 
olanzapine as discussed earlier, although these drugs 
have not been directly evaluated for DTs. Antipsychotics 
are less likely to exacerbate confusion but may increase 
the risk of seizures; they have no place in the treatment 
of mild withdrawal symptoms.
Generalized withdrawal seizures rarely require more 
than giving an adequate dose of benzodiazepines. 
There is little evidence that anticonvulsants such as 
phenytoin or gabapentin are more effective in drug-
withdrawal seizures, and the risk of seizures has usually 
passed by the time effective drug levels are reached. 
The rare patient with status epilepticus must be treated 
aggressively (Chap. 26).
REHABILITATION OF ALCOHOLICS
An 
Overview After completing alcoholic reha-
bilitation, ≥60% of alcoholics, especially middle-class 
patients, maintain abstinence for at least a year, and 
many achieve lifetime sobriety. The core of treatment 
uses cognitive-behavioral approaches to help patients 
recognize the need to change, while working with 
them to alter their behaviors to enhance compliance. 
A key step is to optimize motivation toward abstinence 
through education about alcoholism and instructions 
to family members to stop protecting the patient from 
problems caused by alcohol. After years of heavy drink-
ing, patients also need counseling, vocational rehabili-
tation, and self-help groups such as Alcoholics Anony-
mous (AA) to help them learn how to deal with life’s 
stresses while sober. A third component, relapse preven-
tion, helps the patient to identify situations in which a 
return to drinking is likely, formulate ways of managing 
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
760
these risks, and develop coping strategies that increase 
the chances of a return to abstinence if a slip occurs.
While many patients can be treated as outpatients, 
more intense interventions work better, and some alco-
holics do not respond to AA or outpatient groups. What-
ever the setting, subsequent contact with outpatient 
treatment staff should be maintained for a minimum 
of 6 months and preferably a full year after abstinence. 
Counseling focuses on areas of improved functioning 
in the absence of alcohol (i.e., why it is a good idea to 
continue to abstain) and helping the patient to manage 
free time without alcohol, develop a nondrinking peer 
group, and handle stresses on the job.
The physician serves an important role in identify-
ing the alcoholic, diagnosing and treating associated 
medical or psychiatric syndromes, overseeing detoxifi-
cation, referring the patient to rehabilitation programs, 
providing counseling, and, if appropriate, selecting 
which (if any) medication might be needed. For insom-
nia, patients should be reassured that troubled sleep is 
normal after alcohol withdrawal and will improve over 
subsequent weeks. They should be taught the basic 
elements of “sleep hygiene” including maintaining con-
sistent schedules for bedtime and awakening. Sleep 
medications have the danger of being misused and of 
rebound insomnia when stopped. Sedating antidepres-
sants (e.g., trazodone) should not be used as they inter-
fere with cognitive functioning the next morning and 
disturb the normal sleep architecture, but occasional 
use of over-the-counter sleeping medications (sedat-
ing antihistamines) can be considered. Anxiety can be 
addressed by helping the person to gain insight into 
the temporary nature of the symptoms and to develop 
strategies to achieve relaxation as well as by using forms 
of cognitive therapy.
Medications for Rehabilitation Several medi-
cations have modest benefits when used for the first 6 
months of recovery. The opioid-antagonist, naltrexone, 
50–150 mg/d orally, appears to shorten subsequent 
relapses, whether used in the oral form or as a once-per-
month 380-mg injection, especially in individuals with 
the G allele of the AII8G polymorphism of the μ opioid 
receptor. By blocking opioid receptors, naltrexone may 
decrease activity in the dopamine-rich ventral tegmen-
tal reward system, and decrease the feeling of pleasure 
or reward if alcohol is imbibed. A second medication, 
acamprosate (Campral) at ∼2 g/d divided into three 
oral doses, has similar modest effects; acamprosate 
inhibits NMDA receptors, decreasing mild symptoms of 
protracted withdrawal. Several trials of combined nal-
trexone and acamprosate using doses similar to those 
noted earlier have reported that the combination may 
be superior to either drug alone, although not all stud-
ies agree.
It is more difficult to establish the asset-to-liability 
ratio of a third drug, disulfiram, an ALDH inhibitor, used 
at doses of 250 mg/d. This drug produces vomiting 
and autonomic nervous system instability in the pres-
ence of alcohol as a result of rapidly rising blood levels 
of the first metabolite of alcohol, acetaldehyde. This 
reaction can be dangerous, especially for patients with 
heart disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus, or hyperten-
sion. The drug itself carries potential risks of depression, 
psychotic symptoms, peripheral neuropathy, and liver 
damage. Disulfiram is best given under supervision of 
another individual (such as a spouse), especially dur-
ing discrete periods identified as representing high-
risk drinking situations (such as the Christmas holiday). 
Other relevant drugs under investigation include the 
nicotinic receptor agonist varenicline, the serotonin 
antagonist ondansetron, the α-adrenergic agonist 
prazosin, the GABA-B receptor agonist baclofen, the 
anticonvulsant topiramate, and cannabinol receptor 
antagonists. At present, there are insufficient data to 
determine the asset-to-liability ratio for these medica-
tions in treating alcoholism and, therefore, no data to 
offer solid support for their use in clinical settings.
 Thomas R. Kosten 
761
 INTRODUCTION 
 Opiate analgesics are some of the oldest and most com-
mon medications in clinical practice, but have also been 
abused since at least 300 B.C. Nepenthe (Greek “free 
from sorrow”) helped the hero of the  Odyssey , but wide-
spread opium smoking in China and the Near East has 
caused harm for centuries. Since the ﬁ rst chemical isola-
tion of opium and codeine 200 years ago, a wide range 
of synthetic opioids have been developed, and endog-
enous opioid peptides were discovered in 1995. Two 
of the most important adverse effects of all these agents 
are overdose and dependence. The 0.14% annual 
prevalence of heroin dependence in the United States is 
only about one-third the rate of prescription opiate abuse 
and is substantially lower than the 2% rate of morphine 
dependence in Southeast and Southwest Asia. While 
these rates are low relative to other abused substances, 
their disease burden is substantial, with high rates of mor-
bidity and mortality; disease transmission; increased health 
care, crime, and law enforcement costs; and less tangible 
costs of family distress and lost productivity. 
 The diagnosis of opiate dependence in the  Diagnos-
tic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edi-
tion (DSM-IV) requires the repeated use of the drug 
while producing problems in three or more areas in a 
12-month period. The areas include tolerance, with-
drawal, use of greater amounts of opiates than intended, 
and use despite adverse consequences. The abuse diag-
nosis is related to legal problems, inability to meet obli-
gations, use in hazardous situations, and continued use 
despite problems. The most striking aspect of opiate 
abuse has been its marked increase as the gateway to 
illicit drugs in the United States. Since 2007, prescrip-
tion opiates have surpassed marijuana as the most com-
mon illicit drug that adolescents initially abuse. 
 The most commonly abused opiates are diverted pre-
scriptions for oxycodone, followed by heroin and mor-
phine, and—among health professionals—meperidine and 
fentanyl. Two opiate maintenance treatment agents—
methadone and buprenorphine—are also abused, but at 
substantially lower rates, and the partial opiate agonists such 
as butorphanol, tramadol, and pentazocine are infrequently 
abused. The chemistry and general pharmacology of these 
agents are covered in major pharmacology texts, and this 
chapter focuses on the neurobiology and pharmacology 
relevant to abuse, dependence, and their treatments. 
 NEUROBIOLOGY 
 During the past 30 years, substantial progress has 
been made in elucidating the neurobiology of opiates 
and their effects not only on the three types of opiate 
receptors (mu, kappa, and delta) but also on the cas-
cade of second, third, and fourth intracellular mes-
senger systems and on neuronal action potentials. The 
different functional activities of these three receptors 
are summarized in  Table 57-1 , and abuse liability is 
 OPIOID DRUG ABUSE AND DEPENDENCE 
 CHAPTER 57 
 TABLE 57-1
 ACTIONS OF OPIOID RECEPTORS 
RECEPTOR TYPE
ACTIONS
Mu (μ) (e.g., 
morphine)
Analgesia, reinforcement euphoria, 
cough and appetite suppression, 
decreased respirations, decreased GI 
motility, sedation, hormone changes, 
dopamine and acetylcholine release
Kappa (κ) (e.g., 
butorphanol)
Dysphoria, decreased GI motility, 
decreased appetite, decreased 
respiration, psychotic symptoms, 
sedation, diuresis, analgesia
Delta (∆) (e.g., 
etorphine)
Hormone changes, appetite suppres-
sion, dopamine release
 Abbreviation: GI, gastrointestinal.
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
762
primarily associated with the mu receptor. A fourth 
type of opiate receptor, the orphanin receptor, also 
modulates pain but is not affected by opiate drugs. 
These opiate receptors are all G protein–linked and 
coupled to the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic 
AMP) second messenger system and to potassium 
channels. Opiates are inhibitory and block the potas-
sium channels from opening and depolarizing the neu-
ron, which would produce an action potential. Thus, 
opiates acutely inhibit neuronal activity. Analgesia and 
sedation are induced through this inhibition of speciﬁc 
brain pathways, while the “high” from opiates involves 
an indirect activation of a different brain pathway—the 
mesolimbic dopamine pathway.
The various effects of opiates are related to the spe-
ciﬁc neuroanatomic locations of mu receptors. Rein-
forcing and euphoric effects of opiates occur in the 
dopaminegic pathway from the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA) to the nucleus accumbens, where opiates 
increase synaptic levels of dopamine. This increase is 
due to inhibition of GABAergic neurons that inhibit 
both the VTA and nucleus accumbens activity. How-
ever, the “high” only occurs when the rate of change in 
dopamine is fast. Large, rapidly administered doses of 
opiates block GABA inhibition and produce a burst 
of nucleus accumbens activity that is associated with 
“high” in all abused drugs. Therefore, routes of admin-
istration that slowly increase opiate blood and brain 
levels, such as oral and transdermal routes, are effective 
for analgesia and sedation but do not produce an opi-
ate “high” that follows smoking and intravenous routes. 
Other acute effects such as analgesia and respiratory 
depression leading to overdose are due to stimulation of 
opiate receptors located in other areas such as the locus 
coeruleus.
Opiate dependence and withdrawal are chronic 
effects related to the cyclic AMP system. This second 
messenger phosphorylates various intracellular pro-
teins and produces a cascade of changes reaching into 
the nucleus and DNA. Immediate early gene products 
such as c-fos and c-jun are activated followed by regula-
tion of other genes with more sustained protein tran-
scription such as delta c-fos. With these sustained gene 
activations, several receptor-level changes occur, includ-
ing downregulation of receptor numbers, reduced neu-
ronal cell-surface receptor trafﬁcking, uncoupling of G 
proteins from the mu opiate receptors, and upregula-
tion of cyclic AMP second messenger systems. These 
effects are also reﬂective of genetic risk factors for 
drug dependence, with estimates of up to 50% of the 
risk for dependence due to polygenic inheritance. Spe-
ciﬁc functional genetic polymorphisms in the mu opi-
ate receptor gene appear associated with this risk for 
opiate abuse, including one producing a threefold 
increase in this receptor’s afﬁnity for opiates and the 
endogenous ligand beta endorphin. Epigenetic methyla-
tion changes also occur on the DNA of the mu receptor 
gene of opiate addicts. DNA methylation inhibits gene 
transcription.
This molecular cascade links acute intoxication and 
sedation to chronic opiate dependence and withdrawal 
within the speciﬁc neuroanatomic structure of the locus 
coeruleus. The locus coeruleus is the brain’s largest con-
centration of noradrenergic neurons and is responsible 
for a large proportion of brain cortical activation. When 
large opiate doses saturate and activate all of its mu 
receptors, its steady rate of action potentials can cease 
due to the inactivation of potassium channels. When 
this direct inhibitory effect is sustained over weeks and 
months of opiate use, a secondary set of regulatory 
effects take place in the cyclic AMP system that leads to 
tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal symptoms.
Opiate withdrawal symptoms reﬂect overactivity of 
adrenergic neurons that are located in the locus ceru-
leus. Opiates suppress the activity of these neurons, 
and when this suppression continues chronically from 
daily opiate use, a secondary upregulation occurs in 
adenyl cyclase enzyme capacity and the production of 
cyclic AMP from ATP. This upregulation is a homeo-
static response to the chronic opiate suppression, but 
when that suppression is terminated by discontinuing 
the opiate, this enhanced adenyl cyclase activity leads to 
a marked increase in cyclic AMP. The now very high 
levels of cyclic AMP activate the sodium-potassium 
channels and produce a high level of action potentials 
in these adrenergic neurons. This adrenergic arousal 
is one basis for the symptoms of opiate withdrawal 
and takes about 7 days to readjust to normal levels of 
adenyl cyclase activity and the associated resolution of 
opiate withdrawal symptoms. This molecular model 
of adrenergic neuronal activation during withdrawal has 
had important treatment implications, such as the use of 
clonidine for opioid withdrawal.
PHARMACOLOGY
Tolerance and withdrawal commonly occur with chronic 
daily use as quickly as 6–8 weeks depending on the dose 
and frequency of dosing. Tolerance appears to be pri-
marily a pharmacodynamic rather than pharmacokinetic 
effect, with relatively limited induction of the cytochrome 
P450 or other liver enzymes. The metabolism of opi-
ates occurs in the liver primarily through the cytochrome 
P450 systems of 2D6 and 3A4. They then are conjugated 
to glucuronic acid and excreted in small amounts in feces. 
The plasma half-lives generally range from 2.5 to 3 h for 
morphine and more than 22 h for methadone. The short-
est half-lives of several minutes are for fentanyl-related opi-
ates and the longest are for buprenorphine and its active 
 
CHAPTER 57
Opioid Drug Abuse and Dependence
763
metabolites, which can block opiate withdrawal for up 
to 3 days after a single dose. Tolerance to the mental 
effects of opioids leads to the need for ever-increasing 
amounts of drugs to sustain the desired euphoriant 
effects—as well as to avoid the discomfort of with-
drawal. This combination has the expected consequence 
of strongly reinforcing dependence once it has started. 
The role of endogenous opioid peptides in opioid 
dependence is uncertain.
The clinical aspects of abuse are tied to route of 
administration and the rapidity of an opiate bolus in 
reaching the brain. Intravenous and smoked adminis-
tration is routine not only because it is the most efﬁ-
cient route but also because it rapidly produces a bolus 
of high drug concentration in the brain. This bolus 
produces a “rush,” followed by euphoria, a feeling of 
tranquility, and sleepiness (“the nod”). Heroin pro-
duces effects that last 3–5 h, and several doses a day 
are required to forestall manifestations of withdrawal 
in dependent persons. Symptoms of opioid withdrawal 
begin 8–10 h after the last dose. Many of these symp-
toms reﬂect increased activity of the autonomic nervous 
system. Lacrimation, rhinorrhea, yawning, and sweat-
ing appear ﬁrst. Restless sleep followed by weakness, 
chills, gooseﬂesh (“cold turkey”), nausea and vomiting, 
muscle aches, and involuntary movements (“kicking 
the habit”), hyperpnea, hyperthermia, and hyperten-
sion occur in later stages of the withdrawal syndrome. 
The acute course of withdrawal may last 7–10 days. A 
secondary phase of protracted abstinence lasts for 26–30 
weeks and is characterized by hypotension, bradycardia, 
hypothermia, mydriasis, and decreased responsiveness of 
the respiratory center to carbon dioxide.
Opioid effects on organs
Besides the brain effects of opioids on sedation and 
euphoria and the combined brain and peripheral ner-
vous system effects on analgesia, a wide range of other 
organs can be affected. The cough reﬂex is inhibited 
through the brain, leading to the use of some opiates 
as an antitussive, and nausea and vomiting are due to 
brainstem effects on the medulla. The release of several 
hormones is inhibited including corticotropin-releasing 
factor (CRF) and luteinizing hormone, which reduce 
cortisol and sex hormone levels, respectively. The clini-
cal manifestations of these reductions can involve poor 
responses to stress and reductions in sex drive. An 
increase in prolactin also contributes to the reduced 
sex drive in males. Two other hormones affected are 
decreased thyrotropin and increased growth hormone. 
Respiratory depression results from opiate-induced 
insensitivity of brainstem neurons to increases in carbon 
dioxide. This depression contributes to overdose, but 
in patients with pulmonary disease even opiate doses 
well below those typical of overdose can produce clini-
cally signiﬁcant complications. In overdoses, aspiration 
pneumonia is a common complication due to loss of 
the choking reﬂex. Opiates reduce gut motility, which 
is helpful for diarrhea, but can lead to nausea, consti-
pation, and anorexia with weight loss. Deaths have 
occurred in early methadone maintenance programs 
due to severe constipation and toxic megacolon. Opi-
ates may prolong QT intervals and lead to sudden death 
in some patients. Two opiates particularly noted for this 
complication are methadone and a long-acting form 
of methadone called LAAM that was withdrawn from 
the market. Orthostatic hypotension may occur due to 
histamine release and peripheral blood vessel dilation, 
which is an opiate effect usefully applied to managing 
acute myocardial infarction.
Heroin users in particular tend to use opiates intra-
venously and be polydrug users, also using alcohol, 
sedatives, cannabinoids, and stimulants. None of these 
other drugs serve as substitutes for opioids, but they 
have desired additive effects. One needs to be sure that 
the person undergoing a withdrawal reaction is not also 
withdrawing from alcohol or sedatives, which might be 
more dangerous and more difﬁcult to manage.
Besides the ever-present risk of fatal overdose, hepa-
titis B and AIDS are among the many potential com-
plications of sharing contaminated hypodermic syringes. 
Bacterial infections lead to septic complications such 
as meningitis, osteomyelitis, and abscesses in various 
organs. Attempts to illicitly manufacture meperidine in 
the 1980s resulted in the production of a highly speciﬁc 
neurotoxin, MPTP, which produced parkinsonism in 
users.
Toxicity and overdose
Lethal overdose is a relatively common complica-
tion of opiate dependence and must be rapidly recog-
nized and treated because naloxone provides a highly 
speciﬁc reversal agent that is relatively free of com-
plications. The diagnosis generally does not rely on 
blood or urine toxicology results but on clinical signs 
and symptoms. The presentation involves shallow and 
slow respirations, pupillary miosis (mydriasis does not 
occur until signiﬁcant brain anoxia supervenes), bra-
dycardia, hypothermia, and stupor or coma. If nal-
oxone is not administered, progression to respiratory 
and cardiovascular collapse leading to death occurs. At 
autopsy, cerebral edema and sometimes frothy pulmo-
nary edema are generally found, but those pulmonary 
effects are most likely from allergic reactions to adul-
terants mixed with the heroin. Opiates generally do 
not produce seizures except for unusual cases of mixed 
drug abuse with the opiate meperidine or with high 
doses of tramadol.
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
764
TREATMENT 
Opioid Overdose
Beyond the acute treatment of opiate overdose with 
naloxone, clinicians have two general treatment paths: 
opioid maintenance treatment or detoxification. Most 
opioid-dependent individuals engage in multiple epi-
sodes of all three categories of treatment during the 
course of their drug-using careers. Agonist and partial 
agonist medications are commonly utilized for both 
maintenance and detoxification purposes. Alpha-2-ad-
renergic agonists are primarily used for detoxification. 
Antagonists are used to accelerate detoxification and 
then continued postdetoxification to prevent relapse. 
Only the residential medication-free programs have had 
success that comes close to matching that of the med-
ication-based programs. Success of the various treat-
ment approaches is assessed as retention in treatment, 
reduced opioid and other drug use, as well as secondary 
outcomes such as HIV risk behaviors, crime, psychiatric 
symptoms, and medical comorbidity.
Stopping opiates is like stopping most drugs of 
abuse—it is much easier to stop than to prevent relapses. 
Long-term relapse prevention for opioid-dependent per-
sons requires combined pharmacologic and psychosocial 
approaches. Chronic users tend to prefer pharmacologic 
approaches; those with shorter histories of drug abuse 
are more amenable to detoxification and psychosocial 
interventions.
Opiate Overdose Treatment Managing over-
dose requires naloxone and support of vital functions, 
including intubation if needed. The opiate antagonist 
naloxone is given at 0.4–2 mg IV or IM, with an expected 
response within 1–2 min. If the overdose is due to 
buprenorphine, then naloxone might be required at 
total doses of 10 mg or greater, but primary buprenor-
phine overdose is nearly impossible because this agent 
is a partial opiate agonist. Partial agonism means that 
as the dose of buprenorphine is increased, it has greater 
opiate antagonist than agonist activity. Thus, a 0.2-mg 
buprenorphine dose leads to analgesia and sedation, 
while a hundred times greater 20-mg dose produces 
profound opiate antagonism, precipitating opiate with-
drawal in a person who was opiate dependent on mor-
phine or methadone. When 10 mg of naloxone fails to 
produce arousal in the patient, another cause of toxic-
ity must be found. Before reaching such large naloxone 
doses, however, it is important to recognize that the 
goal is to reverse the respiratory depression and not to 
administer so much naloxone that it precipitates opi-
ate withdrawal. Because naloxone only lasts a few hours 
and most opiates last considerably longer, close moni-
toring and an IV naloxone drip is frequently employed 
to provide a continuous level of antagonism for 24–72 h 
depending on the opiate used in the overdose (e.g., 
morphine vs. methadone). Other sedative drugs that 
produce significant overdoses must also be considered 
if naloxone has only a limited effect. The most com-
mon are benzodiazepines, which have produced over-
doses and deaths in combination with buprenorphine. 
A specific antagonist for benzodiazepines—flumazenil 
at 0.2 mg/min—can be given to a maximum of 3 g/h, 
but it may precipitate seizures and increase intracranial 
pressure. Like naloxone, administration for a prolonged 
period is usually required since most benzodiazepines 
remain active for considerably longer than flumazenil.
Support of vital functions may include oxygen and 
positive-pressure breathing, IV fluids, pressor agents for 
hypotension, and cardiac monitoring to detect QT prolon-
gation, which might require treatment. Activated charcoal 
and gastric lavage may be helpful for oral ingestions, but 
intubation will be needed if the patient is stuporous.
Opiate Withdrawal Treatment The principles 
of detoxification are the same for all drugs: to substitute 
a longer-acting, orally active, pharmacologically equiva-
lent drug for the abused drug, stabilize the patient on 
that drug, and then gradually withdraw the substituted 
drug. Methadone is admirably suited for such use in 
opioid-dependent persons, and the partial mu agonist 
buprenorphine is another option. Clonidine, a centrally 
acting sympatholytic agent, has also been used for 
detoxification. By reducing central sympathetic outflow, 
clonidine mitigates many of the signs of sympathetic 
overactivity. Clonidine has no narcotic action and is not 
addictive. Lofexidine, a clonidine analogue with less 
hypotensive effect, is being developed for use.
Methadone for Detoxiﬁcation Methadone dose 
tapering regimens for detoxification range from 2 to 3 
weeks to as long as 180 days, but this approach is con-
troversial given the relative effectiveness of methadone 
maintenance and the low success rates of detoxifica-
tion. Unfortunately, the vast majority of patients tend 
to relapse to heroin or other opiates during or after 
the detoxification period, indicative of the chronic and 
relapsing nature of opioid dependence.
Buprenorphine for Detoxiﬁcation Because it is 
a partial agonist, buprenorphine produces fewer with-
drawal symptoms and may allow briefer detoxifications 
compared with full agonists like methadone, but it does 
not appear to have better outcomes than methadone 
tapering. Buprenorphine is superior to the alpha-2-
adrenergic agonist clonidine in reducing symptoms of 
withdrawal, retaining patients in a withdrawal protocol, 
and in treatment completion.
Alpha-2-Adrenergic Agonists for Detoxiﬁ-
cation Several alpha-2-adrenergic agonists have 
relieved opioid withdrawal by suppressing central 
 
CHAPTER 57
Opioid Drug Abuse and Dependence
765
noradrenergic hyperactivity. Alpha-2-adrenergic ago-
nists moderate the symptoms of noradrenergic hyper-
activity via actions in the central nervous system. 
Clonidine relieves some signs and symptoms of opiate 
withdrawal such as lacrimation, rhinorrhea, muscle pain, 
joint pain, restlessness, and gastrointestinal symptoms, 
but it is not a drug of abuse or dependence. Unfortu-
nately, clonidine is associated with significant hypoten-
sion, which has stimulated investigation of lofexidine, 
guanfacine, and guanabenz acetate. Lofexidine can be 
dosed up to ∼2 mg/d and appears to be associated 
with fewer adverse effects, and it is therefore likely to 
replace clonidine as the leading opioid withdrawal 
treatment in this drug class. Clonidine or lofexidine are 
typically administered orally, in three or four doses per 
day, with dizziness, sedation, lethargy, and dry mouth 
as the primary adverse side effects. Completion rates of 
managed withdrawal assisted with clonidine and other 
alpha-2-adrenergic agents vs. methadone have been 
comparable.
Rapid and Ultrarapid Opiate Detoxiﬁcation 
The opioid antagonist naltrexone typically combined 
with an alpha-2-adrenergic agonist has been purported 
to shorten the duration of withdrawal without signifi-
cantly increasing patient discomfort. Another benefit 
to rapid opiate detoxification (ROD) is the reduced time 
between opioid use and the commencement of sus-
tained naltrexone treatment for prevention of relapse 
(discussed later). ROD completion rates using naltrex-
one and clonidine range from 75 to 81% compared to 
40 to 65% for methadone or clonidine alone. Buprenor-
phine in combination with naltrexone and clonidine 
reduced ROD from 3 days to 1 day of detoxification. 
Ultrarapid opiate detoxification is an extension of ROD 
using anesthetics, but is highly controversial due to the 
medical risks and mortality associated with it.
Agonist medications for opioid dependence
Methadone maintenance substitutes a once-daily oral 
opioid dose for three-to-four times daily heroin. Meth-
adone saturates the opioid receptors, and by inducing a 
high level of opiate tolerance, blocks the desired eupho-
ria from additional opiates. Buprenorphine, a partial 
opioid agonist, also can be given once daily at sublin-
gual doses of 4–32 mg daily, and in contrast to meth-
adone it can be given in an ofﬁce-based primary care 
setting.
Methadone maintenance
Methadone’s slow onset of action when taken orally, 
long elimination half-life (24–36 h), and production of 
cross-tolerance at doses from 80 to 150 mg are the basis 
for its efﬁcacy in treatment retention and reductions in 
IV drug use, criminal activity, and HIV risk behaviors 
and mortality. Methadone can prolong the QT inter-
val at rates as high as 16% above the rates in non-meth-
adone-maintained, drug-injecting patients, but it has 
been used safely in the treatment of opioid dependence 
for 40 years.
Buprenorphine maintenance
While France and Australia have had sublingual buprenor-
phine maintenance since 1996, the USFDA approved it as 
a Schedule III drug in 2002 for managing opiate depen-
dence. Unlike the full agonist methadone, buprenorphine 
is a partial agonist of mu-opioid receptors with a slow 
onset and long duration of action, allowing for alternate-
day dosing. Its partial agonism reduces the risk of uninten-
tional overdose but limits its efﬁcacy to patients who need 
the equivalent of only 60–70 mg of methadone, and many 
patients in methadone maintenance require higher doses 
up to 150 mg daily. Buprenorphine is combined with nal-
oxone at a 4:1 ratio in order to reduce its abuse liability. A 
subcutaneous buprenorphine implant has also been tested, 
but results are not yet available.
In the United States, the ability of primary care phy-
sicians to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid depen-
dence presents an important and far-reaching opportu-
nity to improve access and quality of treatment as well 
as reduce social harm. Europe, Asia, and Australia have 
found reduced opioid-related deaths and drug-injec-
tion-related medical morbidity with buprenorphine 
available in primary care. Retention in ofﬁce-based 
buprenorphine treatment has been greater than 70% at 
6-month follow-ups.
Antagonist medications for opioid dependence
The rationale for using narcotic antagonist therapy is 
that blocking the action of self-administered opioids 
should eventually extinguish the habit, but this ther-
apy is poorly accepted by patients. Naltrexone, a long-
acting orally active pure opioid antagonist, can be given 
three times a week at doses of 100–150 mg and a depot 
form for monthly administration is available. Because 
it is an antagonist, the patient must ﬁrst be detoxiﬁed 
from opioid dependence before starting naltrexone. 
When taken chronically for even years, it is safe, associ-
ated with few side effects (headache, nausea, abdominal 
pain), and can be given to patients infected with hepati-
tis B or C without producing hepatotoxicity. However, 
most providers refrain from prescribing it if liver func-
tion tests are 3–5 times above normal levels. Naltrex-
one maintenance combined with psychosocial therapy is 
effective in reducing heroin use, but medication adher-
ence is low. Depot injection formulations lasting up to 
4 weeks markedly improve adherence, retention, and 
drug use. Subcutaneous naltrexone implants in Russia, 
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
766
China, and Australia have doubled treatment retention 
and reduced relapse to half that of oral naltrexone.
Medication-free treatment
Most opiate addicts enter medication-free treatments 
in inpatient, residential, or outpatient settings, but 1- 
to 5-year outcomes are very poor compared to phar-
macotherapy except for residential settings lasting 6 
to 18 months. The residential programs require full 
immersion in a regimented system that has progres-
sively increasing levels of independence and respon-
sibility within a controlled community of fellow drug 
abusers. These medication-free programs, as well as the 
pharmacotherapy programs, also include counseling and 
behavioral treatments designed to teach interpersonal 
and cognitive skills for coping with stress and for avoid-
ing situations leading to easy access to drugs or to crav-
ing. Relapse is prevented by having the individual very 
gradually reintroduced to greater responsibilities and to 
the working environment outside of the protected ther-
apeutic community.
PREVENTION
Preventing opiate abuse represents a critically impor-
tant challenge for physicians. Opiate prescriptions are 
the most common source of drugs accessed by adoles-
cents who begin a pattern of illicit drug abuse; in the 
United States, 9000 adolescents become opiate abusers 
every day. The major sources of these drugs are family 
members, not drug dealers or the Internet. Pain man-
agement involves giving sufﬁcient opiates to relieve the 
pain over as short a period of time as the pain warrants. 
The patient then needs to dispose of any remaining opi-
ates, not save them in the medicine cabinet, because this 
behavior leads to diversion to adolescents. Finally, phy-
sicians should never prescribe opiates for themselves.
 Nancy K. Mello  ■   Jack H. Mendelsona 
767
 The abuse of cocaine and other psychostimulant drugs 
reﬂ ects a complex interaction between the pharmacologic 
properties of each drug, the personality and expectations 
of the user, and the environmental context in which the 
drug is used. Polydrug abuse involving the concurrent 
use of several drugs with different pharmacologic effects 
is increasingly common. Some forms of polydrug abuse, 
such as the combined use of heroin and cocaine intrave-
nously, are especially dangerous and are a major problem 
in hospital emergency rooms. Sometimes one drug is 
used to enhance the effects of another, as with the com-
bined use of benzodiazepines and methadone, or cocaine 
and heroin in methadone-maintained patients. 
 Chronic cocaine and psychostimulant abuse may cause 
a number of adverse health consequences, and preexist-
ing disorders such as hypertension and cardiac disease 
may be exacerbated by drug abuse. The combined use 
of two or more drugs may accentuate medical complica-
tions associated with abuse of one of them. Chronic drug 
abuse is often associated with immune system dysfunction 
and increased vulnerability to infections, which in turn 
contributes to the risk for HIV infection. In addition, 
concurrent use of cocaine and opiates (the “speedball”) 
is frequently associated with needle sharing by IV drug 
users. Intravenous drug abusers continue to represent the 
largest single group of persons with HIV infection in sev-
eral major metropolitan areas in the United States as well 
as in many parts of Europe and Asia. 
 COCAINE 
 Cocaine is a stimulant and a local anesthetic with potent 
vasoconstrictor properties. The leaves of the  coca plant 
( Erythroxylon coca ) contain ∼0.5–1% cocaine. The drug 
 COCAINE AND OTHER COMMONLY 
ABUSED DRUGS 
 CHAPTER 58 
a Deceased.
produces physiologic and behavioral effects when admin-
istered orally, intranasally, intravenously, or via inhalation 
following pyrolysis (smoking). The reinforcing effects of 
cocaine appear to be related to activation of dopaminer-
gic neurons in the mesolimbic system. Cocaine increases 
synaptic concentrations of the monamine neurotransmit-
ters dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin by binding 
to transporter proteins in presynaptic neurons and block-
ing reuptake. 
 Prevalence of cocaine use 
 Cocaine is widely available throughout the United 
States, and cocaine abuse occurs in virtually all social and 
economic strata of society. The prevalence of cocaine 
abuse in the general population has been accompanied 
by an increase in cocaine abuse by heroin-dependent 
persons, including those in methadone maintenance pro-
grams. Intravenous cocaine is often used concurrently 
with IV heroin. This combination purportedly attenu-
ates the postcocaine “crash” and substitutes a cocaine 
“high” for the heroin “high” blocked by methadone. 
 Acute and chronic intoxication 
 There has been an increase in both IV administration 
and inhalation of pyrolyzed cocaine via smoking. Fol-
lowing intranasal administration, changes in mood 
and sensation are perceived within 3–5 min, and peak 
effects occur at 10–20 min. The effects rarely last more 
than 1 h. Inhalation of pyrolyzed materials includes 
inhaling crack/cocaine or smoking coca paste, a prod-
uct made by extracting cocaine preparations with ﬂ am-
mable solvents, and cocaine free-base smoking. Free-
base cocaine, including the freebase prepared with 
sodium bicarbonate (crack), has become increasingly 
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
768
popular because of the relative high potency of the 
compound and its rapid onset of action (8–10 s follow-
ing smoking).
Cocaine produces a brief, dose-related stimulation and 
enhancement of mood and an increase in cardiac rate and 
blood pressure. Body temperature usually increases fol-
lowing cocaine administration, and high doses of cocaine 
may induce lethal pyrexia or hypertension. Because 
cocaine inhibits reuptake of catecholamines at adrener-
gic nerve endings, the drug potentiates sympathetic ner-
vous system activity. Cocaine has a short plasma half-life 
of approximately 45–60 min. It is metabolized by plasma 
esterases, and cocaine metabolites are excreted in urine. 
The very short duration of the euphorigenic effects of 
cocaine observed in chronic abusers is probably due to 
both acute and chronic tolerance. Frequent self-adminis-
tration of the drug (two to three times per hour) is often 
reported by chronic cocaine abusers. Alcohol is often 
used to modulate both the cocaine high and the dyspho-
ria associated with the abrupt disappearance of cocaine’s 
effects. A metabolite of cocaine, cocaethylene, has been 
detected in the blood and urine of persons who concur-
rently abuse alcohol and cocaine. Cocaethylene induces 
changes in cardiovascular function similar to those of 
cocaine alone, and the pathophysiologic consequences of 
alcohol abuse plus cocaine abuse may be additive when 
both are used together.
The prevalent assumption that cocaine inhalation 
or IV administration is relatively safe is contradicted by 
reports of death from respiratory depression, cardiac 
arrhythmias, and convulsions associated with cocaine use. 
In addition to generalized seizures, neurologic compli-
cations may include headache, ischemic or hemorrhagic 
stroke, or subarachnoid hemorrhage. Disorders of cere-
bral blood ﬂow and perfusion in cocaine-dependent per-
sons have been detected with magnetic resonance spec-
troscopy (MRS) studies. Severe pulmonary disease may 
develop in individuals who inhale crack cocaine; this 
effect is attributed both to the direct effects of cocaine 
and to residual contaminants in the smoked material. 
Hepatic necrosis may occur following chronic crack/
cocaine use. Protracted cocaine abuse may also cause par-
anoid ideation and visual and auditory hallucinations, a 
state that resembles alcoholic hallucinosis.
Although men and women who abuse cocaine may 
report that the drug enhances libidinal drive, chronic 
cocaine use causes signiﬁcant loss of libido and adversely 
affects sexual function. Impotence and gynecomastia 
have been observed in male cocaine abusers, and these 
abnormalities often persist for long periods follow-
ing cessation of drug use. Women who abuse cocaine 
may have major derangements in menstrual cycle func-
tion, including galactorrhea, amenorrhea, and infertility. 
Chronic cocaine abuse may cause persistent hyperpro-
lactinemia as a consequence of disordered dopaminergic 
inhibition of prolactin secretion by the anterior pitu-
itary. Cocaine abuse by pregnant women, particu-
larly crack smoking, has been associated with both an 
increased risk of congenital malformations in the fetus 
and perinatal cardiovascular and cerebrovascular dis-
ease in the mother. However, cocaine abuse per se is 
probably not the sole cause of these perinatal disorders, 
because maternal cocaine abuse is often associated with 
poor nutrition and prenatal health care as well as poly-
drug abuse that may contribute to the risk for perinatal 
disease.
Psychological dependence on cocaine, indicated by 
inability to abstain from frequent compulsive use, has 
also been reported. Although the occurrence of with-
drawal syndromes involving psychomotor agitation and 
autonomic hyperactivity remains controversial, severe 
depression (“crashing”) following cocaine intoxication 
may accompany drug withdrawal.
TREATMENT 
Cocaine Overdose and Chronic Abuse
Treatment of cocaine overdose is a medical emergency 
that is best managed in an intensive care unit. Cocaine 
toxicity produces a hyperadrenergic state character-
ized by hypertension, tachycardia, tonic-clonic seizures, 
dyspnea, and ventricular arrhythmias. Intravenous diaz-
epam in doses up to 0.5 mg/kg administered over an 
8-h period has been shown to be effective for control of 
seizures. Ventricular arrhythmias have been managed 
successfully by administration of 0.5–1 mg of proprano-
lol IV. Since many instances of cocaine-related mortal-
ity have been associated with concurrent use of other 
illicit drugs (particularly heroin), the physician must be 
prepared to institute effective emergency treatment for 
multiple drug toxicities.
Treatment of chronic cocaine abuse requires the 
combined efforts of primary care physicians, psychia-
trists, and psychosocial care providers. Early abstinence 
from cocaine use is often complicated by symptoms 
of depression and guilt, insomnia, and anorexia, which 
may be as severe as those observed in major affective 
disorders. Individual and group psychotherapy, family 
therapy, and peer group assistance programs are often 
useful for inducing prolonged remission from drug 
use. A number of medications used for the treatment 
of various medical and psychiatric disorders have been 
administered to reduce the duration and severity of 
cocaine abuse and dependence. The search for a medi-
cation that is both safe and highly effective for cocaine 
detoxification or maintenance of abstinence is continu-
ing. Although psychotherapy may be effective, no spe-
cific form of psychotherapy or behavioral modification is 
uniquely beneficial.
 
CHAPTER 58
Cocaine and Other Commonly Abused Drugs 
769
MARIJUANA AND CANNABIS 
COMPOUNDS
Cannabis sativa contains >400 compounds in addition to 
the psychoactive substance, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabi-
nol (THC). Marijuana cigarettes are prepared from the 
leaves and ﬂowering tops of the plant, and a typical mar-
ijuana cigarette contains 0.5–1 g of plant material. The 
usual THC concentration varies between 10 and 40 mg, 
but concentrations >100 mg per cigarette have been 
detected. Hashish is prepared from concentrated resin of 
C. sativa and contains a THC concentration of between 
8 and 12% by weight. “Hash oil,” a lipid-soluble plant 
extract, may contain THC between 25 and 60% and 
may be added to marijuana or hashish to enhance its 
THC concentration. Smoking is the most common 
mode of marijuana or hashish use. During pyrolysis, 
>150 compounds in addition to THC are released in 
the smoke. Although most of these compounds do not 
have psychoactive properties, they may have physiologic 
effects.
THC is quickly absorbed from the lungs into blood, 
and then rapidly sequestered in tissues. THC is metab-
olized primarily in the liver, where it is converted to 
11-hydroxy-THC, a psychoactive compound, and >20 
other metabolites. Many THC metabolites are excreted 
through the feces at a relatively slow rate of clearance in 
comparison to most other psychoactive drugs.
Speciﬁc cannabinoid receptors (CB1 and CB2) 
have been identiﬁed in the central and peripheral ner-
vous system. High densities of cannabinoid receptors 
have been found in the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, 
and hippocampus. T and B lymphocytes also contain 
cannabinoid receptors, and these appear to mediate the 
anti-inﬂammatory and immunoregulatory properties of 
cannabinoids. A naturally occurring THC-like ligand 
has been identiﬁed and is widely distributed in the ner-
vous system.
Prevalence of use
Marijuana is the most commonly used illegal drug in 
the United States, and its use is particularly prevalent 
among adolescents. Marijuana is relatively inexpensive 
and is often considered to be less hazardous than other 
controlled drugs and substances. Very potent forms of 
marijuana (sinsemilla) are now available in many loca-
tions, and concurrent use of marijuana with crack/
cocaine and phencyclidine is not uncommon.
Acute and chronic intoxication
Acute intoxication from marijuana and cannabis com-
pounds is related to both the dose of THC and the 
route of administration. THC is absorbed more rapidly 
from marijuana smoking than from orally ingested can-
nabis compounds. Acute marijuana intoxication may 
produce a perception of relaxation and mild euphoria 
resembling mild to moderate alcohol intoxication. This 
condition is usually accompanied by some impairment 
in thinking, concentration, and perceptual and psycho-
motor function. Higher doses of cannabis may pro-
duce more pronounced impairment in concentration 
and perception, as well as greater sedation. Although 
the acute effects of marijuana intoxication are relatively 
benign in normal users, the drug can precipitate severe 
emotional disorders in individuals who have anteced-
ent psychotic or neurotic problems. Like other psy-
choactive compounds, both the user’s expectations 
and the environmental context are important determi-
nants of the type and severity of the effects of marijuana 
intoxication.
As with abuse of cocaine, opioids, and alcohol, 
chronic marijuana abusers may lose interest in common 
socially desirable goals and steadily devote more time 
to drug acquisition and use. However, THC does not 
cause a speciﬁc and unique “amotivational syndrome.” 
The range of symptoms sometimes attributed to mari-
juana use is difﬁcult to distinguish from mild to moder-
ate depression and the maturational dysfunctions often 
associated with protracted adolescence. Chronic mari-
juana use has also been reported to increase the risk of 
psychotic symptoms in individuals with a past history 
of schizophrenia. Persons who initiate marijuana smok-
ing before the age of 17 may exhibit more pronounced 
cognitive deﬁcits and they may also be at higher risk 
for polydrug and alcohol abuse problems in later life, 
but the role of marijuana in this causal sequence is 
uncertain.
Physical effects
Conjunctival injection and tachycardia are the most 
frequent immediate physical concomitants of smoking 
marijuana. Tolerance for marijuana-induced tachycardia 
develops rapidly among regular users. However, mari-
juana smoking may precipitate angina in persons with 
a history of coronary insufﬁciency. Exercise-induced 
angina may be increased after marijuana use to a greater 
extent than after tobacco cigarette smoking. Patients 
with cardiac disease should be strongly advised not to 
smoke marijuana or use cannabis compounds.
Signiﬁcant decrements in pulmonary vital capac-
ity have been found in regular daily marijuana smok-
ers. Because marijuana smoking typically involves deep 
inhalation and prolonged retention of marijuana smoke, 
marijuana smokers may develop chronic bronchial irrita-
tion. Impairment of single-breath carbon monoxide dif-
fusion capacity (DLCO) is greater in persons who smoke 
both marijuana and tobacco than in tobacco smokers.
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
770
Although marijuana has also been associated with a 
number of other adverse effects, many of these studies 
await replication and conﬁrmation. A reported correla-
tion between chronic marijuana use and decreased testos-
terone levels in males has not been conﬁrmed. Decreased 
sperm count and sperm motility and morphologic abnor-
malities of spermatozoa following marijuana use have 
been reported. Prospective studies demonstrated a cor-
relation between impaired fetal growth and development 
and heavy marijuana use during pregnancy. Marijuana 
has also been implicated in derangements of the immune 
system; in chromosomal abnormalities; and in inhibition 
of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis; however, these 
ﬁndings have not been conﬁrmed or related to any spe-
ciﬁc physiologic effect in humans.
Tolerance and physical dependence
Habitual marijuana users rapidly develop tolerance 
to the psychoactive effects of marijuana, then smoke 
more frequently and try to acquire more potent can-
nabis compounds. Tolerance for the physiologic effects 
of marijuana develops at different rates; e.g., tolerance 
develops rapidly for marijuana-induced tachycardia but 
more slowly for marijuana-induced conjunctival injec-
tion. Tolerance for both behavioral and physiologic 
effects of marijuana decreases rapidly upon cessation of 
marijuana use.
Withdrawal signs and symptoms have been reported 
in chronic cannabis users, and the severity of symp-
toms is related to dosage and duration of use. These 
symptoms typically reach their peak several days 
after cessation of chronic use and include irritability, 
anorexia, and sleep disturbances. Withdrawal signs 
and symptoms observed in chronic marijuana users are 
usually relatively mild in comparison to those observed 
in heavy opiate or alcohol users and rarely require 
medical or pharmacologic intervention. However, 
more severe and protracted abstinence syndromes may 
occur after sustained use of high-potency cannabis 
compounds.
Therapeutic use of marijuana
Marijuana, administered as cigarettes or as a synthetic oral 
cannabinoid (dronabinol), has been proposed to have 
a number of medicinal properties that may be clinically 
useful in some situations. These include antiemetic effects 
in chemotherapy recipients, appetite-promoting effects in 
AIDS patients, reduction of intraocular pressure in glau-
coma, and reduction of spasticity in multiple sclerosis 
and other neurologic disorders. With the possible excep-
tion of AIDS-related cachexia, none of these attributes of 
marijuana compounds is clearly superior to other readily 
available therapies.
METHAMPHETAMINE
Methamphetamine is also referred to as “meth,” 
“speed,” “crank,” “chalk,” “ice,” “glass,” or “crys-
tal.” Methamphetamine is a mixed-action monoamine 
releaser with activity at dopamine, serotonin, and nor-
epinephrine systems. Despite drug seizures, closures of 
clandestine laboratories that produce methamphetamine 
illegally, and an increase in methamphetamine abuse 
prevention programs, methamphetamine was consid-
ered second only to cocaine as a drug threat to society 
by the U.S. Department of Justice in 2009. Hospital 
admissions for methamphetamine treatment more than 
doubled between 1998 and 2007, and young adults 
(aged 18–25 years) have the highest use rates.
Methamphetamine can be used by smoking, snorting, 
IV injection, or oral administration. Methamphetamine 
abusers report that drug use induces feelings of euphoria 
and decreased fatigue. Adverse consequences of metham-
phetamine abuse include headache, difﬁculty concentrat-
ing, diminished appetite, abdominal pain, vomiting or 
diarrhea, disordered sleep, paranoid or aggressive behav-
ior, and psychosis. Chronic methamphetamine abuse can 
result in severe dental caries, described as blackened, rot-
ting, crumbling teeth. Severe, life-threatening metham-
phetamine toxicity may include hypertension, cardiac 
arrhythmia or cardiac failure, subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
ischemic stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage, convul-
sions, or coma. Methamphetamines increase the release 
of monoamine neurotransmitters (dopamine, norepi-
nephrine, and serotonin) from presynaptic neurons. It is 
thought that the euphoric and reinforcing effects of this 
class of drugs are mediated through dopamine and the 
mesolimbic system, whereas the cardiovascular effects are 
related to norepinephrine. MRS studies of the brain sug-
gest that chronic abusers have neuronal damage in the 
frontal areas and basal ganglia.
Therapy of acute methamphetamine overdose is 
largely symptomatic. Ammonium chloride may be use-
ful to acidify the urine and enhance clearance of the 
drug. Hypertension may respond to sodium nitroprus-
side or α-adrenergic antagonists. Sedatives may reduce 
agitation and other signs of central nervous system 
hyperactivity. Treatment of chronic methamphetamine 
dependence may be accomplished in either an inpatient 
or outpatient setting using strategies similar to those 
described earlier for cocaine abuse.
MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), or 
ecstasy, is a derivative of methamphetamine. Ecstasy is usu-
ally taken orally but may be injected or inhaled; its effects 
last for 3–6 h. In addition to amphetamine-like effects, 
MDMA can induce hyperthermia and vivid hallucina-
tions and other perceptual distortions. Recent studies have 
revealed that MDMA use is associated with cognitive and 
 
CHAPTER 58
Cocaine and Other Commonly Abused Drugs 
771
memory impairment and a mild withdrawal syndrome 
after cessation of use. The long-term consequences of 
recreational use of MDMA by young persons are poorly 
understood.
LYSERGIC ACID DIETHYLAMIDE (LSD)
The discovery of the psychedelic effects of LSD led to 
an epidemic of LSD abuse during the 1960s. Imposition 
of stringent constraints on the manufacture and distribu-
tion of LSD (classiﬁed as a Schedule I substance by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration), as well as public 
recognition that psychedelic experiences induced by 
LSD were a health hazard, have resulted in a reduction 
in LSD abuse. LSD still remains popular among adoles-
cents and young adults, and there are indications that 
LSD use among young persons has been increasing in 
some areas in the United States.
LSD is a very potent hallucinogen; oral doses as low 
as 20 μg may induce profound psychological and physi-
ologic effects. Tachycardia, hypertension, pupillary dila-
tion, tremor, and hyperpyrexia occur within minutes 
following oral administration of 0.5–2 μg/kg. A variety 
of bizarre and often conﬂicting perceptual and mood 
changes, including visual illusions, synesthesias, and 
extreme lability of mood, usually occur within 30 min 
after LSD intake. These effects of LSD may persist for 
12–18 h, even though the half-life of the drug is only 
3 h.
The most frequent acute medical emergency associ-
ated with LSD use is a panic episode (the “bad trip”), 
which may persist up to 24 h. Management of this 
problem is best accomplished by supportive reassur-
ance (“talking down”) and, if necessary, administration 
of small doses of anxiolytic drugs. Adverse consequences 
of chronic LSD use include enhanced risk for schizo-
phreniform psychosis and derangements in memory 
function, problem solving, and abstract thinking. Treat-
ment of these disorders is best carried out in specialized 
psychiatric facilities.
Tolerance develops rapidly for LSD-induced changes 
in psychological function when the drug is used one 
or more times per day for >4 days. Abrupt abstinence 
following continued use does not produce withdrawal 
signs or symptoms. There have been no clinical reports 
of death caused by the direct effects of LSD.
PHENCYCLIDINE (PCP)
Phencyclidine (PCP), a cyclohexylamine derivative, is 
widely used in veterinary medicine to brieﬂy immobilize 
large animals and is sometimes described as a dissociative 
anesthetic. PCP binds to ionotropic N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptors in the nervous system, blocking ion 
current through these channels. PCP is easily synthesized; 
its abusers are primarily young people and polydrug users. 
It is used orally, by smoking, by snorting, or by IV injec-
tion. It is also used as an adulterant in THC, LSD, amphet-
amine, or cocaine. The most common street prepara-
tion, angel dust, is a white granular powder that contains 
50–100% of the drug. Low doses (5 mg) produce agita-
tion, excitement, impaired motor coordination, dysarthria, 
and analgesia. Physical signs of intoxication may include 
horizontal or vertical nystagmus, ﬂushing, diaphoresis, 
and hyperacusis. Behavioral changes include distortions of 
body image, disorganization of thinking, and feelings of 
estrangement. Higher doses of PCP (5–10 mg) may pro-
duce profuse salivation, vomiting, myoclonus, fever, stu-
por, or coma. PCP doses of v10 mg cause convulsions, 
opisthotonus, and decerebrate posturing, which may be 
followed by prolonged coma.
The diagnosis of PCP overdose is difﬁcult because 
the patient’s initial symptoms (anxiety, paranoia, delu-
sions, hallucinations) may suggest an acute schizophrenic 
reaction. Conﬁrmation of PCP use is possible by deter-
mination of PCP levels in serum or urine. PCP assays 
are available at most toxicologic centers. PCP remains in 
urine for 1–5 days following high-dose intake.
PCP overdose requires life-support measures, includ-
ing treatment of coma, convulsions, and respiratory 
depression in an intensive care unit. There is no speciﬁc 
antidote or antagonist for PCP. PCP excretion from the 
body can be enhanced by gastric lavage and acidiﬁca-
tion of urine. Death from PCP overdose may occur as a 
consequence of some combination of pharyngeal hyper-
secretion, hyperthermia, respiratory depression, severe 
hypertension, seizures, hypertensive encephalopathy, 
and intracerebral hemorrhage.
Acute psychosis associated with PCP use is a psychi-
atric emergency since patients may be at high risk for 
suicide or extreme violence toward others. Phenothi-
azines should not be used for treatment because these 
drugs potentiate PCP’s anticholinergic effects. Halo-
peridol (5 mg IM) has been administered on an hourly 
basis to induce suppression of psychotic behavior. PCP, 
like LSD and mescaline, produces vasospasm of cerebral 
arteries at relatively low doses. Chronic PCP use has 
been shown to induce insomnia, anorexia, severe social 
and behavioral changes, and, in some cases, chronic 
schizophrenia.
OTHER DRUGS OF ABUSE
A number of other pharmacologically diverse drugs of 
abuse are often referred to as “club drugs” because these 
are frequently used in bars, at concerts, and rave parties. 
Commonly abused club drugs include ﬂunitrazepam, 
SECTION VI
Alcoholism and Drug Dependency
772
GHB, and ketamine and are described next. Metham-
phetamine, MDMA, and LSD are also considered club 
drugs and were described earlier in this chapter. Abuse 
of club drugs at high doses, especially in combination 
with alcohol, can be lethal and should be treated as a 
medical emergency. GHB and ketamine can be iden-
tiﬁed in blood, and ﬂunitrazepam can be identiﬁed in 
urine and hair samples. Flunitrazepam and GHB tox-
icity can be treated with antagonists at benzodiazepine 
and GABAB receptors, respectively.
Flunitrazepam
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol) is a benzodiazepine deriva-
tive primarily used for treatment of insomnia, but it has 
signiﬁcant abuse potential because of its strong hyp-
notic, anxiolytic, and amnesia-producing effects. It is a 
club drug commonly referred to as a “date-rape drug” or 
“rooﬁes.” The drug enhances GABAA receptor activity, 
and overdose can be treated with ﬂumazenil, a benzo-
diazepine receptor antagonist. Flunitrazepam is typically 
used orally but can be snorted or injected. Concomitant 
use of alcohol or opiates is common, and this enhances 
the sedative and hypnotic effects of ﬂunitrazepam and 
also the risk of motor vehicle accidents. Overdose can 
produce life-threatening respiratory depression and coma. 
Abrupt cessation after chronic use may result in a ben-
zodiazepine withdrawal syndrome consisting of anxiety, 
insomnia, disordered thinking, and seizures.
GHB
Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (Xyrem) is a sedative 
drug that is FDA-approved for the treatment of narco-
lepsy. It is classiﬁed as a club drug, is sometimes used in 
combination with alcohol or other drugs of abuse, and 
has been implicated in cases of date rape. GHB is usu-
ally taken orally and has no distinctive color or odor. 
Its stimulant properties are attributed to agonist activity 
at the GHB receptor, but it also has sedative effects at 
high doses that reﬂect its activity at GABAB receptors. 
GABAB antagonists can reverse GHB’s sedative effects, 
and opioid antagonists (naloxone, naltrexone) can atten-
uate GHB effects on dopamine release. Low doses of 
GHB may produce euphoria and disinhibition, whereas 
high doses result in nausea, agitation, convulsions, and 
sedation that can lead to unconsciousness and death 
from respiratory depression.
Ketamine
Ketamine (Ketaset, Ketalar) is a dissociative anes-
thetic, similar to phencyclidine (PCP). In veterinary 
medicine, it is used for brief immobilization. In clini-
cal medicine, it is used for sedation, analgesia, and to 
supplement anesthesia. Ketamine increases heart rate 
and blood pressure, with less respiratory depression 
than other anesthetics. Ketamine’s popularity as a club 
drug appears to reﬂect its ability to induce a dissociative 
state and feelings of depersonalization, accompanied by 
intense hallucinations and subsequent amnesia. It can be 
administered orally, by smoking (usually in combination 
with tobacco and/or marijuana), or by IV or IM injec-
tion. Like PCP, it binds to NMDA receptors and acts 
as an uncompetitive NMDA antagonist. Ketamine has a 
complex proﬁle of action and appears to be useful as an 
antidepressant in treatment-resistant patients and as an 
analgesic in chronic-pain patients. The extent to which 
chronic recreational use leads to memory impairment 
remains controversial.
POLYDRUG ABUSE
Although some drug abusers may prefer a particu-
lar drug, the concurrent use of multiple drugs is often 
reported. Polydrug abuse often involves substances 
that may have different pharmacologic effects from the 
preferred drug. For example, concurrent use of such 
dissimilar compounds as stimulants and opiates or stimu-
lants and alcohol is common. The diversity of reported 
drug use combinations suggests that achieving a subjec-
tive change in state, rather than any particular direction 
of change (stimulation or sedation), may be the primary 
reinforcer in polydrug abuse. There is also evidence 
that intoxication with alcohol, opiates, and cocaine is 
associated with increased tobacco smoking. There are 
relatively few controlled studies of multiple drug inter-
actions. However, the combined use of cocaine, her-
oin, and alcohol increases the risk for toxic effects and 
adverse medical consequences. One determinant of 
polydrug use patterns is the relative availability and cost 
of the drugs. For example, alcohol abuse, with its atten-
dant medical complications, is one of the most serious 
problems encountered in former heroin addicts partici-
pating in methadone maintenance programs.
The physician must recognize that perpetuation of 
polydrug abuse and drug dependence is not necessarily 
a symptom of an underlying emotional disorder. Nei-
ther alleviation of anxiety nor reduction of depression 
accounts for initiation and perpetuation of polydrug 
abuse. Severe depression and anxiety are the conse-
quences of polydrug abuse as frequently as they are the 
antecedents. Interestingly, some adverse consequences 
of drug use may be reinforcing and contribute to the 
continuation of polydrug abuse.
Adequate treatment of polydrug abuse, as well as 
other forms of drug abuse, requires innovative inter-
vention programs. The ﬁrst step in successful treatment 
is detoxiﬁcation, a process that may be difﬁcult when 
 
CHAPTER 58
Cocaine and Other Commonly Abused Drugs 
773
several drugs with different pharmacologic actions 
(e.g., alcohol, opiates, and cocaine) have been abused. 
Since patients may not recall or may deny simultaneous 
multiple drug use, diagnostic evaluation should always 
include urinalysis for qualitative detection of psycho-
active substances and their metabolites. Treatment of 
polydrug abuse often requires hospitalization or inpa-
tient residential care during detoxiﬁcation and the ini-
tial phase of drug abstinence. When possible, specialized 
facilities for the care and treatment of drug-dependent 
persons should be used. Outpatient detoxiﬁcation of 
polydrug abuse patients is likely to be ineffective and 
may be dangerous.
Drug abuse disorders often respond to effective treat-
ment, but episodes of relapse may occur unpredictably. 
The physician should continue to assist patients during 
relapse and recognize that occasional recurrent drug use 
is not unusual in this complex behavioral disorder.
This page intentionally left blank 
 Alexander Kratz  ■   Michael A. Pesce  ■   Robert C. Basner
 ■   Andrew J. Einstein 
775
 LABORATORY VALUES OF CLINICAL 
IMPORTANCE 
 APPENDIX  
TABLE 1 
 HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION 
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Activated clotting time
WB
70–180 s
70–180 s
Activated protein C resistance (factor V Leiden)
P
Not applicable
Ratio >2.1
ADAMTS13 activity
P
≥0.67
≥67%
ADAMTS13 inhibitor activity
P
Not applicable
≤0.4 U
ADAMTS13 antibody
P
Not applicable
≤18 U
Alpha 2 antiplasmin
P
0.87–1.55
87–155%
Antiphospholipid antibody panel
 PTT-LA (lupus anticoagulant screen)
P
Negative
Negative
 Platelet neutralization procedure
P
Negative
Negative
 Dilute viper venom screen
P
Negative
Negative
 Anticardiolipin antibody
S
  IgG
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 GPL
  IgM
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 MPL
 This Appendix contains tables of reference values for 
laboratory tests, special analytes, and special function 
tests. A variety of factors can inﬂ uence reference values. 
Such variables include the population studied, the dura-
tion and means of specimen transport, laboratory meth-
ods and instrumentation, and even the type of container 
used for the collection of the specimen. The reference 
or “normal” ranges given in this appendix may there-
fore not be appropriate for all laboratories, and these 
values should only be used as general guidelines. When-
ever possible, reference values provided by the labora-
tory performing the testing should be utilized in the 
interpretation of laboratory data. Values supplied in 
this Appendix reﬂ ect typical reference ranges in adults. 
Pediatric reference ranges may vary signiﬁ cantly from 
adult values. 
 In preparing the Appendix, the authors have taken 
into account the fact that the system of international 
units (SI, système international d’unités) is used in most 
countries and in some medical journals. However, 
clinical laboratories may continue to report values in 
“traditional” or conventional units. Therefore, both 
systems are provided in the Appendix. The dual system 
is also used in the text except for (1) those instances in 
which the numbers remain the same but only the ter-
minology is changed (mmol/L for meq/L or IU/L for 
mIU/mL), when only the SI units are given; and (2) 
most pressure measurements (e.g., blood and cerebrospi-
nal ﬂ uid pressures), when the traditional units (mmHg, 
mmH 2 O) are used. In all other instances in the text the 
SI unit is followed by the traditional unit in parentheses.
 REFERENCE VALUES FOR 
LABORATORY TESTS 
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
776
TABLE 1 
HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Antithrombin III
P
 Antigenic
220–390 mg/L
22–39 mg/dL
 Functional
0.7–1.30 U/L
70–130%
Anti-Xa assay (heparin assay)
P
 Unfractionated heparin
0.3–0.7 kIU/L
0.3–0.7 IU/mL
 Low-molecular-weight heparin
0.5–1.0 kIU/L
0.5–1.0 IU/mL
 Danaparoid (Orgaran)
0.5–0.8 kIU/L
0.5–0.8 IU/mL
Autohemolysis test
WB
0.004–0.045
0.4–4.50%
Autohemolysis test with glucose
WB
0.003–0.007
0.3–0.7%
Bleeding time (adult)
<7.1 min
<7.1 min
Bone marrow: See Table 7
Clot retraction
WB
0.50–1.00/2 h
50–100%/2 h
Cryoﬁbrinogen
P
Negative
Negative
D-dimer
P
220–740 ng/mL FEU
220–740 ng/mL FEU
Differential blood count
WB
Relative counts:
 Neutrophils
0.40–0.70
40–70%
 Bands
0.0–0.05
0–5%
 Lymphocytes
0.20–0.50
20–50%
 Monocytes
0.04–0.08
4–8%
 Eosinophils
0.0–0.6
0–6%
 Basophils
0.0–0.02
0–2%
Absolute counts:
 Neutrophils
1.42–6.34 × 109/L
1420–6340/mm3
 Bands
0–0.45 × 109/L
0–450/mm3
 Lymphocytes
0.71–4.53 × 109/L
710–4530/mm3
 Monocytes
0.14–0.72 × 109/L
140–720/mm3
 Eosinophils
0–0.54 × 109/L
0–540/mm3
 Basophils
0–0.18 × 109/L
0–180/mm3
Erythrocyte count
WB
 Adult males
4.30–5.60 × 1012/L
4.30–5.60 × 106/mm3
 Adult females
4.00–5.20 × 1012/L
4.00–5.20 × 106/mm3
Erythrocyte life span
WB
 Normal survival
120 days
120 days
 Chromium labeled, half-life (t1/2)
25–35 days
25–35 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
WB
 Females
0–20 mm/h
0–20 mm/h
 Males
0–15 mm/h
0–15 mm/h
Euglobulin lysis time
P
7200–14,400 s
120–240 min
Factor II, prothrombin
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor V
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VIII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor IX
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor X
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XI
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150 %
Factor XIII screen
P
Not applicable
Present
Factor inhibitor assay
P
<0.5 Bethesda Units
<0.5 Bethesda Units
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
P
0–1 mg/L
0–1 μg/mL
Fibrinogen
P
2.33–4.96 g/L
233–496 mg/dL
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (erythrocyte)
WB
<2400 s
<40 min
Ham’s test (acid serum)
WB
Negative
Negative
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
777
TABLE 1 
HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Hematocrit
WB
 Adult males
0.388–0.464
38.8–46.4
 Adult females
0.354–0.444
35.4–44.4
Hemoglobin
 Plasma
P
6–50 mg/L
0.6–5.0 mg/dL
 Whole blood:
WB
  Adult males
133–162 g/L
13.3–16.2 g/dL
  Adult females
120–158 g/L
12.0–15.8 g/dL
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
WB
 Hemoglobin A
0.95–0.98
95–98%
 Hemoglobin A2
0.015–0.031
1.5–3.1%
 Hemoglobin F
0–0.02
0–2.0%
 Hemoglobins other than A, A2, or F
Absent
Absent
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibody
P
Negative
Negative
Immature platelet fraction (IPF)
WB
0.011–0.061
1.1–6.1%
Joint ﬂuid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint ﬂuid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Leukocytes
 Alkaline phosphatase (LAP)
WB
0.2–1.6 μkat/L
13–100 μ/L
 Count (WBC)
WB
3.54–9.06 × 109/L
3.54–9.06 × 103/mm3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
WB
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
WB
323–359 g/L
32.3–35.9 g/dL
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin of reticulocytes (CH)
WB
24–36 pg
24–36 pg
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
WB
79–93.3 fL
79–93.3 μm3
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
WB
9.00–12.95 fL
9.00–12.95
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
WB
 Direct
0.0035–0.0045
0.35–0.45%
 Indirect
0.0030–0.0065
0.30–0.65%
Partial thromboplastin time, activated
P
26.3–39.4 s
26.3–39.4 s
Plasminogen
P
 Antigen
84–140 mg/L
8.4–14.0 mg/dL
 Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
P
4–43 μg/L
4–43 ng/mL
Platelet aggregation
PRP
Not applicable
>65% aggregation in 
response to adenosine 
diphosphate, epinephrine, 
collagen, ristocetin, and 
arachidonic acid
Platelet count
WB
165–415 × 109/L
165–415 × 103/mm3
Platelet, mean volume
WB
6.4–11 fL
6.4–11.0 μm3
Prekallikrein assay
P
0.50–1.5
50–150%
Prekallikrein screen
P
No deﬁciency detected
Protein C
P
 Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
 Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Protein S
P
 Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
 Functional
0.65–1.40
65–140%
 Free antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A
WB
Not applicable
Not present
Prothrombin time
P
12.7–15.4 s
12.7–15.4 s
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
778
TABLE 1 
HEMATOLOGY AND COAGULATION (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
WB
0.28–0.64 μmol/L of 
red blood cells
16–36 μg/dL of red blood 
cells
Red cell distribution width
WB
<0.145
<14.5%
Reptilase time
P
16–23.6 s
16–23.6 s
Reticulocyte count
WB
 Adult males
0.008–0.023 red cells
0.8–2.3% red cells
 Adult females
0.008–0.020 red cells
0.8–2.0% red cells
Reticulocyte hemoglobin content
WB
>26 pg/cell
>26 pg/cell
Ristocetin cofactor (functional von Willebrand factor)
P
 Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
 Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
 Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
 Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
Serotonin release assay
S
<0.2 release
<20% release
Sickle cell test
WB
Negative
Negative
Sucrose hemolysis
WB
<0.1
<10% hemolysis
Thrombin time
P
15.3–18.5 s
15.3–18.5 s
Total eosinophils
WB
150–300 × 106/L
150–300/mm3
Transferrin receptor
S, P
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
Viscosity
 Plasma
P
1.7–2.1
1.7–2.1
 Serum
S
1.4–1.8
1.4–1.8
von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen (factor VIII:R  
antigen)
 Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
 Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
 Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
 Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
von Willebrand factor multimers
P
Normal distribution
Normal distribution
White blood cells: see “Leukocytes”
Abbreviations: JF, joint ﬂuid; P, plasma; PRP, platelet-rich plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Acetoacetate
P
49–294 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 mg/dL
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
P
1.3–16.7 pmol/L
6.0–76.0 pg/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)
S
0.12–0.70 μkat/L
7–41 U/L
Albumin
S
40–50 g/L
4.0–5.0 mg/dL
Aldolase
S
26–138 nkat/L
1.5–8.1 U/L
Aldosterone (adult)
 Supine, normal sodium diet
S, P
<443 pmol/L
<16 ng/dL
 Upright, normal
S, P
111–858 pmol/L
4–31 ng/dL
Alpha fetoprotein (adult)
S
0–8.5 μg/L
0–8.5 ng/mL
Alpha1 antitrypsin
S
1.0–2.0 g/L
100–200 mg/dL
Ammonia, as NH3
P
11–35 μmol/L
19–60 μg/dL
Amylase (method dependent)
S
0.34–1.6 μkat/L
20–96 U/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
779
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Androstendione (adult)
S
 Males
0.81–3.1 nmol/L
23–89 ng/dL
 Females
  Premenopausal
0.91–7.5 nmol/L
26–214 ng/dL
  Postmenopausal
0.46–2.9 nmol/L
13–82 ng/dL
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
S
0.15–1.1 μkat/L
9–67 U/L
Anion gap
S
7–16 mmol/L
7–16 mmol/L
Apolipoprotein A-1
 Male
 Female
S
0.94–1.78 g/L
1.01–1.99 g/L
94–178 mg/dL
101–199 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein B
 Male
 Female
S
0.55–1.40 g/L
0.55–1.25 g/L
55–140 mg/dL
55–125 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases
 [HCO3
–]
 PCO2
 pH
 PO2
WB
22–30 mmol/L
4.3–6.0 kPa
7.35–7.45
9.6–13.8 kPa
22–30 meq/L
32–45 mmHg
7.35–7.45
72–104 mmHg
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT)
S
0.20–0.65 μkat/L
12–38 U/L
Autoantibodies
 Anti-centromere antibody IgG
 Anti-double-strand (native) DNA
  Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies
  Qualitative IgG, IgA
  Quantitative IgG antibody
 Anti-histone antibodies
 Anti-Jo-1 antibody
 Anti-mitochondrial antibody
  Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies
  Serine proteinase 3 antibodies
  Myeloperoxidase antibodies
 Antinuclear antibody
 Anti-parietal cell antibody
 Anti-RNP antibody
 Anti-Scl 70 antibody
 Anti-Smith antibody
 Anti-smooth muscle antibody
 Anti-SSA antibody
 Anti-SSB antibody
 Anti-thyroglobulin antibody
 Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody
S
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
<40 kIU/L
<35 kIU/L
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
<20 Units
<1:20
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Negative at 1:40
None detected
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
Negative
<40 IU/mL
<35 IU/mL
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
P
Age and gender speciﬁc: 
<100 ng/L
Age and gender speciﬁc:  
<100 pg/mL
Bence Jones protein, serum qualitative
S
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, serum quantitative
 Free kappa
 Free lambda
K/L ratio
S
3.3–19.4 mg/L
5.7–26.3 mg/L
0.26–1.65
0.33–1.94 mg/dL
0.57–2.63 mg/dL
0.26–1.65
Beta-2-microglobulin
S
1.1–2.4 mg/L
1.1–2.4 mg/L
Bilirubin
 Total
 Direct
 Indirect
S
5.1–22 μmol/L
1.7–6.8 μmol/L
3.4–15.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.3 mg/dL
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
0.2–0.9 mg/dL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
780
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
C peptide
S
0.27–1.19 nmol/L
0.8–3.5 ng/mL
C1-esterase-inhibitor protein
S
210–390 mg/L
21–39 mg/dL
CA 125
S
<35 kU/L
<35 U/mL
CA 19-9
S
<37 kU/L
<37 U/mL
CA 15-3
S
<33 kU/L
<33 U/mL
CA 27-29
S
0–40 kU/L
0–40 U/mL
Calcitonin
 Male
 Female
S
0–7.5 ng/L
0–5.1 ng/L
0–7.5 pg/mL
0–5.1 pg/mL
Calcium
S
2.2–2.6 mmol/L
8.7–10.2 mg/dL
Calcium, ionized
WB
1.12–1.32 mmol/L
4.5–5.3 mg/dL
Carbon dioxide content (TCO2)
P (sea level)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content)
 Nonsmokers
 Smokers
 Loss of consciousness and death
WB
0.0–0.015
0.04–0.09
>0.50
0–1.5%
4–9%
>50%
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
 Nonsmokers
 Smokers
S
0.0–3.0 μg/L
0.0–5.0 μg/L
0.0–3.0 ng/mL
0.0–5.0 ng/mL
Ceruloplasmin
S
250–630 mg/L
25–63 mg/dL
Chloride
S
102–109 mmol/L
102–109 meq/L
Cholesterol: see Table 5
Cholinesterase
S
5–12 kU/L
5–12 U/mL
Chromogranin A
S
0–50 μg/L
0–50 ng/mL
Complement
 C3
 C4
 Complement total
S
0.83–1.77 g/L
0.16–0.47 g/L
60–144 CAE units
83–177 mg/dL
16–47 mg/dL
60–144 CAE units
Cortisol
 Fasting, 8 A.M.–12 noon
 12 noon–8 P.M.
 8 P.M.–8 A.M.
S
138–690 nmol/L
138–414 nmol/L
0–276 nmol/L
5–25 μg/dL
5–15 μg/dL
0–10 μg/dL
C-reactive protein
S
<10 mg/L
<10 mg/L
C-reactive protein, high sensitivity
S
Cardiac risk
 Low: <1.0 mg/L
 Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
 High: >3.0 mg/L
Cardiac risk
 Low: <1.0 mg/L
 Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
 High: >3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (total)
 Females
 Males
S
0.66–4.0 μkat/L
0.875.0 μkat/L
39–238 U/L
51–294 U/L
Creatine kinase-MB
 Mass
 Fraction of total activity (by electrophoresis)
S
0.0–5.5 μg/L
0–0.04
0.0–5.5 ng/mL
0–4.0%
Creatinine
 Female
 Male
S
44–80 μmol/L
53–106 μmol/L
0.5–0.9 mg/dL
0.6–1.2 mg/dL
Cryoglobulins
S
Not applicable
None detected
Cystatin C
S
0.5–1.0 mg/L
0.5–1.0 mg/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
781
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (adult)
 Male
 Female
S
6.2–43.4 nmol/L
4.5–34.0 nmol/L
180–1250 ng/dL
130–980 ng/dL
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate
 Male (adult)
 Female (adult, premenopausal)
 Female (adult, postmenopausal)
S
100–6190 μg/L
120–5350 μg/L
300–2600 μg/L
10–619 μg/dL
12–535 μg/dL
30–260 μg/dL
11-Deoxycortisol (adult) (compound S)
S
0.34–4.56 nmol/L
12–158 ng/dL
Dihydrotestosterone
 Male
 Female
S, P
1.03–2.92 nmol/L
0.14–0.76 nmol/L
30–85 ng/dL
4–22 ng/dL
Dopamine
P
0–130 pmol/L
0–20 pg/mL
Epinephrine
 Supine (30 min)
 Sitting
 Standing (30 min)
P
<273 pmol/L
<328 pmol/L
<491 pmol/L
<50 pg/mL
<60 pg/mL
<90 pg/mL
Erythropoietin
S
4–27 U/L
4–27 U/L
Estradiol
 Female
  Menstruating:
   Follicular phase
   Midcycle peak
   Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
 Male
S, P
74–532 pmol/L
411–1626 pmol/L
74–885 pmol/L
217 pmol/L
74 pmol/L
<20–145 pg/mL
112–443 pg/mL
<20–241 pg/mL
<59 pg/mL
<20 pg/mL
Estrone
 Female
  Menstruating:
   Follicular phase
   Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
 Male
S, P
<555 pmol/L
<740 pmol/L
11–118 pmol/L
33–133 pmol/L
<150 pg/mL
<200 pg/mL
3–32 pg/mL
9–36 pg/mL
Fatty acids, free (nonesteriﬁed)
P
0.1–0.6 mmol/L
2.8–16.8 mg/dL
Ferritin
 Female
 Male
S
10–150 μg/L
29–248 μg/L
10–150 ng/mL
29–248 ng/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
 Female
  Menstruating:
   Follicular phase
   Ovulatory phase
   Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
 Male
S, P
3.0–20.0 IU/L
9.0–26.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
18.0–153.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
3.0–20.0 mIU/mL
9.0–26.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
18.0–153.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Fructosamine
S
<285 umol/L
<285 umol/L
Gamma glutamyltransferase
S
0.15–0.99 μkat/L
9–58 U/L
Gastrin
S
<100 ng/L
<100 pg/mL
Glucagon
P
40–130 ng/L
40–130 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
782
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Glucose
Glucose (fasting)
 Normal
 Increased risk for diabetes
 Diabetes mellitus
WB
P
3.6–5.3 mmol/L
4.2–5.6 mmol/L
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
Fasting >7.0 mmol/L
A 2-hour level of >11.1 
mmol/L during an oral 
glucose tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥11.1 mmol/L in patients 
with symptoms of hyper-
glycemia
65–95 mg/dL
75–100 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
Fasting >126 mg/dL
A 2-hour level of ≥200 mg/dL 
during an oral glucose  
tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥200 mg/dL in patients with 
symptoms of hyperglycemia
Growth hormone
S
0–5 μg/L
0–5 ng/mL
Hemoglobin A1c
 Pre-diabetes
 Diabetes mellitus
WB
0.04–0.06 HgB fraction
0.057–0.064 HgB fraction
A hemoglobin A1c level 
of ≥0.065 Hgb fraction 
as suggested by the  
American Diabetes 
Association
4.0–5.6%
5.7–6.4%
A hemoglobin A1c level of 
≥6.5% as suggested by 
the American Diabetes  
Association
Hemoglobin A1c with estimated average glucose 
(eAg)
WB
eAg mmoL/L = 1.59 × 
HbA1c − 2.59
eAg (mg/dL) = 28.7 × HbA1c 
− 46.7
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) (see Table 5)
Homocysteine
P
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
 Nonpregnant female
 1–2 weeks postconception
 2–3 weeks postconception
 3–4 weeks postconception
 4–5 weeks postconception
 5–10 weeks postconception
 10–14 weeks post conception
 Second trimester
 Third trimester
S
<5 IU/L
9–130 IU/L
75–2600 IU/L
850–20,800 IU/L
4000–100,200 IU/L
11,500–289,000 IU/L
18,300–137,000 IU/L
1400–53,000 IU/L
940–60,000 IU/L
<5 mIU/mL
9–130 mIU/mL
75–2600 mIU/mL
850–20,800 mIU/mL
4000–100,200 mIU/mL
11,500–289,000 mIU/mL
18,300–137,000 mIU/mL
1400–53,000 mIU/mL
940–60,000 mIU/mL
β-Hydroxybutyrate
P
60–170 μmol/L
0.6–1.8 mg/dL
17-Hydroxyprogesterone (adult)
 Male
 Female
  Follicular phase
  Luteal phase
S
<4.17 nmol/L
0.45–2.1 nmol/L
1.05–8.7 nmol/L
<139 ng/dL
15–70 ng/dL
35–290 ng/dL
Immunoﬁxation
S
Not applicable
No bands detected
Immunoglobulin, quantitation (adult)
 IgA
 IgD
 IgE
 IgG
  IgG1
  IgG2
  IgG3
  IgG4
 IgM
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
0.70–3.50 g/L
0–140 mg/L
1–87 kIU/L
7.0–17.0 g/L
2.7–17.4 g/L
0.3–6.3 g/L
0.13–3.2 g/L
0.11–6.2 g/L
0.50–3.0 g/L
70–350 mg/dL
0–14 mg/dL
1–87 IU/mL
700–1700 mg/dL
270–1740 mg/dL
30–630 mg/dL
13–320 mg/dL
11–620 mg/dL
50–300 mg/dL
Insulin
S, P
14.35–143.5 pmol/L
2–20 μU/mL
Iron
S
7–25 μmol/L
41–141 μg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
783
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Iron-binding capacity
S
45–73 μmol/L
251–406 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity saturation
S
0.16–0.35
16–35%
Ischemia modiﬁed albumin
S
<85 kU/L
<85 U/mL
Joint ﬂuid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint ﬂuid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Ketone (acetone)
S
Negative
Negative
Lactate
P, arterial
P, venous
0.5–1.6 mmol/L
0.5–2.2 mmol/L
4.5–14.4 mg/dL
4.5–19.8 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase
S
2.0–3.8 μkat/L
115–221 U/L
Lipase
S
0.51–0.73 μkat/L
3–43 U/L
Lipids: see Table 5
Lipoprotein (a)
S
0–300 mg/L
0–30 mg/dL
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (see Table 5)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
 Female
  Menstruating:
   Follicular phase
   Ovulatory phase
   Luteal phase
 Postmenopausal
 Male
S, P
2.0–15.0 U/L
22.0–105.0 U/L
0.6–19.0 U/L
16.0–64.0 U/L
2.0–12.0 U/L
2.0–15.0 mIU/mL
22.0–105.0 mIU/mL
0.6–19.0 mIU/mL
16.0–64.0 mIU/mL
2.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Magnesium
S
0.62–0.95 mmol/L
1.5–2.3 mg/dL
Metanephrine
P
<0.5 nmol/L
<100 pg/mL
Methemoglobin
WB
0.0–0.01
0–1%
Myoglobin
 Male
 Female
S
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
Norepinephrine
 Supine (30 min)
 Sitting
 Standing (30 min)
P
650–2423 pmol/L
709–4019 pmol/L
739–4137 pmol/L
110–410 pg/mL
120–680 pg/mL
125–700 pg/mL
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
 Female, premenopausal
 Male
 BCE = bone collagen equivalent
S
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
NT-Pro BNP
S, P
<125 ng/L up to 75 years
<450 ng/L >75 years
<125 pg/mL up to 75 years
<450 pg/mL >75 years
5′ Nucleotidase
S
0.00–0.19 μkat/L
0–11 U/L
Osmolality
P
275–295 mOsmol/kg 
serum water
275–295 mOsmol/kg serum 
water
Osteocalcin
S
11–50 μg/L
11–50 ng/mL
Oxygen content
 Arterial (sea level)
 Venous (sea level)
WB
17–21
10–16
17–21 vol%
10–16 vol%
Oxygen saturation (sea level)
 Arterial
 Venous, arm
WB
Fraction:
0.94–1.0
0.60–0.85
Percent:
94–100%
60–85%
Parathyroid hormone (intact)
S
8–51 ng/L
8–51 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
784
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Phosphatase, alkaline
S
0.56–1.63 μkat/L
33–96 U/L
Phosphorus, inorganic
S
0.81–1.4 mmol/L
2.5–4.3 mg/dL
Potassium
S
3.5–5.0 mmol/L
3.5–5.0 meq/L
Prealbumin
S
170–340 mg/L
17–34 mg/dL
Procalcitonin
S
<0.1 μg/L
<0.1 ng/mL
Progesterone
 Female: Follicular
 Midluteal
 Male
S, P
<3.18 nmol/L
9.54–63.6 nmol/L
<3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
3–20 ng/mL
<1.0 ng/mL
Prolactin
 Male
 Female
S
53–360 mg/L
40–530 mg/L
2.5–17 ng/mL
1.9–25 ng/mL
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA)
S
0.0–4.0 μg/L
0.0–4.0 ng/mL
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen, free
S
With total PSA between 
4 and 10 μg/L and when 
the free PSA is:
>0.25 decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<0.10 increased risk of 
prostate cancer
With total PSA between 4 and 
10 ng/mL and when the free 
PSA is:
>25% decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<10% increased risk of 
prostate cancer
Protein fractions:
 Albumin
 Globulin
 Alpha1
 Alpha2
 Beta
 Gamma
S
35–55 g/L
20–35 g/L
2–4 g/L
5–9 g/L
6–11 g/L
7–17 g/L
3.5–5.5 g/dL (50–60%)
2.0–3.5 g/dL (40–50%)
0.2–0.4 g/dL (4.2–7.2%)
0.5–0.9 g/dL (6.8–12%)
0.6–1.1 g/dL (9.3–15%)
0.7–1.7 g/dL (13–23%)
Protein, total
S
67–86 g/L
6.7–8.6 g/dL
Pyruvate
P
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
Rheumatoid factor
S
<15 kIU/L
<15 IU/mL
Serotonin
WB
0.28–1.14 umol/L
50–200 ng/mL
Serum protein electrophoresis
S
Not applicable
Normal pattern
Sex hormone–binding globulin (adult)
 Male
 Female
S
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
Sodium
S
136–146 mmol/L
136–146 meq/L
Somatomedin-C (IGF-1) (adult)
 16 years
 17 years
 18 years
 19 years
 20 years
 21–25 years
 26–30 years
 31–35 years
 36–40 years
 41–45 years
 46–50 years
 51–55 years
 56–60 years
 61–65 years
S
226–903 μg/L
193–731 μg/L
163–584 μg/L
141–483 μg/L
127–424 μg/L
116–358 μg/L
117–329 μg/L
115–307 μg/L
119–204 μg/L
101–267 μg/L
94–252 μg/L
87–238 μg/L
81–225 μg/L
75–212 μg/L
226–903 ng/mL
193–731 ng/mL
163–584 ng/mL
141–483 ng/mL
127–424 ng/mL
116–358 ng/mL
117–329 ng/mL
115–307 ng/mL
119–204 ng/mL
101–267 ng/mL
94–252 ng/mL
87–238 ng/mL
81–225 ng/mL
75–212 ng/mL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
785
TABLE 2 
CLINICAL CHEMISTRY AND IMMUNOLOGY (CONTINUED)
ANALYTE
SPECIMEN
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
 66–70 years
 71–75 years
 76–80 years
 81–85 years
69–200 μg/L
64–188 μg/L
59–177 μg/L
55–166 μg/L
69–200 ng/mL
64–188 ng/mL
59–177 ng/mL
55–166 ng/mL
Somatostatin
P
<25 ng/L
<25 pg/mL
Testosterone, free
 Female, adult
 Male, adult
S
10.4–65.9 pmol/L
312–1041 pmol/L
3–19 pg/mL
90–300 pg/mL
Testosterone, total,
 Female
 Male
S
0.21–2.98 nmol/L
9.36–37.10 nmol/L
6–86 ng/dL
270–1070 ng/dL
Thyroglobulin
S
1.3–31.8 μg/L
1.3–31.8 ng/mL
Thyroid-binding globulin
S
13–30 mg/L
1.3–3.0 mg/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
S
0.34–4.25 mIU/L
0.34–4.25 μIU/mL
Thyroxine, free (fT4)
S
9.0–16 pmol/L
0.7–1.24 ng/dL
Thyroxine, total (T4)
S
70–151 nmol/L
5.4–11.7 μg/dL
Thyroxine index (free)
S
6.7–10.9
6.7–10.9
Transferrin
S
2.0–4.0 g/L
200–400 mg/dL
Triglycerides (see Table 5)
S
0.34–2.26 mmol/L
30–200 mg/dL
Triiodothyronine, free (fT3)
S
3.7–6.5 pmol/L
2.4–4.2 pg/mL
Triiodothyronine, total (T3)
S
1.2–2.1 nmol/L
77–135 ng/dL
Troponin I (method dependent)
 99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.04 μg/L
0–0.04 ng/mL
Troponin T
 99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.01 μg/L
0–0.01 ng/mL
Urea nitrogen
S
2.5–7.1 mmol/L
7–20 mg/dL
Uric acid
 Females
 Males
S
0.15–0.33 mmol/L
0.18–0.41 mmol/L
2.5–5.6 mg/dL
3.1–7.0 mg/dL
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
P
0–60 ng/L
0–60 pg/mL
Zinc protoporphyrin
WB
0–400 μg/L
0–40 μg/dL
Zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP)-to-heme ratio
WB
0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme 0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme
Abbreviations: P, plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
786
TABLE 3
TOXICOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING
THERAPEUTIC RANGE
TOXIC LEVEL
DRUG
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Acetaminophen
66–199 μmol/L
10–30 μg/mL
>1320 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Amikacin
 Peak
 Trough
34–51 μmol/L
0–17 μmol/L
20–30 μg/mL
0–10 μg/mL
>60 μmol/L
>17 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
>10 μg/mL
Amitriptyline/nortriptyline  
(total drug)
430–900 nmol/L
120–250 ng/mL
>1800 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Amphetamine
150–220 nmol/L
20–30 ng/mL
>1500 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Bromide
 Mild toxicity
 Severe toxicity
 Lethal
9.4–18.7 mmol/L
75–150 mg/dL
>18.8 mmol/L
6.4–18.8 
mmol/L
>18.8 mmol/L
>37.5 mmol/L
>150 mg/dL
51–150 mg/dL
>150 mg/dL
>300 mg/dL
Caffeine
25.8–103 μmol/L
5–20 μg/mL
>206 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Carbamazepine
17–42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
>85 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Chloramphenicol
 Peak
 Trough
31–62 μmol/L
15–31 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
5–10 μg/mL
>77 μmol/L
>46 μmol/L
>25 μg/mL
>15 μg/mL
Chlordiazepoxide
1.7–10 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 μg/mL
>17 μmol/L
>5.0 μg/mL
Clonazepam
32–240 nmol/L
10–75 ng/mL
>320 nmol/L
>100 ng/mL
Clozapine
0.6–2.1 μmol/L
200–700 ng/mL
>3.7 μmol/L
>1200 ng/mL
Cocaine
>3.3 μmol/L
>1.0 μg/mL
Codeine
43–110 nmol/mL
13–33 ng/mL
>3700 nmol/mL
>1100 ng/mL (lethal)
Cyclosporine
 Renal transplant
  0–6 months
  6–12 months after transplant
  >12 months
 Cardiac transplant
  0–6 months
  6–12 months after transplant
  >12 months
208–312 nmol/L
166–250 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
125–208 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
250–375 ng/mL
200–300 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
150–250 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
>312 nmol/L
>250 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>208 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>375 ng/mL
>300 ng/mL
>150 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>250 ng/mL
150 ng/mL
 Lung transplant 
  0–6 months
 Liver transplant
  Initiation
  Maintenance
250–374 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
83–166 nmol/L
300–450 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
100–200 ng/mL
>374 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>166 nmol/L
>450 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>200 ng/mL
Desipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Diazepam (and metabolite)
 Diazepam
 Nordiazepam
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
0.4–6.6 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
0.1–1.8 μg/mL
>7.0 μmol/L
>9.2 μmol/L
>2.0 μg/mL
>2.5 μg/mL
Digoxin
0.64–2.6 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
>5.0 nmol/L
>3.9 ng/mL
Disopyramide
5.3–14.7 μmol/L
2–5 μg/mL
>20.6 μmol/L
>7 μg/mL
Doxepin and nordoxepin
 Doxepin
 Nordoxepin
0.36–0.98 μmol/L
0.38–1.04 μmol/L
101–274 ng/mL
106–291 ng/mL
>1.8 μmol/L
>1.9 μmol/L
>503 ng/mL
>531 ng/mL
Ethanol
 Behavioral changes
 Legal limit
 Critical with acute exposure
>4.3 mmol/L
≥17 mmol/L
>54 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
≥80 mg/dL
>250 mg/dL
Ethylene glycol
 Toxic
 Lethal
>2 mmol/L
>20 mmol/L
>12 mg/dL
>120 mg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
787
TABLE 3
TOXICOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING (CONTINUED)
THERAPEUTIC RANGE
TOXIC LEVEL
DRUG
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Ethosuximide
280–700 μmol/L
40–100 μg/mL
>700 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Everolimus
3.13–8.35 nmol/L
3–8 ng/mL
>12.5 nmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Flecainide
0.5–2.4 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>3.6 μmol/L
>1.5 μg/mL
Gentamicin
 Peak
 Trough
10–21 μmol/mL
0–4.2 μmol/mL
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>25 μmol/mL
>4.2 μmol/mL
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Heroin (diacetyl morphine)
>700 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL (as morphine)
Ibuprofen
49–243 μmol/L
10–50 μg/mL
>970 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Imipramine (and metabolite)
 Desimipramine
  Total imipramine + 
 desimipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
563–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
150–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
>500 ng/mL
Lamotrigine
11.7–54.7 μmol/L
3–14 μg/mL
>58.7 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Lidocaine
5.1–21.3 μmol/L
1.2–5.0 μg/mL
>38.4 μmol/L
>9.0 μg/mL
Lithium
0.5–1.3 mmol/L
0.5–1.3 meq/L
>2 mmol/L
>2 meq/L
Methadone
1.0–3.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.0 μg/mL
>6.5 μmol/L
>2 μg/mL
Methamphetamine
0.07–0.34 μmol/L
0.01–0.05 μg/mL
>3.35 μmol/L
>0.5 μg/mL
Methanol
>6 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
Methotrexate
 Low-dose
 High-dose (24 h)
 High-dose (48 h)
 High-dose (72 h)
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
Morphine
232–286 μmol/L
65–80 ng/mL
>720 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Mycophenolic acid
3.1–10.9 μmol/L
1.0–3.5 ng/mL
>37 μmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Nitroprusside (as thiocyanate)
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Nortriptyline
190–569 nmol/L
50–150 ng/mL
>1900 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>258 μmol/L
>60 μg/mL
Phenytoin
40–79 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>158 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Phenytoin, free
 % Free
4.0–7.9 μg/mL
0.08–0.14
1–2 μg/mL
8–14%
>13.9 μg/mL
>3.5 μg/mL
Primidone and metabolite
 Primidone
 Phenobarbital
23–55 μmol/L
65–172 μmol/L
5–12 μg/mL
15–40 μg/mL
>69 μmol/L
>215 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
>50 μg/mL
Procainamide
 Procainamide
 NAPA (N-acetylprocainamide)
17–42 μmol/L
22–72 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
6–20 μg/mL
>43 μmol/L
>126 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
>35 μg/mL
Quinidine
6.2–15.4 μmol/L
2.0–5.0 μg/mL
>19 μmol/L
>6 μg/mL
Salicylates
145–2100 μmol/L
2–29 mg/dL
>2900 μmol/L
>40 mg/dL
Sirolimus (trough level) 
 Kidney transplant
4.4–15.4 nmol/L
4–14 ng/mL
>16 nmol/L
>15 ng/mL
Tacrolimus (FK506) (trough)
 Kidney and liver
  Initiation
  Maintenance
 Heart
  Initiation
  Maintenance
12–19 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
19–25 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
15–20 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
>20 ng/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
788
TABLE 3
TOXICOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING (CONTINUED)
THERAPEUTIC RANGE
TOXIC LEVEL
DRUG
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Theophylline
56–111 μg/mL
10–20 μg/mL
>168 μg/mL
>30 μg/mL
Thiocyanate
 After nitroprusside infusion
 Nonsmoker
 Smoker
103–499 μmol/L
17–69 μmol/L
52–206 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
1–4 μg/mL
3–12 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Tobramycin
 Peak
 Trough
11–22 μg/L
0–4.3 μg/L
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>26 μg/L
>4.3 μg/L
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Valproic acid
346–693 μmol/L
50–100 μg/mL
>693 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Vancomycin
 Peak
 Trough
14–28 μmol/L
3.5–10.4 μmol/L
20–40 μg/mL
5–15 μg/mL
>55 μmol/L
>14 μmol/L
>80 μg/mL
>20 μg/mL
TABLE 4 
VITAMINS AND SELECTED TRACE MINERALS
REFERENCE RANGE
SPECIMEN
ANALYTE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Aluminum
S
<0.2 μmol/L
<5.41 μg/L
Arsenic
WB
0.03–0.31 μmol/L
2–23 μg/L
Cadmium
WB
<44.5 nmol/L
<5.0 μg/L
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone)
P
433–1532 μg/L
433–1532 μg/L
β-Carotene
S
0.07–1.43 μmol/L
4–77 μg/dL
Copper
S
11–22 μmol/L
70–140 μg/dL
Folic acid
RC
340–1020 nmol/L cells
150–450 ng/mL cells
Folic acid
S
12.2–40.8 nmol/L
5.4–18.0 ng/mL
Lead (adult)
S
<0.5 μmol/L
<10 μg/dL
Mercury
WB
3.0–294 nmol/L
0.6–59 μg/L
Selenium
S
0.8–2.0 umol/L
63–160 μg/L
Vitamin A
S
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
20–100 μg/dL
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
S
0–75 nmol/L
0–2 μg/dL
Vitamin B2 (riboﬂavin)
S
106–638 nmol/L
4–24 μg/dL
Vitamin B6
P
20–121 nmol/L
5–30 ng/mL
Vitamin B12
S
206–735 pmol/L
279–996 pg/mL
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
S
23–57 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D3,1,25-dihydroxy, total
S, P
36–180 pmol/L
15–75 pg/mL
Vitamin D3,25-hydroxy, total
P
75–250 nmol/L
30–100 ng/mL
Vitamin E
S
12–42 μmol/L
5–18 μg/mL
Vitamin K
S
0.29–2.64 nmol/L
0.13–1.19 ng/mL
Zinc
S
11.5–18.4 μmol/L
75–120 μg/dL
Abbreviations: P, plasma; RC, red cells; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
789
TABLE 5 
CLASSIFICATION OF LDL, TOTAL, AND HDL 
CHOLESTEROL
LDL Cholesterol
 <70 mg/dL
Therapeutic option for very high 
risk patients
 <100 mg/dL
Optimal
 100–129 mg/dL
Near optimal/above optimal
 130–159 mg/dL
Borderline high
 160–189 mg/dL
High
 ≥190 mg/dL
Very high
Total Cholesterol
 <200 mg/dL
Desirable
 200–239 mg/dL
Borderline high
 ≥240 mg/dL
High
HDL Cholesterol
 <40 mg/dL
Low
 ≥60 mg/dL
High
Abbreviations: LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density 
lipoprotein.
Source: Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) expert panel on detec-
tion, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults 
(adult treatment panel III). JAMA 2001; 285:2486–97. Implications 
of Recent Clinical Trials for the National Cholesterol Education 
Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. SM Grundy et al for 
the Coordinating Committee of the National Cholesterol Education 
Program: Circulation 110:227, 2004.
TABLE 6 
CEREBROSPINAL FLUIDa
REFERENCE RANGE
CONSTITUENT
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL 
UNITS
Osmolarity
292–297 mmol/kg 
water
292–297 
mOsm/L
Electrolytes
 Sodium
137–145 mmol/L
137–145 meq/L
 Potassium
2.7–3.9 mmol/L
2.7–3.9 meq/L
 Calcium
1.0–1.5 mmol/L
2.1–3.0 meq/L
 Magnesium
1.0–1.2 mmol/L
2.0–2.5 meq/L
 Chloride
116–122 mmol/L
116–122 meq/L
 CO2 content
20–24 mmol/L
20–24 meq/L
PCO2
6–7 kPa
45–49 mmHg
pH
7.31–7.34
Glucose
2.22–3.89 mmol/L
40–70 mg/dL
Lactate
1–2 mmol/L
10–20 mg/dL
Total protein:
 Lumbar
0.15–0.5 g/L
15–50 mg/dL
 Cisternal
0.15–0.25 g/L
15–25 mg/dL
 Ventricular
0.06–0.15 g/L
6–15 mg/dL
 Albumin
0.066–0.442 g/L
6.6–44.2 mg/dL
 IgG
0.009–0.057 g/L
0.9–5.7 mg/dL
 IgG indexb
0.29–0.59
  Oligoclonal  
 bands (OGB)
<2 bands not pres-
ent in matched 
serum sample
Ammonia
15–47 μmol/L
25–80 μg/dL
Creatinine
44–168 μmol/L
0.5–1.9 mg/dL
Myelin basic  
protein
<4 μg/L
CSF pressure
50–180 mmH2O
CSF volume 
(adult)
∼150 mL
Red blood cells
0
0
Leukocytes
 Total
0–5 mononuclear 
cells per μL
 Differential
  Lymphocytes
60–70%
  Monocytes
30–50%
  Neutrophils
None
aSince cerebrospinal ﬂuid concentrations are equilibrium values, 
measurements of the same parameters in blood plasma obtained 
at the same time are recommended. However, there is a time lag in 
attainment of equilibrium, and cerebrospinal levels of plasma con-
stituents that can ﬂuctuate rapidly (such as plasma glucose) may 
not achieve stable values until after a signiﬁcant lag phase.
bIgG index = CSF IgG (mg/dL) × serum albumin (g/dL)/serum IgG 
(g/dL) × CSF albumin (mg/dL).
REFERENCE VALUES  
FOR SPECIFIC ANALYTES
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
790
TABLE 7A 
DIFFERENTIAL NUCLEATED CELL COUNTS OF 
BONE MARROW ASPIRATESa
OBSERVED 
RANGE (%)
95% RANGE 
(%)
MEAN (%)
Blast cells
0–3.2
0–3.0
1.4
Promyelocytes
3.6–13.2
3.2–12.4
7.8
Neutrophil 
myelocytes
4–21.4
3.7–10.0
7.6
Eosinophil 
myelocytes
0–5.0
0–2.8
1.3
Metamyelocytes
1–7.0
2.3–5.9
4.1
Neutrophils
 Males
 Females
21.0–45.6
29.6–46.6
21.9–42.3
28.8–45.9
32.1
37.4
Eosinophils
0.4–4.2
0.3–4.2
2.2
Eosinophils 
plus eosinophil 
myelocytes
0.9–7.4
0.7–6.3
3.5
Basophils
0–0.8
0–0.4
0.1
Erythroblasts
 Male
 Females
18.0–39.4
14.0–31.8
16.2–40.1
13.0–32.0
28.1
22.5
Lymphocytes
4.6–22.6
6.0–20.0
13.1
Plasma cells
0–1.4
0–1.2
0.6
Monocytes
0–3.2
0–2.6
1.3
Macrophages
0–1.8
0–1.3
0.4
M:E ratio
 Males
 Females
1.1–4.0
1.6–5.4
1.1–4.1
1.6–5.2
2.1
2.8
aBased on bone marrow aspirate from 50 healthy volunteers 
(30 men, 20 women).
Abbreviation: M:E, myeloid to erythroid ratio.
Source: BJ Bain: Br J Haematol 94:206, 1996.
TABLE 7B 
BONE MARROW CELLULARITY
AGE
OBSERVED 
RANGE
95% RANGE
MEAN
Under 10 years
59.0–95.1%
72.9–84.7%
78.8%
10–19 years
41.5–86.6%
59.2–69.4%
64.3%
20–29 years
32.0–83.7%
54.1–61.9%
58.0%
30–39 years
30.3–81.3%
41.1–54.1%
47.6%
40–49 years
16.3–75.1%
43.5–52.9%
48.2%
50–59 years
19.7–73.6%
41.2–51.4%
46.3%
60–69 years
16.3–65.7%
40.8–50.6%
45.7%
70–79 years
11.3–47.1%
22.6–35.2%
28.9%
Source: From RJ Hartsock et al: Am J Clin Pathol 1965; 43:326, 
1965.
TABLE 8 
STOOL ANALYSIS
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL 
UNITS
Alpha-1- 
antitrypsin
≤540 mg/L
≤54 mg/dL
Amount
0.1–0.2 kg/d
100–200 g/24 h
Coproporphyrin
611–1832 nmol/d
400–1200 μg/24 h
Fat
 Adult
  Adult on  
 fat-free diet
<7 g/d
<4 g/d
Fatty acids
0–21 mmol/d
0–6 g/24 h
Leukocytes
None
None
Nitrogen
<178 mmol/d
<2.5 g/24 h
pH
7.0–7.5
Potassium
14–102 mmol/L
14–102 mmol/L
Occult blood
Negative
Negative
Osmolality
280–325 mOsmol/
kg
280–325 mOsmol/
kg
Sodium
7–72 mmol/L
7–72 mmol/L
Trypsin
20–95 U/g
Urobilinogen
85–510 μmol/d
50–300 mg/24 h
Uroporphyrins
12–48 nmol/d
10–40 μg/24 h
Water
<0.75
<75%
Source: Modiﬁed from: FT Fishbach, MB Dunning III: A Manual of 
Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2004.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
791
TABLE 9
URINE ANALYSIS AND RENAL FUNCTION TESTS
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Acidity, titratable
20–40 mmol/d
20–40 meq/d
Aldosterone
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Aluminum
0.19–1.11 μmol/L
5–30 μg/L
Ammonia
30–50 mmol/d
30–50 meq/d
Amylase
4–400 U/L
Amylase/creatinine clearance ratio  
[(Clam/Clcr) × 100]
1–5
1–5
Arsenic
0.07–0.67 μmol/d
5–50 μg/d
Bence Jones protein, urine, qualitative
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, urine, quantitative
 Free Kappa
 Free Lambda
 K/L ratio
1.4–24.2 mg/L
0.2–6.7 mg/L
2.04–10.37
0.14–2.42 mg/dL
0.02–0.67 mg/dL
2.04–10.37
Calcium (10 meq/d or 200 mg/d dietary 
calcium)
<7.5 mmol/d
<300 mg/d
Chloride
140–250 mmol/d
140–250 mmol/d
Citrate
320–1240 mg/d
320–1240 mg/d
Copper
<0.95 μmol/d
<60 μg/d
Coproporphyrins (types I and III)
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
Cortisol, free
55–193 nmol/d
20–70 μg/d
Creatine, as creatinine
 Female
 Male
<760 μmol/d
<380 μmol/d
<100 mg/d
<50 mg/d
Creatinine
8.8–14 mmol/d
1.0–1.6 g/d
Dopamine
392–2876 nmol/d
60–440 μg/d
Eosinophils
<100 eosinophils/mL
<100 eosinophils/mL
Epinephrine
0–109 nmol/d
0–20 μg/d
Glomerular ﬁltration rate
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the 
result by 1.21
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the result by 
1.21
Glucose (glucose oxidase method)
0.3–1.7 mmol/d
50–300 mg/d
5-Hydroindoleacetic acid [5-HIAA]
0–78.8 μmol/d
0–15 mg/d
Hydroxyproline
53–328 μmol/d
53–328 μmol/d
Iodine, spot urine
  WHO classiﬁcation of iodine deﬁciency:
  Not iodine deﬁcient
  Mild iodine deﬁciency
  Moderate iodine deﬁciency
  Severe iodine deﬁciency
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
Ketone (acetone)
Negative
Negative
17 Ketosteroids
3–12 mg/d
3–12 mg/d
Metanephrines
 Metanephrine
 Normetanephrine
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
792
TABLE 9
URINE ANALYSIS AND RENAL FUNCTION TESTS (CONTINUED)
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Microalbumin
 Normal
 Microalbuminuria
 Clinical albuminuria
0.0–0.03 g/d
0.03–0.30 g/d
>0.3 g/d
0–30 mg/d
30–300 mg/d
>300 mg/d
Microalbumin/creatinine ratio
 Normal
 Microalbuminuria
 Clinical albuminuria
0–3.4 g/mol creatinine
3.4–34 g/mol creatinine
>34 g/mol creatinine
0–30 μg/mg creatinine
30–300 μg/mg creatinine
>300 μg/mg creatinine
β2-Microglobulin
0–160 μg/L
0–160 μg/L
Norepinephrine
89–473 nmol/d
15–80 μg/d
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
 Female, premenopausal
 Female, postmenopausal
 Male
 BCE = bone collagen equivalent
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
Osmolality
100–800 mOsm/kg
100–800 mOsm/kg
Oxalate
 Male
 Female
80–500 μmol/d
45–350 μmol/d
7–44 mg/d
4–31 mg/d
pH
5.0–9.0
5.0–9.0
Phosphate (phosphorus) (varies with 
intake)
12.9–42.0 mmol/d
400–1300 mg/d
Porphobilinogen
None
None
Potassium (varies with intake)
25–100 mmol/d
25–100 meq/d
Protein
<0.15 g/d
<150 mg/d
Protein/creatinine ratio
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Sediment
 Red blood cells
 White blood cells
 Bacteria
 Crystals
 Bladder cells
 Squamous cells
 Tubular cells
 Broad casts
 Epithelial cell casts
 Granular casts
 Hyaline casts
 Red blood cell casts
 Waxy casts
 White cell casts
0–2/high-power ﬁeld
0–2/high-power ﬁeld
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
0–5/low-power ﬁeld
None
None
None
Sodium (varies with intake)
100–260 mmol/d
100–260 meq/d
Speciﬁc gravity:
 After 12-h ﬂuid restriction
 After 12-h deliberate water intake
>1.025
≤1.003
>1.025
≤1.003
Tubular reabsorption, phosphorus
0.79–0.94 of ﬁltered load
79–94% of ﬁltered load
Urea nitrogen
214–607 mmol/d
6–17 g/d
Uric acid (normal diet)
1.49–4.76 mmol/d
250–800 mg/d
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
<30 μmol/d
<6 mg/d
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
793
TABLE 10
NORMAL PRESSURES IN HEART AND GREAT VESSELS
PRESSURE (mmHg)
AVERAGE
RANGE
Right Atrium
Mean
2.8
1–5
a wave
5.6
2.5–7
c wave
3.8
1.5–6
x wave
1.7
0–5
v wave
4.6
2–7.5
y wave
2.4
0–6
Right Ventricle
Peak systolic
25
17–32
End-diastolic
4
1–7
Pulmonary Artery
Mean
15
9–19
Peak systolic
25
17–32
End-diastolic
9
4–13
Pulmonary Artery Wedge
Mean
9
4.5–13
Left Atrium
Mean
7.9
2–12
a wave
10.4
4–16
v wave
12.8
6–21
Left Ventricle
Peak systolic
130
90–140
End-diastolic
8.7
5–12
Brachial Artery
Mean
85
70–105
Peak systolic
130
90–140
End-diastolic
70
60–90
Source: Reproduced from: MJ Kern The Cardiac Catheterization Handbook, 4th ed. Phil-
adelphia, Mosby, 2003.
SPECIAL FUNCTION TESTS
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
794
TABLE 11 
CIRCULATORY FUNCTION TESTS
RESULTS: REFERENCE RANGE
TEST
SI UNITS (RANGE)
CONVENTIONAL UNITS (RANGE)
Arteriovenous oxygen difference
30–50 mL/L
30–50 mL/L
Cardiac output (Fick)
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface 
area per min
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface area per min
Contractility indexes
 Max. left ventricular dp/dt (dp/dt)
220 kPa/s (176–250 kPa/s)
1650 mmHg/s (1320–1880 mmHg/s)
DP when DP = 5.3 kPa
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(40 mmHg) (DP, developed LV pressure)
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes 
per second
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes per second
  Mean normalized systolic ejection rate  
 (angiography)
  Mean velocity of circumferential ﬁber  
 shortening (angiography)
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per 
second
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per second
Ejection fraction: stroke volume/ 
end-diastolic volume (SV/EDV)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
End-diastolic volume
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
End-systolic volume
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
Left ventricular work
 Stroke work index
50 ± 20.0 (g·m)/m2 (30–110)
50 ± 20.0 (g·m)/m2 (30–110)
 Left ventricular minute work index
1.8–6.6 [(kg·m)/m2]/min
1.8–6.6 [(kg·m)/m2]/min
 Oxygen consumption index
110–150 mL
110–150 mL
Maximum oxygen uptake
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
Pulmonary vascular resistance
2–12 (kPa·s)/L
20–130 (dyn·s)/cm5
Systemic vascular resistance
77–150 (kPa·s)/L
770–1600 (dyn·s)/cm5
Source: E Braunwald et al: Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 2001.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
795
TABLE 12
 NORMAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC REFERENCE LIMITS AND PARTITION VALUES IN ADULTS
WOMEN 
REFERENCE 
RANGE
MILDLY 
ABNORMAL
MODERATELY 
ABNORMAL
SEVERELY 
ABNORMAL
MEN 
REFERENCE 
RANGE
MILDLY 
ABNORMAL
MODERATELY 
ABNORMAL
SEVERELY 
ABNORMAL
Left ventricular dimensions
  Septal thickness, cm
0.6–0.9
1.0–1.2
1.3–1.5
≥1.6
0.6–1.0
1.1–1.3
1.4–1.6
≥1.7
  Posterior wall thickness, cm
0.6–0.9
1.0–1.2
1.3–1.5
≥1.6
0.6–1.0
1.1–1.3
1.4–1.6
≥1.7
  Diastolic diameter, cm
3.9–5.3
5.4–5.7
5.8–6.1
≥6.2
4.2–5.9
6.0–6.3
6.4–6.8
≥6.9
  Diastolic diameter/BSA, cm/m2
2.4–3.2
3.3–3.4
3.5–3.7
≥3.8
2.2–3.1
3.2–3.4
3.5–3.6
≥3.7
  Diastolic diameter/height, cm/m
2.5–3.2
3.3–3.4
3.5–3.6
≥3.7
2.4–3.3
3.4–3.5
3.6–3.7
≥3.8
Left ventricular volumes
 Diastolic, mL
56–104
105–117
118–130
≥131
67–155
156–178
179–201
≥202
 Diastolic/BSA, mL/m2
35–75
76–86
87–96
≥97
35–75
76–86
87–96
≥97
 Systolic, mL
19–49
50–59
60–69
≥70
22–58
59–70
71–82
≥83
 Systolic/BSA, mL/m2
12–30
31–36
37–42
≥43
12–30
31–36
37–42
≥43
Left ventricular mass, 2D method
 Mass, g
66–150
151–171
172–182
≥183
96–200
201–227
228–254
≥255
  Mass/BSA, g/m2
44–88
89–100
101–112
≥113
50–102
103–116
117–130
≥131
Left ventricular function
  Endocardial fractional shortening (%)
27–45
22–26
17–21
≤16
25–43
20–24
15–19
≤14
  Midwall fractional shortening (%)
15–23
13–14
11–12
≤10
14–22
12–13
10–11
≤9
 Ejection fraction, 2D method (%)
≥55
45–54
30–44
≤29
≥55
45–54
30–44
≤29
Right heart dimensions (cm)
 Basal RV diameter
2.0–2.8
2.9–3.3
3.4–3.8
≥3.9
2.0–2.8
2.9–3.3
3.4–3.8
≥3.9
 Mid-RV diameter
2.7–3.3
3.4–3.7
3.8–4.1
≥4.2
2.7–3.3
3.4–3.7
3.8–4.1
≥4.2
 Base-to-apex length
7.1–7.9
8.0–8.5
8.6–9.1
≥9.2
7.1–7.9
8.0–8.5
8.6–9.1
≥9.2
 RVOT diameter above aortic valve
2.5–2.9
3.0–3.2
3.3–3.5
≥3.6
2.5–2.9
3.0–3.2
3.3–3.5
≥3.6
 RVOT diameter above pulmonic valve
1.7–2.3
2.4–2.7
2.8–3.1
≥3.2
1.7–2.3
2.4–2.7
2.8–3.1
≥3.2
  Pulmonary artery diameter below  
 pulmonic valve
1.5–2.1
2.2–2.5
2.6–2.9
≥3.0
1.5–2.1
2.2–2.5
2.6–2.9
≥3.0
Right ventricular size and function in 
4-chamber view
Diastolic area, cm2
11–28
29–32
33–37
≥38
11–28
29–32
33–37
≥38
Systolic area, cm2
7.5–16
17–19
20–22
≥23
7.5–16
17–19
20–22
≥23
Fractional area change, %
32–60
25–31
18–24
≤17
32–60
25–31
18–24
≤17
Atrial sizes
  LA diameter, cm
2.7–3.8
3.9–4.2
4.3–4.6
≥4.7
3.0–4.0
4.1–4.6
4.7–5.2
≥5.3
  LA diameter/BSA, cm/m2
1.5–2.3
2.4–2.6
2.7–2.9
≥3.0
1.5–2.3
2.4–2.6
2.7–2.9
≥3.0
  RA minor axis, cm
2.9–4.5
4.6–4.9
5.0–5.4
≥5.5
2.9–4.5
4.6–4.9
5.0–5.4
≥5.5
  RA minor axis/BSA, cm/m2
1.7–2.5
2.6–2.8
2.9–3.1
≥3.2
1.7–2.5
2.6–2.8
2.9–3.1
≥3.2
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
796
TABLE 12
 NORMAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC REFERENCE LIMITS AND PARTITION VALUES IN ADULTS (CONTINUED)
WOMEN 
REFERENCE 
RANGE
MILDLY 
ABNORMAL
MODERATELY 
ABNORMAL
SEVERELY 
ABNORMAL
MEN 
REFERENCE 
RANGE
MILDLY 
ABNORMAL
MODERATELY 
ABNORMAL
SEVERELY 
ABNORMAL
 LA area, cm2
<20
20–30
30–40
≥41
<20
20–30
30–40
≥41
 LA volume, mL
22–52
53–62
63–72
≥73
18–58
59–68
69–78
≥79
  LA volume/BSA, mL/m2
16–28
29–33
34–39
≥40
16–28
29–33
34–39
≥40
Aortic stenosis, classiﬁcation of severity
  Aortic jet velocity, m/s
2.6–2.9
3.0–4.0
>4.0
2.6–2.9
3.0–4.0
>4.0
  Mean gradient, mmHg
<20
20–40
>40
<20
20–40
>40
  Valve area, cm2
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
  Indexed valve area, cm2/m2
>0.85
0.60–0.85
<0.6
>0.85
0.60–0.85
<0.6
  Velocity ratio
>0.50
0.25–0.50
<0.25
>0.50
0.25–0.50
<0.25
Mitral stenosis, classiﬁcation of severity
 Valve area, cm2
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
 Mean gradient, mmHg
<5
5–10
>10
<5
5–10
>10
 Pulmonary artery pressure, mmHg
<30
30–50
>50
<30
30–50
>50
Aortic regurgitation, indices of severity
  Vena contracta width, cm
<0.30
0.30–0.60
≥0.60
<0.30
0.30–0.60
≥0.60
  Jet width/LVOT width, %
<25
25–64
≥65
<25
25–64
≥65
  Jet CSA/LVOT CSA, %
<5
5–59
≥60
<5
5–59
≥60
  Regurgitant volume, mL/beat
<30
30–59
≥60
<30
30–59
≥60
  Regurgitant fraction, %
<30
30–49
≥50
<30
30–49
≥50
  Effective regurgitant oriﬁce area, cm2
<0.10
0.10–0.29
≥0.30
<0.10
0.10–0.29
≥0.30
Mitral regurgitation, indices of severity
  Vena contracta width, cm
<0.30
0.30–0.69
≥0.70
<0.30
0.30–0.69
≥0.70
  Regurgitant volume, mL/beat
<30
30–59
≥60
<30
30–59
≥60
 Regurgitant fraction, %
<30
30–49
≥50
<30
30–49
≥50
  Effective regurgitant oriﬁce area, cm2
<0.20
0.20–0.39
≥0.40
<0.20
0.20–0.39
≥0.40
Abbreviations: BSA, body surface area; CSA, cross-sectional area; LA, left atrium; LVOT, left ventricular outﬂow tract; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; RVOT, right ventricular outﬂow tract; 
2D, 2-dimensional.
Source: Values adapted from: American Society of Echocardiography, Guidelines and Standards. http://www.asecho.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3317. Accessed Feb 23, 2010.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
797
TABLE 13 
SUMMARY OF VALUES USEFUL IN PULMONARY PHYSIOLOGY
TYPICAL VALUES
SYMBOL
MAN AGED 40, 75 kg, 
175 cm TALL
WOMAN AGED 40, 60 
kg, 160 cm TALL
Pulmonary Mechanics
Spirometry—volume-time curves
 Forced vital capacity
FVC
5.0 L
3.4 L
 Forced expiratory volume in 1 s
FEV1
4.0 L
2.8 L
 FEV1/FVC
FEV1%
80%
78%
 Maximal midexpiratory ﬂow rate
MMEF (FEF 25–75)
4.1 L/s
3.2 L/s
 Maximal expiratory ﬂow rate
MEFR (FEF 200–1200)
9.0 L/s
6.1 L/s
Spirometry—ﬂow-volume curves
  Maximal expiratory ﬂow at 50% of expired vital  
 capacity
Vmax 50 (FEF 50%)
5.0 L/s
4.0 L/s
  Maximal expiratory ﬂow at 75% of expired vital  
 capacity
Vmax 75 (FEF 75%)
2.1 L/s
2.0 L/s
Resistance to airﬂow:
 Pulmonary resistance
RL (RL)
<3.0 (cmH2O/s)/L
 Airway resistance
Raw
<2.5 (cmH2O/s)/L
 Speciﬁc conductance
SGaw
>0.13 cmH2O/s
Pulmonary compliance
 Static recoil pressure at total lung capacity
Pst TLC
25 ± 5 cmH2O
 Compliance of lungs (static)
CL
0.2 L cmH2O
 Compliance of lungs and thorax
C(L + T)
0.1 L cmH2O
 Dynamic compliance of 20 breaths per minute
C dyn 20
0.25 ± 0.05 L/cmH2O
Maximal static respiratory pressures:
 Maximal inspiratory pressure
MIP
>110 cmH2O
>70 cmH2O
 Maximal expiratory pressure
MEP
>200 cmH2O
>140 cmH2O
Lung Volumes
Total lung capacity
TLC
6.9 L
4.9 L
Functional residual capacity
FRC
3.3 L
2.6 L
Residual volume
RV
1.9 L
1.5 L
Inspiratory capacity
IC
3.7 L
2.3 L
Expiratory reserve volume
ERV
1.4 L
1.1 L
Vital capacity
VC
5.0 L
3.4 L
Gas Exchange (Sea Level)
Arterial O2 tension
PaO2
12.7 ± 0.7 kPa (95 ± 5 mmHg)
Arterial CO2 tension
PaCO2
5.3 ± 0.3 kPa (40 ± 2 mmHg)
Arterial O2 saturation
SaO2
0.97 ± 0.02 (97 ± 2%)
Arterial blood pH
pH
7.40 ± 0.02
Arterial bicarbonate
HCO3
–
24 + 2 meq/L
Base excess
BE
0 ± 2 meq/L
Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide  
(single breath)
DLCO
37 mL CO/min/mmHg 27 mL CO/min/mmHg
Dead space volume
VD
2 mL/kg body wt
Physiologic dead space; dead space-tidal  
volume ratio
VD/VT
 Rest
≤35% VT
 Exercise
≤20% VT
Alveolar-arterial difference for O2
P(A – a)O2
≤2.7 kPa ≤20 kPa (≤24 mmHg)
Source: Based on: AH Morris et al: Clinical Pulmonary Function Testing. A Manual of Uniform Laboratory Procedures, 2nd ed. Salt Lake City, 
Utah, Intermountain Thoracic Society, 1984.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
798
TABLE 14 
GASTROINTESTINAL TESTS
RESULTS
TEST
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Absorption tests
  D-Xylose: after overnight fast, 25 g xylose given in oral 
 aqueous solution
  Urine, collected for following 5 h
25% of ingested dose
25% of ingested dose
  Serum, 2 h after dose
2.0–3.5 mmol/L
30–52 mg/dL
  Vitamin A: a fasting blood specimen is obtained and  
 200,000 units of vitamin A in oil is given orally
Serum level should rise to twice 
fasting level in 3–5 h
Serum level should rise to 
twice fasting level in 3–5 h
Bentiromide test (pancreatic function): 500 mg  
bentiromide (chymex) orally; p-aminobenzoic acid 
(PABA) measured
 Plasma
 Urine
>50% recovered in 6 h
>3.6 (±1.1) μg/mL at 90 min
>50% recovered in 6 h
Gastric juice
 Volume
  24 h
2–3 L
2–3 L
  Nocturnal
600–700 mL
600–700 mL
  Basal, fasting
30–70 mL/h
30–70 mL/h
Reaction
  pH
1.6–1.8
1.6–1.8
  Titratable acidity of fasting juice
4–9 μmol/s
15–35 meq/h
Acid output
 Basal
  Females (mean ± 1 SD)
0.6 ± 0.5 μmol/s
2.0 ± 1.8 meq/h
  Males (mean ± 1 SD)
0.8 ± 0.6 μmol/s
3.0 ± 2.0 meq/h
  Maximal (after SC histamine acid phosphate,  
 0.004 mg/kg body weight, and preceded by 50 mg  
 promethazine, or after betazole, 1.7 mg/kg body  
 weight, or pentagastrin, 6 μg/kg body weight)
  Females (mean ± 1 SD)
4.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
16 ± 5 meq/h
  Males (mean ± 1 SD)
6.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
23 ± 5 meq/h
 Basal acid output/maximal acid output ratio
≤0.6
≤0.6
Gastrin, serum
0–200 μg/L
0–200 pg/mL
Secretin test (pancreatic exocrine function): 1 unit/kg  
body weight, IV
 Volume (pancreatic juice) in 80 min
>2.0 mL/kg
>2.0 mL/kg
 Bicarbonate concentration
>80 mmol/L
>80 meq/L
 Bicarbonate output in 30 min
>10 mmol
>10 meq
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
799
TABLE 15 
BODY FLUIDS AND OTHER MASS DATA
REFERENCE RANGE
SI UNITS
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
Ascitic ﬂuid
Body ﬂuid
 Total volume (lean) of body weight
 Intracellular
 Extracellular
50% (in obese) to 70%
30–40% of body weight
20–30% of body weight
Blood
 Total volume
  Males
69 mL/kg body weight
  Females
65 mL/kg body weight
 Plasma volume
  Males
39 mL/kg body weight
  Females
40 mL/kg body weight
 Red blood cell volume
  Males
30 mL/kg body weight
1.15–1.21 L/m2 of body surface area
  Females
25 mL/kg body weight
0.95–1.00 L/m2 of body surface area
Body mass index
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
TABLE 16
RADIATION-DERIVED UNITS
QUANTITY
MEASURES
OLD UNIT
SI UNIT
SPECIAL NAME 
FOR SI UNIT 
(ABBREVIATION)
CONVERSION
Activity
Rate of radioactive decay
curie (Ci)
Disintegrations per 
second (dps)
becquerel (Bq)
1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010 Bq
1 mCi = 37 MBq
1 Bq = 2.703 × 10–11 Ci
Exposure
Amount of ionizations pro-
duced in dry air by x-rays 
or gamma rays, per unit 
of mass
roentgen (R)
Coulomb per  
kilogram (C/kg)
none
1 C/kg = 3876 R
1 R = 2.58 × 10–4 C/kg
1 mR = 258 pC/kg
Air kerma
Sum of initial energies of 
charged particles liber-
ated by ionizing radiation 
in air, per unit of mass
rad
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10 μGy
Absorbed 
dose
Energy deposited per unit 
of mass in a medium, 
e.g., an organ/tissue
rad
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10 μGy
Equivalent 
dose
Energy deposited per unit 
of mass in a medium, 
e.g., an organ/tissue, 
weighted to reﬂect type(s) 
of radiation
rem
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
Effective dose Energy deposited per 
unit of mass in a refer-
ence individual, doubly 
weighted to reﬂect type(s) 
of radiation and organ(s) 
irradiated
rem
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
MISCELLANEOUS
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
800
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The contributions of Drs. Daniel J. Fink, Patrick M. Sluss, 
James L. Januzzi, and Kent B. Lewandrowski to this chapter in 
previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 
are gratefully acknowledged. We also express our gratitude to 
Drs. Amudha Palanisamy and Scott Fink for careful review of 
tables and helpful suggestions.
801
801
QUESTIONS
REVIEW AND 
SELF-ASSESSMENT
a
Charles Wiener  ■   Cynthia D. Brown   ■  Anna R. Hemnes
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to 
each question.
4. A 54-year-old woman presents to the emergency 
department complaining of the abrupt onset of 
what she describes as the worst headache of her 
life. You are concerned about the possibility of 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. What is the most ap-
propriate initial test for diagnosis?
A. Cerebral angiography
B. CT of the head with IV contrast
C. CT of the head without IV contrast
D. Lumbar puncture
E. Transcranial Doppler ultrasound
5. A 74-year-old woman has a recent diagnosis of 
small cell lung cancer. She is now complaining of 
headaches, and her family has noticed confusion as 
well. Metastatic disease to the brain is suspected. A 
mass lesion on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
is demonstrated in the right parietal lobe. Which 
MRI technique would best identify the extent of 
the edema surrounding the lesion?
A. MR angiography
B. FLAIR
C. T1-weighted
D. T2-weighted
E. B and D
6. Which of the following is a possible complication 
of administration of gadolinium to a patient with 
chronic kidney disease?
A. Acute renal failure
B. Hyperthyroidism
C. Hypocalcemia
D. Lactic acidosis
E. Nephrogenic systemic sclerosis
7. In a patient with coma, an EEG showing triphasic 
waves is most suggestive of which of the following 
clinical disorders?
A. Brain abscess
B. Herpes simplex encephalitis
C. Locked-in syndrome
D. Metabolic encephalopathy
E. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus
1. During a neurologic examination, you ask a patient 
to stand with both arms fully extended and parallel 
to the ground with his eyes closed for 10 seconds. 
What is the name of this test?
A. Babinski sign
B. Dysdiadochokinesis
C. Lhermitte symptom
D. Pronator drift
E. Romberg sign
2. This sign is considered positive if there is ﬂexion at 
the elbows or forearms, or if there is pronation of 
the forearms. A positive test is a sign of:
A. Abnormal sensation
B. Early dementia
C. Localized brainstem disease
D. Potential weakness
E. Underlying cerebellar dysfunction
3. A 55-year-old woman with known metastatic 
breast cancer presents to the emergency depart-
ment complaining of new-onset weakness and 
numbness. The symptoms involve both arms and 
legs. She also has developed urinary incontinence 
over the past 24 hours. On physical examination, 
strength is 3/5 in the lower extremities and 4/5 
in the upper extremities. Anal sphincter tone is 
decreased. Babinski sign is positive. Sensation is 
decreased in the extremities, but not in the face. 
Cranial nerves are symmetric and intact, and men-
tal status is normal. Based on this information, what 
is the most likely site of the lesion causing the pa-
tient’s symptoms?
A. Brainstem
B. Cerebrum
C. Cervical spinal cord
D. Lumbar spinal cord
E. Neuromuscular junction
aQuestions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Review and Self-Assessment
802
8. A 25-year-old woman becomes lightheaded and 
experiences a syncopal event while having her 
blood drawn during a cholesterol screening. She 
has no medical history and takes no medications. 
She experiences a brief loss of consciousness for 
about 20 seconds. She has no seizure-like activity 
and immediately returns to her usual level of func-
tioning. She is diagnosed with vasovagal syncope, 
and no follow-up testing is recommended. Which 
of the following statements regarding neurally me-
diated syncope is TRUE?
A. Neurally mediated syncope occurs when there are 
abnormalities of the autonomic nervous system.
B. Proximal and distal myoclonus do not occur during 
neurally mediated syncope and should increase the 
likelihood of a seizure.
C. The ﬁnal pathway of neurally mediated syncope 
results in a surge of the sympathetic nervous system 
with inhibition of the parasympathetic nervous 
system.
D. The primary therapy for neurally mediated syncope 
is reassurance, avoidance of triggers, and plasma 
volume expansion.
E. The usual ﬁnding with cardiovascular monitoring is 
hypotension and tachycardia.
9. A 76-year-old woman is brought to the emergency 
department after a syncopal event that occurred 
while she was singing in her church choir. She has 
a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and 
chronic kidney disease (stage III). She does recall 
at least two prior episodes of syncope similar to 
this one. Her medications include insulin glargine 
40 units daily, lispro insulin sliding scale, lisino-
pril 20 mg daily, and hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg 
daily. By the time she arrived in the emergency 
department, she reports feeling back to her usual 
self. She does recall feeling somewhat lightheaded 
before the syncopal events but does not recall the 
event itself. Witnesses report some jerking of her 
upper extremities. She regained full consciousness 
in less than 2 minutes. Her current vital signs in-
clude blood pressure of 110/62 mmHg, heart rate 
of 84 beats/min, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, 
and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. She is 
afebrile. Her physical examination is unremarkable 
and includes a normal neurologic examination. 
Which of the following would be least helpful in 
determining the etiology of the patient’s syncope?
A. CT scan of the head
B. Electrocardiogram
C. Fingerstick glucose measurement
D. Orthostatic blood pressure measurement
E. Tilt table testing
10. A 48-year-old man presents to the emergency de-
partment complaining of dizziness. He describes it 
as a sensation that the room is spinning. All of the 
following would be consistent with a central cause 
of vertigo EXCEPT:
A. Absence of tinnitus
B. Gaze-evoked nystagmus
C. Hiccups
D. Inhibition of nystagmus by visual ﬁxation
E. Purely vertical nystagmus
11. A 62-year-old woman presents complaining of se-
vere dizziness. She notes it especially when she turns 
over in bed and immediately upon standing. Her ini-
tial physical examination ﬁndings are normal. Upon 
further testing, you ask the patient to sit with her 
head turned 45 degrees to the right. You lower the 
patient to the supine position and extend the head 
backward 20 degrees. This maneuver immediately 
reproduces the patient’s symptoms, and you note 
torsional nystagmus. What is the most appropriate 
next step in evaluation and treatment of this patient?
A. MRI of the brainstem
B. Methylprednisolone taper beginning at 100 mg daily
C. Repositioning (Epley) maneuvers
D. Rizatriptan 10 mg orally once
E. Valacyclovir 1000 mg three times daily for 7 days
12. A 42-year-old man presents complaining of pro-
gressive weakness over a period of several months. 
He reports tripping over his toes while walking 
and has dropped a cup of hot coffee on one oc-
casion because he felt too weak to continue to 
hold it. A disorder affecting lower motor neurons 
is suspected. All of the following ﬁndings would be 
found in an individual with a disease primarily af-
fecting lower motor neurons EXCEPT:
A. Decreased muscle tone
B. Distal greater than proximal weakness
C. Fasciculations
D. Hyperactive tendon reﬂexes
E. Severe muscle atrophy
13. A 78-year-old man is seen in clinic because of re-
cent falls. He reports gait difﬁculties with a sensa-
tion of being off balance at times. One recent fall 
caused a shoulder injury requiring surgery to repair 
a torn rotation cuff. In epidemiologic case series, 
what is the most common cause of gait disorders?
A. Cerebellar degeneration
B. Cerebrovascular disease with multiple infarcts
C. Cervical myelopathy
D. Parkinson’s disease
E. Sensory deﬁcits
Review and Self-Assessment
803
14. A 65-year-old man presents complaining of fre-
quent falls and gait abnormalities. He ﬁrst noticed 
the difﬁculty about 6 months ago. He has a history 
of hypertension and hypothyroidism and hyper-
lipidemia. His current medications include amlo-
dipine 10 mg daily, simvastatin 20 mg daily, and 
levothyroxine 75 μg daily. On neurologic exami-
nation, you observe his gait to be wide based with 
short, shufﬂing steps. He has difﬁculty rising from 
his chair and initiating his gait. Upon turning, he 
takes multiple steps and appears unsteady. How-
ever, cerebellar testing results are normal, including 
heel-to-shin and Romberg testing. He has no evi-
dence of sensory deﬁcits in the lower extremities, 
and strength is 5/5 throughout all tested muscle 
groups. He shows no evidence of muscle spasticity 
on passive movement. His neurologic examination 
is consistent with which of the following causes?
A. Alcoholic cerebellar degeneration
B. Communicating hydrocephalus
C. Neurosyphilis
D. Multiple system atrophy
E. Lumbar myelopathy
15. A 74-year-old woman is admitted to the medical 
intensive care unit with confusion and sepsis from 
a urinary origin. Her initial blood pressure was 
70/40 mmHg with a heart rate of 130 beats/min. 
She is volume resuscitated but requires dopamine 
to maintain an adequate blood pressure. Her men-
tal status improved initially, but now she is agitated 
and pulling at her IV catheters. She is screaming 
that she is trapped, and she is not oriented to place 
or year. All of the following statements regarding 
the patient’s condition are true EXCEPT:
A. An episode of delirium is associated with an in-
hospital mortality rate of 25% to 33%.
B. A patient who has an episode of delirium in the 
hospital is more likely to be discharged to a nursing 
home.
C. Delirium is associated with an increased risk of 
all-cause mortality for at least 1 year after hospital 
discharge.
D. Delirium is typically short-lived and does not persist 
longer than several days.
E. Individuals who experience delirium have longer 
lengths of stay in the hospital.
16. You are covering the night shift at a local hospital 
and are called acutely to the bedside of a 62-year-
old man to evaluate a change in his mental status. 
He was admitted 36 hours previously for treat-
ment of community-acquired pneumonia. He re-
ceived treatment with levoﬂoxacin 500 mg daily
 16. (Continued)
 and required oxygen 2 L/min. He has a medical 
history of tobacco abuse, diabetes mellitus, and hy-
pertension. He reports alcohol intake of 2–4 beers 
daily. His vital signs at 10 pm were blood pres-
sure of 138/85 mmHg, heart rate of 92 beats/min, 
respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, temperature 
of 37.4°C (99.3°F), and SaO2 of 92% on oxygen 
2 L/min. Currently, the patient is agitated and pac-
ing his room. He is reporting that he needs to leave 
the “meeting” immediately and go home. He states 
that if he does not do this, someone is going to take 
his house and car away. He has removed his IV and 
oxygen tubing from his nose. His last vital signs 
taken 30 minutes previously were blood pressure 
of 156/92 mmHg, heart rate of 118 beats/min, 
respiratory rate of 26 breaths/min, temperature of 
38.3°C (100.9°F), and oxygen saturation of 87% on 
room air. He is noted to be somewhat tremulous 
and diaphoretic. All of the following should be 
considered as part of the patient’s diagnostic work-
up EXCEPT:
A. Arterial blood gas testing
B. Brain imaging with MRI or head CT
C. Fingerstick glucose testing
D. More thorough review of the patient’s alcohol in-
take with his wife
E. Review of the recent medications received by the 
patient
17. Delirium, an acute confusional state, is a common 
disorder that remains a major cause of morbidity 
and mortality in the United States. Which of the 
following patients is at the highest risk for develop-
ing delirium?
A. A 36-year-old man admitted to the medical ward 
with a deep venous thrombosis
B. A 55-year-old man postoperative day 2 from a total 
colectomy
C. A 68-year-old woman admitted to the intensive care 
unit (ICU) with esophageal rupture
D. A 74-year-old woman in the preoperative clinic 
before hip surgery
E. An 84-year-old man living in an assisted living 
facility
18. A 28-year-old woman has severe head trauma after 
a motor vehicle accident. One year after the acci-
dent, she is noted to have spontaneous eye open-
ing and is able to track an object visually at times. 
She does not speak or follow any commands. 
She breathes independently but is fed through a 
gastrostomy tube. She can move all extremities
Review and Self-Assessment
804
 18. (Continued)
 spontaneously but without purposeful movement. 
What term best describes this patient’s condition?
A. Coma
B. Locked-in
C. Minimally conscious state
D. Persistent vegetative state
E. Vegetative state
19. A 52-year-old man is evaluated after a large sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) from a ruptured ce-
rebral aneurysm. There is concern that the patient 
has brain death. What test is most commonly used 
to diagnose brain death in this situation?
A. Apnea testing
B. Cerebral angiography
C. Demonstration of absent cranial nerve reﬂexes
D. Demonstration of ﬁxed and dilated pupils
E. Performance of transcranial Doppler ultrasonography
20. Which of the following neurologic phenomena is 
classically associated with herniation of the brain 
through the foramen magnum?
A. Third-nerve compression and ipsilateral papillary 
dilation
B. Catatonia
C. “Locked-in” state
D. Miotic pupils
E. Respiratory arrest
21. Which of the following is the most common ﬁnd-
ing in aphasic patients?
A. Alexia
B. Anomia
C. Comprehension
D. Fluency
E. Repetition
22. A 65-year-old man experiences an ischemic cere-
brovascular accident affecting the territory of the 
right anterior cerebral artery. After the stroke, an 
assessment reveals the ﬁndings shown in Figure 22. 
What diagnosis does this ﬁgure suggest? 
A. Construction apraxia
B. Hemianopia
C. Hemineglect
D. Object agnosia
E. Simultanagnosia
23. A 42-year-old man is evaluated for excessive sleep-
iness that is interfering with his ability to work. 
He works at a glass factory that requires him to 
work rotating shifts. He typically cycles across day 
(7 am–3 pm), evening (3 pm–11 pm), and night 
(11 pm–7 am) shifts over the course of 4 weeks. 
He notes the problem to be most severe when he 
is on the night shift. Twice he has fallen asleep 
on the job. Although no accidents have occurred, 
he has been threatened with loss of his job if he
A
FIGURE 22
Review and Self-Assessment
805
 23. (Continued)
 falls asleep again. His preferred sleep schedule is 
10 pm until 6 am, but even when he is work-
ing day shifts, he typically only sleeps from about 
10:30 pm until 5:30 am. However, he feels fully 
functional at work on day and evening shifts. Af-
ter his night shifts, he states that he ﬁnds it dif-
ﬁcult to sleep when he ﬁrst gets home, frequently 
not falling asleep until 10 am or later. He is up 
by about 3 pm when his children arrive home 
from school. He drinks about 2 cups of coffee 
daily but tries to avoid drinking more than this. 
He does not snore and has a body mass index of 
21.3 kg/m2. All of the following are reasonable 
approaches to treatment in this man EXCEPT:
A. Avoidance of bright light in the morning after his 
shifts
B. Exercise in the early evening before going to work
C. Melatonin 3 mg taken at bedtime on the morning 
after a night shift
D. Modaﬁnil 200 mg taken 30–60 minutes before 
starting a shift
E. Strategic napping of no more than 20 minutes dur-
ing breaks at work
24. A 45-year-old woman presents for evaluation of 
abnormal sensations in her legs that keep her from 
sleeping at night. She ﬁrst notices the symptoms 
around 8 pm when she is sitting quietly watch-
ing television. She describes the symptoms as “ants 
crawling in my veins.” Although the symptoms 
are not painful, they are very uncomfortable and 
worsen when she lies down at night. They inter-
fere with her ability to fall asleep about four times 
weekly. If she gets out of bed to walk or rubs her 
legs, the symptoms disappear almost immediately 
only to recur as soon as she is still. She also some-
times takes a very hot bath to alleviate the symp-
toms. During sleep, her husband complains that she 
kicks him throughout the night. She has no history 
of neurologic or renal disease. She currently is per-
imenopausal and has been experiencing very heavy 
and prolonged menstrual cycles over the past sev-
eral months. The physical examination ﬁndings, 
including thorough neurologic examination, are 
normal. Her hemoglobin is 9.8 g/dL and hema-
tocrit is 30.1%. The mean corpuscular volume is 
68 fL. Serum ferritin is 12 ng/mL. Which is the 
most appropriate initial therapy for this patient?
A. Carbidopa/levodopa
B. Hormone replacement therapy
C. Iron supplementation
D. Oxycodone
E. Pramipexole
25. A 20-year-old man presents for evaluation of ex-
cessive daytime somnolence. He is ﬁnding it in-
creasingly difﬁcult to stay awake during his classes. 
Recently, his grades have fallen because whenever 
he tries to read, he ﬁnds himself drifting off. He 
ﬁnds that his alertness is best after exercising or 
brief naps of 10–30 minutes. Because of this, he 
states that he takes 5 or 10 “catnaps” daily. The 
sleepiness persists despite averaging 9 hours of sleep 
nightly. In addition to excessive somnolence, he 
reports occasional hallucinations that occur as he 
is falling asleep. He describes these occurrences as 
a voice calling his name as he drifts off. Perhaps 
once weekly, he awakens from sleep but is unable 
to move for a period of about 30 seconds. He has 
never had apparent loss of consciousness but states 
that whenever he is laughing, he feels heaviness in 
his neck and arms. Once he had to lean against 
a wall to keep from falling down. He undergoes 
an overnight sleep study and multiple sleep latency 
test. There is no sleep apnea. His mean sleep laten-
cy on ﬁve naps is 2.3 minutes. In three of the ﬁve 
naps, rapid eye movement sleep is present. Which 
of the following ﬁndings of this patient is most spe-
ciﬁc for the diagnosis of narcolepsy?
A. Cataplexy
B. Excessive daytime somnolence
C. Hypnagogic hallucinations
D. Rapid eye movement sleep in more than two naps 
on a multiple sleep latency test
E. Sleep paralysis
26. Which of the following is the most common sleep 
disorder in the U.S. population?
A. Delayed sleep phase syndrome
B. Insomnia
C. Obstructive sleep apnea
D. Narcolepsy
E. Restless legs syndrome
27. In which stage of sleep are the parasomnias som-
nambulism and night terrors most likely to occur?
A. Stage 1
B. Stage 2
C. Slow-wave sleep
D. Rapid eye movement sleep
28. A 44-year-old man is seen in the emergency de-
partment after a motor vehicle accident. The pa-
tient says, “I never saw that car coming from the 
right side.” On physical examination, his pupils are 
equal and reactive to light. His visual acuity is nor-
mal; however, there are visual ﬁeld defects in both 
eyes laterally (bitemporal hemianopia). Which of
Review and Self-Assessment
806
 28. (Continued)
 the following is most likely to be found on further 
evaluation?
A. Retinal detachment
B. Occipital lobe glioma
C. Optic nerve injury
D. Parietal lobe infarction
E. Pituitary adenoma
29. A 42-year-old construction worker complains of 
waking up with a red, painful left eye. She often 
works without goggles at her construction site. 
Her history is notable for hypertension, inﬂam-
matory bowel disease, diabetes, and prior IV drug 
use. Her only current medication is lisinopril. 
On examination, the left eye is diffusely red and 
sensitive to light. The eyelids are normal. In dim 
light, visual acuity is normal in both eyes. All of 
the following diagnoses will explain her ﬁndings 
EXCEPT:
A. Acute angle-closure glaucoma
B. Anterior uveitis
C. Corneal abrasion
D. Posterior uveitis
E. Transient ischemic attack
30. A 75-year-old triathlete complains of gradually 
worsening vision over the past year. It seems to 
be involving near and far vision. The patient has 
never required corrective lenses and has no sig-
niﬁcant medical history other than diet-controlled 
hypertension. He takes no regular medications. 
Physical examination is normal except for bilateral 
visual acuity of 20/100. There are no focal visual 
ﬁeld defects and no redness of the eyes or eyelids. 
Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Age-related macular degeneration
B. Blepharitis
C. Diabetic retinopathy
D. Episcleritis
E. Retinal detachment
31. All of the following statements regarding olfaction 
are true EXCEPT:
A. Decrements in olfaction may lead to nutritional 
deﬁciency.
B. More than 40% of patients with traumatic anosmia 
will regain normal function over time.
C. Signiﬁcant decrements in olfaction are present in 
more than 50% of the population 80 years and older.
D. The most common identiﬁable cause of long-lasting 
or permanent loss of olfaction in outpatients is se-
vere respiratory infection.
E. Women identify odorants better than men at all ages.
32. A 64-year-old man is evaluated for hearing loss that 
he thinks is worse in his left ear. His wife and chil-
dren have told him for years that he does not listen to 
them. Recently, he has failed to hear the chime of the 
alarm on his digital watch, and he admits to focusing 
on the lips of individuals speaking to him because he 
sometimes has difﬁculties in word recognition. In ad-
dition, he reports a continuous buzzing that is louder 
in his left ear. He denies any sensation of vertigo, 
headaches, or balance difﬁculties. He has worked in a 
factory for many years that makes parts for airplanes, 
and the machinery that he works with sits to his left 
primarily. He has no family history of deafness, al-
though his father had hearing loss as he aged. He has a 
medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and 
coronary artery disease. You suspect sensorineural 
hearing loss related to exposure to the intense noise in 
the factory for many decades. Which of the following 
ﬁndings would you expect on physical examination?
A. A deep tympanic retraction pocket seen above the 
pars ﬂaccida on the tympanic membrane.
B. Cerumen impaction in the external auditory canal.
C. Hearing loss that is greater at lower frequencies on 
pure tone audiometry.
D. Increased intensity of sound when a tuning fork is 
placed on the mastoid process when compared with 
placement near the auditory canal.
E. Increased intensity of sound in the right ear when a 
tuning fork is placed in the midline of the forehead.
33. All of the following neurologic conditions have a 
mechanistic association with abnormalities of ion 
channel function EXCEPT:
A. Epilepsy
B. Lambert-Eaton syndrome
C. Migraine
D. Parkinson’s disease
E. Spinocerebellar ataxia
34. All of the following neurologic diseases are matched 
correctly with the neurotransmitter system that is 
dysfunctional EXCEPT:
A. Lambert-Eaton syndrome: acetylcholine
B. Myasthenia gravis: acetylcholine
C. Orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: serotonin
D. Parkinson’s disease: dopamine
E. Stiff-person syndrome: GABA
35. An 18-year-old man seeks evaluation at his univer-
sity health center for increasing episodes of sudden- 
onset smelling of burning kerosene. These episodes 
had occurred every few months during high school 
and he never told anyone. However, since start-
ing college, he notes an increasing frequency, often
Review and Self-Assessment
807
 35. (Continued)
 when sleep deprived. The episodes typically start 
without warning and he’ll smell a distinct kerosene 
smell no matter the environment. The episodes last 
about 3–5 minutes and stop spontaneously. He has 
never lost consciousness. During the episodes, he can 
communicate with friends. An EEG during an epi-
sode shows abnormal discharges distinctly localized to 
an area of the frontal lobe. Which of the following is 
the most accurate classiﬁcation of his seizure disorder?
A. Focal seizures with dyscognitive features
B. Focal seizures without dyscognitive features
C. Generalized seizure
D. Myoclonic seizures
E. Typical absence seizure
36. On the neurologic consultation service, you are 
asked to evaluate a patient with mesial temporal 
lobe epilepsy syndrome. The patient has a history 
of intractable focal seizures that rarely generalize. 
Her seizures often begin with an aura and com-
monly manifest as behavioral arrests, complex 
automatisms, and unilateral posturing. MRI ﬁnd-
ings include small temporal lobes and a small hip-
pocampus with increased signal on T2-weighted 
sequences. Which of these additional historic fac-
tors is also likely to be present in this patient?
A. History of febrile seizures
B. Hypothyroidism
C. Neuroﬁbromas
D. Recurring genital ulcers
E. Type 2 diabetes mellitus
37. You have just admitted a young man with a prior 
history of seizure disorder who was witnessed to have 
a seizure. His family’s description suggests a focal sei-
zure involving the left hand that spread to involve the 
entire arm. He did not lose consciousness. He was 
brought in 2 hours after symptom onset and is cur-
rently awake, alert, and oriented. He has not had any 
further seizures but has been unable to move his left 
hand since his seizure. His electrolytes and complete 
blood count are within normal limits. A noncontrast 
CT scan of his head is unremarkable. On examina-
tion, sensation is intact in the affected limb, but his 
strength is 0 out of 5 in the musculature of the left 
hand. What is the best course of action at this time?
A. Cerebral angiogram
B. Lumbar puncture
C. Magnetic resonance angiogram
D. Psychiatric evaluation
E. Reassess in a few hours
38. A 37-year-old man is witnessed by his family to have 
a generalized tonic-clonic seizure at a party. He does 
not have a known seizure disorder. There is no his-
tory of head trauma, stroke, or tumor. The patient 
is unemployed, married, and takes no medication. 
Physical examination shows no skin abnormalities 
and no stigmata of chronic liver or renal disease. The 
patient is postictal. His neck is difﬁcult to maneu-
ver due to stiffness. His white blood cell count is 
19,000/μL, hematocrit 36%, and platelets 200,000/
μL. Glucose is 102 mg/dL, sodium 136 meq/dL, 
calcium 9.5 mg/dL, magnesium 2.2 mg/dL, SGOT 
18 U/L, blood urea nitrogen 7 mg/dL, and creati-
nine 0.8 mg/dL. Urine toxicology screen is positive 
for cocaine metabolites. Which next step is most ap-
propriate in this patient’s management?
A. Electroencephalogram (EEG)
B. IV loading with antiepileptic medication
C. Lumbar puncture
D. Magnetic resonance imaging
E. Substance abuse counseling
39. All of the following statements regarding epilepsy 
are true EXCEPT:
A. The incidence of suicide is higher in epileptic pa-
tients than it is in the general population.
B. Mortality is no different in patients with epilepsy 
than it is in age-matched controls.
C. A majority of patients with epilepsy that is com-
pletely controlled with medication eventually will 
be able to discontinue therapy and remain seizure-
free.
D. Surgery for mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) 
decreases the number of seizures in over 70% of 
patients.
E. Tricyclic antidepressants lower the seizure threshold 
and may precipitate seizures.
40. A 20-year-old woman is brought to the emergency 
department after a witnessed generalized tonic-
clonic seizure. She has no identifying information, 
and her past medical history is unknown. What is 
the most likely cause of her seizure?
A. Amyloid angiopathy
B. Fever
C. Genetic disorder
D. Illicit drug use
E. Uremia
41. A 36-year-old man is brought to the emergency 
department because of a seizure. His family reports 
he has a history of seizure disorder but stopped his 
medications a month ago due to ﬁnancial issues. 
He had a brief seizure at home that stopped within
Review and Self-Assessment
808
 41. (Continued)
 a few minutes. However, 15 minutes later he began 
seizing again and the tonic-clonic activity has per-
sisted for 30 minutes. On physical examination he 
is afebrile, hypertensive, and actively seizing. All of 
the following are potential therapies for his condition 
EXCEPT:
A. Carbamazepine
B. Fosphenytoin
C. Lorazepam
D. Phenobarbital
E. Valproate
42. The most common cause of a cerebral embolism is:
A. Atrial ﬁbrillation
B. Cardiac prosthetic valves
C. Dilated cardiomyopathy
D. Endocarditis
E. Rheumatic heart disease
43. A 54-year-old male is referred to your clinic for 
evaluation of atrial ﬁbrillation. He ﬁrst noted the ir-
regular heartbeat 2 weeks ago and presented to his pri-
mary care physician. He denies chest pain, shortness 
of breath, nausea, or gastrointestinal symptoms. Past 
medical history is unremarkable. There is no history 
of hypertension, diabetes, or tobacco use. His medica-
tions include metoprolol. The examination is notable 
for a blood pressure of 126/74 mmHg and a pulse of 
64 beats/min. The jugular venous pressure is not ele-
vated. His heart is irregularly irregular, with normal S1 
and S2. The lungs are clear, and there is no peripheral 
edema. An echocardiogram shows a left atrial size of 
3.6 cm. Left ventricular ejection fraction is 60%. There 
are no valvular or structural abnormalities. Which of 
the following statements regarding his atrial ﬁbrillation 
and stroke risk is true?
A. He requires no antiplatelet therapy or anticoagula-
tion because the risk of embolism is low.
B. Lifetime vitamin K antagonist therapy is indicated 
for atrial ﬁbrillation in this situation to reduce the 
risk of stroke.
C. He should be admitted to the hospital for IV heparin 
and undergo electrical cardioversion; afterward there 
is no need for anticoagulation.
D. His risk of an embolic stroke is less than 1%, and he 
should take a daily aspirin.
E. He should be started on SC low-molecular-weight 
heparin and transitioned to warfarin.
44. All the following have been shown to reduce the 
risk of atherothrombotic stroke in primary or sec-
ondary prevention EXCEPT:
A. Aspirin
B. Blood pressure control
 44. (Continued)
C. Clopidogrel
D. Statin therapy
E. Warfarin
45. A 57-year-old man is brought to the emergency 
department after falling while playing tennis and 
developing garbled speech. He has a past his-
tory of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. 
His medications include atorvastatin and enala-
pril. On physical examination, his blood pressure 
is 210/115 mmHg with heart rate 105 beats/min, 
respirations 28 breaths/min, temperature 37°C 
(98.6°F), and oxygen saturation 94% on room air. 
He is alert but aphasic with upper and lower left 
extremity hemiparesis. He is able to move his right 
side normally. Based on the results of immediate 
imaging, all of the following are potential thera-
peutic considerations for his condition EXCEPT:
A. Anticoagulation
B. Blood pressure lowering
C. Hypothermia protocol
D. Intracerebral stent placement
E. IV thrombolysis
46. A 72-year-old right-handed male with a history of 
atrial ﬁbrillation and chronic alcoholism is evalu-
ated for dementia. His son gives a history of a step-
wise decline in the patient’s function over the last 
5 years with the accumulation of mild focal neuro-
logic deﬁcits. On examination he is found to have a 
pseudobulbar affect, mildly increased muscle tone, 
and brisk deep-tendon reﬂexes in the right upper 
extremity and an extensor plantar response on the 
left. The history and examination are most consis-
tent with which of the following?
A. Alzheimer’s disease
B. Binswanger’s disease
C. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
D. Multi-infarct dementia
E. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency
47. A 49-year-old woman presents for a second opin-
ion regarding symptoms of tremors, difﬁculty with 
ambulation, and periodic ﬂushing. Her symptoms 
originally began approximately 3 years ago. At that 
time, she was hospitalized for a syncopal episode, 
after which she was told to increase her salt intake. 
Since then, she has had progressive motor difﬁ-
culties including bilateral tremors and a stiff, slow 
gait. She also has had several more episodes of syn-
cope. She states that she knows when these syn-
copal events will occur because she feels faint and 
weak. She has never had an injury from syncope. 
A ﬁnal recent symptom has been periodic ﬂushing
Review and Self-Assessment
809
 47. (Continued)
 and sweating. A neurologist previously diagnosed 
her with Parkinson’s disease and prescribed therapy 
with ropinirole. Despite increasing doses, she does 
not feel improved, but rather has recently noticed 
uncontrollable movements that she describes as tics 
of her face. Her only other medical history is re-
cent recurrent urinary tract infections. Her medi-
cations are ropinirole 24 mg daily and nitrofuran-
toin 100 mg daily. She reports no history of drug 
use. On physical examination, her blood pressure 
is 130/70 mmHg with a heart rate of 78 beats/
min while sitting. Upon standing, her blood pres-
sure drops to 90/50 mmHg with a heart rate of 
110 beats/min. Her ocular movements are full and 
intact. She has recurrent motor movements of the 
right side of her face. Her neurologic examination 
shows increased muscle tone in the lower extremi-
ties with bilateral 4-Hz tremor. Deep tendon reﬂex-
es are brisk and 3+ in upper and lower extremities. 
Three beats of myoclonus are present at the ankles 
bilaterally. She walks with a spastic gait. Strength is 
normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Corticobasal degeneration
B. Diffuse Lewy body dementia
C. Drug-induced Parkinson’s disease
D. Multiple system atrophy with parkinsonian features
E. Parkinson’s disease with inadequate treatment
48. A 65-year-old man presents to your ofﬁce com-
plaining of a tremor and progressive gait abnor-
malities. He states that he ﬁrst noticed a slowing of 
his gait approximately 6 months ago. He has difﬁ-
culty rising to a standing position and states that he 
shufﬂes when he walks. In addition, he states that 
his right hand shakes more so than his left, and he 
is right handed. He believes it to be worse when 
not moving but states there are times when he spills 
his morning coffee because of the tremors. He has 
retired but states he is not able to play tennis and 
golf any longer because of his motor symptoms. He 
denies syncope or presyncope, difﬁculty swallow-
ing, changes to his voice, or memory difﬁculties. 
His past medical history is signiﬁcant for hyperten-
sion and hypercholesterolemia. His medications are 
hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg daily, ezetimibe 10 mg 
daily, and lovastatin 40 mg daily. He drinks a glass 
of wine with dinner daily and is a lifelong non-
smoker. On physical examination, he has masked 
facies. His gait shows decreased arm swing with 
slow shufﬂing steps. He turns en bloc. A pill-rolling 
tremor is present on the right side. There is cog-
wheel rigidity bilaterally. Eye movements are full 
and intact. There is no orthostatic hypotension. A
 48. (Continued)
 brain MRI with gadolinium shows no evidence 
of mass lesions, hydrocephalus, or vascular disease. 
You diagnose the patient with Parkinson’s disease. 
The patient asks about his prognosis and likelihood 
of disability. Which of the following is correct 
about the clinical course and treatment of Parkin-
son’s disease?
A. Early initiation of therapy with levodopa predisposes 
an individual to a higher likelihood of dyskinesias 
early in the disease.
B. Early therapy with bilateral deep-brain stimulation 
of the subthalamic nuclei slows the progression of 
Parkinson’s disease.
C. Initial treatment with a dopamine agonist such as 
pramipexole is likely to be effective in control-
ling his motor symptoms for 1–3 years before the 
addition of levodopa or another agent is necessary.
D. Levodopa should be started immediately to prevent 
the development of disabling rigidity.
E. MAO inhibitors are contraindicated once the diag-
nosis of Parkinson’s disease is established.
49. All of the following statements regarding restless 
legs syndrome (RLS) are true EXCEPT:
A. Dopamine antagonists are effective therapy.
B. Most patients develop symptoms before the age of 
30 years old.
C. RLS may cause sleep disorder and daytime hyper-
somnolence.
D. RLS is more common in Asians than in the general 
U.S. population.
E. Symptoms may involve the upper extremity.
50. Which of the following statements regarding 
Alzheimer’s disease is true?
A. Delusions are uncommon.
B. It accounts for over half of the cases of signiﬁcant 
memory loss in patients over 70 years of age.
C. It typically presents with rapid (<6 months) signiﬁ-
cant memory loss.
D. Less than 5% of patients present with nonmemory 
complaints.
E. Pathologically, the most notable abnormalities are in 
the cerebellar regions.
51. A 63-year-old man seeks medical attention be-
cause of progressive weakness of the left foot and 
lower leg over the last 6 months. The progression 
has been gradual, and he only noticed it initially 
because of cramping and tripping while playing 
squash. He denies back pain. His only medication 
is atorvastatin. On physical examination, vital signs 
are normal and the only abnormalities are on neu-
rologic examination. His left leg strength is notably
Review and Self-Assessment
810
 51. (Continued)
 diminished in the hip ﬂexors, hip adductors, quad-
riceps, and calf muscles. There is atrophy of the 
quadriceps and calf. His ankle and knee reﬂexes are 
increased on the left. He has subtle weakness on 
the right quadriceps. There are no sensory abnor-
malities in light touch, pinprick, temperature, or 
proprioception. There are occasional fasciculations 
of the abdominal muscles. Before diagnosing the 
patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
all of the following alternative diagnoses should be 
ruled out EXCEPT:
A. Cervical spondylosis
B. Foramen magnum tumor
C. Lead poisoning
D. Multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block
E. Vitamin C deﬁciency
52. A 42-year-old woman seeks medical attention for 
a 5- to 6-week history of marked fatigue that is 
affecting her work. She reports that she has felt 
some general fatigue but her symptoms are most 
notable when she starts moving around during the 
day. She has taken her pulse and it feels fast to her. 
She reports no loss of consciousness, but does say 
that she feels lightheaded and has blurred vision 
after arising. Sitting or lying down improves the 
symptoms. She has no notable past medical history 
and takes no medications other than a calcium/vi-
tamin supplement. On physical examination, her 
supine heart rate is 90 beats/min with blood pres-
sure of 110/70 mmHg. Upon standing her heart 
rate increases to 130 beats/min and is regular, and 
her blood pressure standing is 115/75 mmHg. She 
reports lightheadedness during the episode. An 
ECG while symptomatic shows sinus tachycardia 
without any conduction abnormalities. Which of 
the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Addison’s disease
B. Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy
C. Diabetic neuropathy
D. Multisystem atrophy
E. Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
53. A 45-year-old male complains of severe right arm 
pain. He gives a history of having slipped on the 
ice and severely contusing his right shoulder ap-
proximately 6 months ago. Soon thereafter, he de-
veloped sharp, knifelike pain in the right arm and 
forearm that lasted for a few months. There was 
some arm swelling and warmth. He was evaluated 
in an urgent care setting. There were no radio-
graphic abnormalities and he was not treated. Since 
the injury, the pain and swelling have persisted. 
 53. (Continued)
 Physical examination reveals a right arm that is 
more moist and hairy than the left arm. There is no 
speciﬁc weakness or sensory change. However, the 
right arm is clearly more edematous than the left, 
and the skin appears shiny and cool. The patient’s 
pain most likely is due to:
A. Acromioclavicular separation
B. Brachial plexus injury
C. Cervical radiculopathy
D. Complex regional pain syndrome
E. Subclavian vein thrombosis
54. Which of the following criteria suggests the diag-
nosis of trigeminal neuralgia?
A. Deep-seated, steady facial pain
B. Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
C. Objective signs of sensory loss on physical examina-
tion
D. Response to gabapentin therapy
E. None of the above
55. A 72-year-old woman presents with recurrent epi-
sodes of incapacitating facial pain lasting from sec-
ond to minutes and then dissipating. The episodes 
occur usually twice per day, usually without warn-
ing, but are also occasionally provoked by brushing 
of her teeth. On physical examination, she appears 
well with normal vital signs. Detailed cranial nerve 
examination reveals no sensory or motor abnormali-
ties. The remainder of her neurologic examination 
is normal. What is the next step in her management?
A. Brain MRI
B. Brain MRI plus carbamazepine therapy
C. Carbamazepine therapy
D. Glucocorticoid therapy
E. Referral to Otolaryngology for surgical cure
56. A 72-year-old female presents with brief, intermit-
tent excruciating episodes of lancinating pain in the 
lips, gums, and cheek. Touching the lips or moving 
the tongue can initiate these intense spasms of pain. 
The results of a physical examination are normal. 
MRI of the head is also normal. The most likely 
cause of this patient’s pain is:
A. Acoustic neuroma
B. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
C. Meningioma
D. Trigeminal neuralgia
E. Facial nerve palsy
57. A 33-year-old woman presents with rapidly wors-
ening pain at the top of the back over the last 3 days. 
The pain is not relieved by lying down or by wear-
ing a soft neck collar. She notes that the pain is 
much worse with movement and has woken her 
Review and Self-Assessment
811
 57. (Continued)
 from sleep. The pain is severe and is impeding her 
daily activities. She denies any arm pain or weak-
ness. There is no history of prior back or neck pain, 
trauma, or arthritis. She works as a postal delivery 
agent and her only physical activity is walking. She 
is monogamous with her husband and has no illicit 
activities. Her family history is notable for an aunt 
and mother with breast cancer. Her MRI is shown 
in Figure 57. Which is the most likely diagnosis? 
A. Cervical spondylosis
B. Hematomyelia
C. Metastatic breast cancer
D. Spinal epidural abscess
E. Spinal epidural hematoma
58. A 34-year-old female complains of lower extrem-
ity weakness for the last 3 days. She has noted pro-
gressive weakness in the lower extremities with loss 
of sensation “below the belly button” and inconti-
nence. She had had some low-grade fevers for the last 
week. She denies recent travel. Past medical history is 
unremarkable. Physical examination is notable for a 
sensory level at the level of the umbilicus. The lower 
extremities show +3/5 strength bilaterally proximally 
and distally. Reﬂexes, cerebellar examination, and 
mental status are normal. All of the following are ap-
propriate steps in evaluating this patient EXCEPT:
A. Antinuclear antibodies
B. Electromyography
C. Lumbar puncture
D. MRI of the spine
E. Viral serologies
59. Which of the following statements about syringo-
myelia is true?
A. More than half the cases are associated with Chiari 
malformations.
 59. (Continued)
B. Symptoms typically begin in middle age.
C. Vibration and position sensation are usually diminished.
D. Syrinx cavities are always congenital.
E. Neurosurgical decompression is usually effective in 
relieving the symptoms.
60. A 17-year-old adolescent is seen in the clinic sev-
eral weeks after he suffered a concussion during a 
high-school football game. At the time of the event, 
paramedics reported that he experienced no loss of 
consciousness but was confused for a period of about 
10 minutes. Head imaging was normal. He describes a 
generalized headache that is present all the time since 
his trauma, and he occasionally feels dizzy. His mother 
is concerned that he is having a hard time concentrat-
ing in school and seems depressed to her lately; she 
describes him as being very energetic prior to his con-
cussion. The patient’s physical examination is entirely 
normal except for a somewhat ﬂattened affect. Which 
of the following statements regarding his condition is 
true?
A. He has an excellent prognosis.
B. He meets the criteria for postconcussive syndrome 
and should improve over 1–2 months.
C. He should avoid contact sports for 2 weeks.
D. He is most likely malingering.
E. Low-dose narcotics should be started for headache.
61. A 68-year-old man is brought to the clinic by his 
wife for evaluation. She has noticed that over past 
2–3 months her husband has had increasingly slowed 
thinking and a change in his personality in that he has 
become very withdrawn. His only complaint is a mild 
but persistent, diffuse headache. There is no history of 
head trauma, prior neurologic or psychiatric disease, 
or family history of dementia. Physical examination is 
only notable for a moderate cognitive deﬁcit with a 
mini-mental examination of 19/30. His head CT is 
shown in Figure 61. What is the most likely diagnosis?
FIGURE 57
FIGURE 61
Review and Self-Assessment
812
 61. (Continued)
A. Acute epidural hematoma
B. Acute subarachnoid hemorrhage
C. Alzheimer’s disease
D. Chronic subdural hematomas
E. Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
62. A 76-year-old nursing home resident is brought to 
the local emergency department after falling out of 
bed. The fall was not witnessed; however, she was 
suspected to have hit her head. She is not respon-
sive to verbal or light tactile stimuli. At baseline she is 
able to converse but is frequently disoriented to place 
and time. She has a medical history that includes stable 
coronary disease, mild emphysema, and multi-infarct 
dementia. Immediately after triage she is taken for a 
CT scan of the head. Which of the following is true 
regarding head injury and hematomas?
A. More than 80% of patients with subdural hemato-
mas will experience a lucid interval prior to loss of 
consciousness.
B. Epidural hematomas generally arise from venous 
sources.
C. Epidural hematomas are common among the elderly 
with minor head trauma.
D. Most patients presenting with epidural hematomas 
are unconscious.
E. Subdural hematomas lead to rapid increases in intra-
cranial pressure and can require arterial ligation.
63. A 49-year-old man is admitted to the hospital 
with a seizure. He does not have a history of sei-
zures and he currently takes no medications. He 
has AIDS and is not under any care at this time. 
His physical examination is most notable for small, 
shoddy lymphadenopathy in the cervical region. 
A head CT shows a ring-enhancing lesion in the 
right temporal lobe, with edema but no mass effect. 
A lumbar puncture shows no white or red blood 
cells, and the Gram stain is negative. His serum 
Toxoplasma IgG is positive. He is treated with pyri-
methamine, sulfadiazine, and levetiracetam. After 2 
weeks of therapy the central nervous system (CNS) 
lesion has not changed in size and he has not had 
any more seizures. All microbiologic cultures and 
viral studies, including Epstein-Barr virus DNA 
from the cerebrospinal ﬂuid, are negative. What 
is the best course of action for this patient at this 
time?
A. Continue treatment for CNS toxoplasmosis.
B. Dexamethasone.
C. IV acyclovir.
D. Stereotactic brain biopsy.
E. Whole-brain radiation therapy.
64. A young man with a history of a low-grade as-
trocytoma comes into your ofﬁce complaining of 
weight gain and low energy. He is status post resec-
tion of his low-grade astrocytoma and had a course 
of whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) 1 year 
ago. A laboratory workup reveals a decreased 
morning cortisol level of 1.9 μg/dL. In addition to 
depressed adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
function, which of the following hormones is most 
sensitive to damage from whole-brain radiation 
therapy?
A. Growth hormone
B. Follicle-stimulating hormone
C. Prolactin
D. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
65. A 37-year-old woman with a history of 6 months 
of worsening headache is admitted to the hospi-
tal after a tonic-clonic seizure that occurred at 
work. The seizure lasted a short time and termi-
nated spontaneously. On examination her vital 
signs are normal, she is somnolent but awake, 
and there are no focal abnormalities. Her initial 
CT scan showed no acute hemorrhage but was 
abnormal. An MRI is obtained and is shown in 
Figure 65. What is the most likely diagnosis in 
this patient? 
A. Brain abscess
B. Glioblastoma
C. Low-grade astrocytoma
D. Meningioma
E. Oligodendroglioma
FIGURE 65
Review and Self-Assessment
813
66. All of the following hormones are produced by the 
anterior pituitary EXCEPT:
A. Adrenocorticotropic hormone
B. Growth hormone
C. Oxytocin
D. Prolactin
E. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
67. A 22-year-old woman who is otherwise healthy 
undergoes an uneventful vaginal delivery of a full-
term infant. One day postpartum she complains of 
visual changes and severe headache. Two hours 
after these complaints, she is found unresponsive 
and profoundly hypotensive. She is intubated and 
placed on mechanical ventilation. Her blood pres-
sure is 68/28 mmHg, heart rate is regular at 148 
beats/min, and oxygen saturation is 95% on FiO2 
0.40. Physical exam is unremarkable. Her laborato-
ries are notable for glucose of 49 mg/dL and nor-
mal hematocrit and white blood cell count. Which 
of the following is most likely to reverse her hypo-
tension?
A. Activated drotrecogin alfa
B. Hydrocortisone
C. Piperacillin/tazobactam
D. T4
E. Transfusion of packed red blood cells
68. A 45-year-old man reports to his primary care phy-
sician that his wife has noted coarsening of his facial 
features over several years. In addition, he reports 
low libido and decreased energy. Physical examina-
tion shows frontal bossing and enlarged hands. An 
MRI conﬁrms that he has a pituitary mass. Which 
of the following screening tests should be ordered 
to diagnose the cause of the mass?
A. 24-hour urinary free cortisol
B. ACTH assay
C. Growth hormone level
D. Serum IGF-1 level
E. Serum prolactin level
69. All of the following are potential causes of hyper-
prolactinemia EXCEPT:
A. Cirrhosis
B. Hirsutism
C. Nipple stimulation
D. Opiate abuse
E. Rathke’s cyst
70. A 28-year-old woman presents to her primary 
care physician’s ofﬁce with 1 year of amenorrhea. 
She reports mild galactorrhea and headaches. Al-
though she is sexually active, a urine pregnancy test
 70. (Continued)
 is negative. Serum prolactin level is elevated and she is 
subsequently diagnosed with a microscopic prolacti-
noma. Which of the following represents the primary 
goal of bromocriptine therapy for her condition?
A. Control of hyperprolactinemia
B. Reduction in tumor size
C. Resolution of galactorrhea
D. Restoration of menses and fertility
E. All of the above
71. A 58-year-old man undergoes severe head trauma 
and develops pituitary insufﬁciency. After recov-
ery, he is placed on thyroid hormone, testosterone, 
glucocorticoids, and vasopressin. On a routine visit 
he questions his primary care physician regard-
ing potential growth hormone deﬁciency. All of 
the following are potential signs or symptoms of 
growth hormone deﬁciency EXCEPT:
A. Abnormal lipid proﬁle
B. Atherosclerosis
C. Increased bone mineral density
D. Increased waist:hip ratio
E. Left ventricular dysfunction
72. A 75-year-old man presents with development of 
abdominal obesity, proximal myopathy, and skin 
hyper pigmentation. His laboratory evaluation shows 
a hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis. Cushing’s syn-
drome is suspected. Which of the following state-
ments regarding this syndrome is true?
A. Basal ACTH level is likely to be low.
B. Circulating corticotropin-releasing hormone is likely 
to be elevated.
C. Pituitary MRI will visualize all ACTH-secreting 
tumors.
D. Referral for urgent performance of inferior petrosal 
venous sampling is indicated.
E. Serum potassium level below 3.3 mmol/L is sugges-
tive of ectopic ACTH production.
73. A 23-year-old college student is followed in the 
student health center for medical management of 
panhypopituitarism after resection of craniopha-
ryngioma as a child. She reports moderate compli-
ance with her medications but feels generally well. 
A TSH is checked and is below the limits of de-
tection of the assay. Which of the following is the 
next most appropriate action?
A. Decrease levothyroxine dose to half of current dose.
B. Do nothing.
C. Order free T4 level.
D. Order MRI of her brain.
E. Order thyroid uptake scan.
Review and Self-Assessment
814
74. A 23-year-old woman presents to the clinic com-
plaining of months of weight gain, fatigue, amen-
orrhea, and worsening acne. She cannot precisely 
identify when her symptoms began, but she reports 
that without a change in her diet she has noted a 
12.3-kg weight gain over the past 6 months. She 
has been amenorrheic for several months. On ex-
amination she is noted to have truncal obesity with 
bilateral purplish striae across both ﬂanks. Cush-
ing’s syndrome is suspected. Which of the follow-
ing tests should be used to make the diagnosis?
A. 24-hour urine free cortisol
B. Basal adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
C. Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) level at 8 am
D. Inferior petrosal venous sampling
E. Overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test
75. A patient visited a local emergency room 1 week 
ago with a headache. She received a head MRI, 
which did not reveal a cause for her symptoms, but 
the ﬁnal report states, “An empty sella is noted. 
Advise clinical correlation.” The patient was dis-
charged from the emergency department with 
instructions to follow up with her primary care 
physician as soon as possible. Her headache has re-
solved, and the patient has no complaints; however, 
she comes to your ofﬁce 1 day later very concerned 
about this unexpected MRI ﬁnding. What should 
be the next step in her management?
A. Diagnose her with subclinical panhypopituitarism, 
and initiate low-dose hormone replacement.
B. Reassure her and follow laboratory results closely.
C. Reassure her and repeat MRI in 6 months.
D. This may represent early endocrine malignancy—
whole-body positron emission tomography/CT is 
indicated.
E. This MRI ﬁnding likely represents the presence of a 
benign adenoma—refer to neurosurgery for resection.
76. All of the following are frequent initial symptoms 
of multiple sclerosis EXCEPT:
A. Optic neuritis
B. Paresthesias
C. Sensory loss
D. Visual loss
E. Weakness
77. Which of the following is the most common clini-
cal classiﬁcation of multiple sclerosis?
A. Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy
B. Primary progressive
C. Progressive relapsing
D. Relapsing/remitting
E. Secondary progressive
78. Lumbar puncture should be preceded by CT or 
MRI in all of the following subsets of patients sus-
pected of having meningitis EXCEPT those with:
A. Depressed consciousness
B. Focal neurologic abnormality
C. Known central nervous system (CNS) mass lesion
D. Positive Kernig’s sign
E. Recent head trauma
79. A 78-year-old man with diabetes mellitus presents with 
fever, headache, and altered sensorium. On physical 
exam his temperature is 40.2°C (104.4°F), heart rate 
is 103 beats/min, and blood pressure is 84/52 mmHg. 
His neck is stiff and he has photophobia. His cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid (CSF) examination shows 2100 cells/μL, 
with 100% neutrophils, glucose 10 mg/dL, and pro-
tein 78 mg/dL. CSF Gram stain is negative. In addi-
tion to empiric antibacterial antibiotics, initial therapy 
should include which of the following?
A. Acyclovir
B. Dexamethasone after antibiotics
C. Dexamethasone prior to antibiotics
D. IV γ globulin
E. Valacyclovir
80. Which of the following groups of patients should 
receive empirical antibiotic therapy that includes 
coverage of Listeria monocytogenes in cases of pre-
sumed meningitis?
A. Immunocompromised patients
B. Elderly patients
C. Infants
D. All of the above
81. Which of the following medicines has been most 
commonly implicated in the development of non-
infectious chronic meningitis?
A. Acetaminophen
B. Acyclovir
C. β-lactam antibiotics
D. Ibuprofen
E. Phenobarbital
82. Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) has been 
diagnosed in which of the following populations?
A. Family members with well-deﬁned germ-line muta-
tions leading to autosomal dominant inheritance of a 
fatal neurodegenerative disease
B. New Guinea natives practicing cannibalism
C. Patients accidentally inoculated with infected mate-
rial during surgical procedures
D. Worldwide, in sporadic cases, mostly during the 
ﬁfth and sixth decades of life
E. Young adults in Europe thought to have been ex-
posed to tainted beef products
Review and Self-Assessment
815
83. The presence of startle myoclonus in a 60-year-
old man with rapidly progressive deﬁcits in cortical 
dysfunction is which of the following?
A. Neither sensitive nor speciﬁc for Creutzfeldt-Jacob 
disease (CJD) but does represent grounds to explore 
further for this condition with an electroencephalo-
gram (EEG)
B. Neither sensitive nor speciﬁc for CJD but does rep-
resent grounds to explore further for this condition 
with an EEG and brain MRI
C. Sensitive but not speciﬁc for CJD and is not enough 
to prompt a further workup for this condition unless 
other clinical criteria are met
D. Speciﬁc but not sensitive for CJD and should there-
fore prompt immediate referral for brain biopsy to 
conﬁrm the diagnosis
E. Virtually diagnostic for CJD, and further workup in-
cluding EEG, brain MRI, and perhaps brain biopsy 
serves only a prognostic purpose
84. A 55-year-old woman presents with progressive 
incoordination. Physical examination is remarkable 
for nystagmus, mild dysarthria, and past pointing 
on ﬁnger-to-nose testing. She also has an unsteady 
gait. MRI reveals atrophy of both lobes of the cer-
ebellum. Serologic evaluation reveals the presence 
of anti-Yo antibody. Which of the following is the 
most likely cause of this clinical syndrome?
A. Non–small cell cancer of the lung
B. Small cell cancer of the lung
C. Breast cancer
D. Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
E. Colon cancer
85. A 24-year-old man presents for evaluation of foot-
drop. He has noted that for the last several months, 
he has had difﬁculty picking his feet up to walk 
up stairs and over thresholds. His right leg is more 
affected than his left leg. He has not noted any sen-
sory changes. He has several family members with 
similar complaints. His exam is notable for distal 
leg weakness with reduced sensation to light touch 
in both lower extremities. Knee and ankle jerk re-
ﬂexes are unobtainable. Calves are reduced in size 
bilaterally. Upper extremity examination is normal. 
Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome
B. Fabry disease
C. Guillain-Barré syndrome
D. Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy
E. Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
86. A 57-year-old immigrant from Vietnam is evalu-
ated by his primary caregiver for dysesthesias that 
have been present in his hands and feet for the
 86. (Continued)
 past several weeks. He also reports some difﬁculty 
walking. His past medical history is notable for 
hypertriglyceridemia, tobacco abuse, and a re-
cently discovered positive PPD with sputum that 
is smear-negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
His medications include niacin, aspirin, and iso-
niazid. Which of the following is likely to reverse 
his symptoms?
A. Cobalamin
B. Levothyroxine
C. Neurontin
D. Pregabalin
E. Pyridoxine
87. A 52-year-old woman with long-standing, poorly 
controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus is evaluated for 
a sensation of numbness in her ﬁngers and toes, as 
if she is wearing gloves and socks all the time. She 
also reports tingling and burning in the same loca-
tion, but no weakness. Her symptoms have been 
intermittently present for the last several months. 
After a thorough evaluation, nerve biopsy is ob-
tained and demonstrates axonal degeneration, en-
dothelial hyperplasia, and perivascular inﬂamma-
tion. Which of the following statements regarding 
this condition is true?
A. Autonomic neuropathy is rarely seen in combina-
tion with sensory neuropathy.
B. The presence of retinopathy or nephropathy does 
not portend increased risk for diabetic neuropathy.
C. This is the most common cause of peripheral neu-
ropathy in developed countries.
D. Tight glucose control from now on will reverse her 
neuropathy.
E. None of the above is true.
88. All the following cause primarily a sensory neu-
ropathy EXCEPT:
A. Acromegaly
B. Critical illness
C. HIV infection
D. Hypothyroidism
E. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency
89. A 50-year-old male complains of weakness and 
numbness in the hands for the last month. He de-
scribes paresthesias in the thumb and the index and 
middle ﬁngers. The symptoms are worse at night. 
He also describes decreased grip strength bilaterally. 
He works as a mechanical engineer. The patient de-
nies fevers, chills, or weight loss. The examination 
is notable for atrophy of the thenar eminences bi-
laterally and decreased sensation in a median nerve 
distribution. You consider the diagnosis of carpal
Review and Self-Assessment
816
 89. (Continued)
 tunnel syndrome. All the following are causes of 
carpal tunnel syndrome EXCEPT:
A. Amyloidosis
B. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
C. Diabetes mellitus
D. Hypothyroidism
E. Rheumatoid arthritis
90. A 27-year-old woman is diagnosed with Guillain-
Barré syndrome after presenting with ﬂaccid paralysis 
and sensory disturbance several weeks after a diarrheal 
illness. Which of the following bacteria have been im-
plicated in cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome?
A. Bartonella henselae
B. Campylobacter jejuni
C. Escherichia coli
D. Proteus mirabilis
E. Tropheryma whippelii
91. A 34-year-old female complains of weakness and 
double vision for the last 3 weeks. She has also not-
ed a change in her speech, and her friends tell her 
that she is “more nasal.” She has noticed decreased 
exercise tolerance and difﬁculty lifting objects and 
getting out of a chair. The patient denies pain. The 
symptoms are worse at the end of the day and with 
repeated muscle use. You suspect myasthenia gravis. 
All the following are useful in the diagnosis of myas-
thenia gravis EXCEPT:
A. Acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibodies
B. Edrophonium
C. Electrodiagnostic testing
D. Muscle-speciﬁc kinase (MuSK) antibodies
E. Voltage-gated calcium channel antibodies
92. A 38-year-old female patient with facial and ocular 
weakness has just been diagnosed with myasthenia 
gravis. You intend to initiate therapy with anticho-
linesterase medications and glucocorticoids. All of 
the following tests are necessary before instituting 
this therapy EXCEPT:
A. MRI of mediastinum
B. Puriﬁed protein derivative skin test
C. Lumbar puncture
D. Pulmonary function tests
E. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
93. All of the following lipid-lowering agents are as-
sociated with muscle toxicity EXCEPT:
A. Atorvastatin.
B. Ezetimibe.
C. Gemﬁbrozil.
D. Niacin.
E. All of the above are associated with muscle toxicity.
94. All of the following endocrine conditions are as-
sociated with myopathy EXCEPT:
A. Hypothyroidism.
B. Hyperparathyroidism.
C. Hyperthyroidism.
D. Acromegaly.
E. All of the above are associated with myopathy.
95. A 34-year-old woman seeks evaluation for weak-
ness. She has noted tripping when walking, par-
ticularly in her left foot, for the past 2 years. She 
recently also began to drop things, once allowing a 
full cup of coffee to spill onto her legs. In this set-
ting, she also feels as if the appearance of her face 
has changed over the course of many years, stat-
ing that she feels as if her face is becoming more 
hollow and elongated, although she hasn’t lost any 
weight recently. She has not seen a physician in 
many years and has no past medical history. Her 
only medications are a multivitamin and calcium 
with vitamin D. Her family history is signiﬁcant for 
similar symptoms of weakness in her brother who 
is 2 years older. Her mother, who is 58 years old, 
was diagnosed with mild weakness after her brother 
was evaluated, but is not symptomatic. On physi-
cal examination, the patient’s face appears long and 
narrow with wasting of the temporalis and masseter 
muscles. Her speech is mildly dysarthric, and the 
palate is high and arched. Strength is 4/5 in the 
intrinsic muscles of the hand, wrist extensors, and 
ankle dorsiﬂexors. After testing handgrip strength, 
you notice that there is a delayed relaxation of the 
muscles of the hand. What is the most likely diag-
nosis?
A. Acid maltase deﬁciency (Pompe’s disease)
B. Becker muscular dystrophy
C. Duchenne muscular dystrophy
D. Myotonic dystrophy
E. Nemaline myopathy
96. An elevation in which of the following serum en-
zymes is the most sensitive indicator of myositis?
A. Aldolase
B. Creatinine kinase
C. Glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase
D. Glutamate pyruvate transaminase
E. Lactate dehydrogenase
97. A 64-year-old woman is evaluated for weakness. 
For several weeks she has had difﬁculty brushing 
her teeth and combing her hair. She has also noted 
a rash on her face. Examination is notable for a 
heliotrope rash and proximal muscle weakness. 
Serum creatine kinase (CK) is elevated and she is
Review and Self-Assessment
817
 97. (Continued)
 diagnosed with dermatomyositis. After evaluation 
by a rheumatologist, she is found to have anti-Jo-1 
antibodies. She is also likely to have which of the 
following ﬁndings?
A. Ankylosing spondylitis
B. Inﬂammatory bowel disease
C. Interstitial lung disease
D. Primary biliary cirrhosis
E. Psoriasis
98. A 63-year-old woman is evaluated for a rash on her 
eyes and fatigue for 1 month. She reports difﬁculty 
with arm and leg strength and constant fatigue, but 
no fevers or sweats. She also notes that she has a red 
discoloration around her eyes. She has hypothy-
roidism but is otherwise well. On examination she 
has a heliotrope rash and proximal muscle weak-
ness. A diagnosis of dermatomyositis is made after 
demonstration of elevated serum creatinine kinase 
and conﬁrmatory EMGs. Which of the following 
studies should be performed as well to look for as-
sociated conditions?
A. Mammogram
B. Serum antinuclear antibody measurement
C. Stool examination for ova and parasites
D. Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins
E. Titers of antibodies to varicella zoster
99. You are seeing your patient with polymyositis for 
follow-up. He has been taking prednisone at high 
doses for 2 months, and you initiated mycophe-
nolate mofetil at the last clinic visit for a steroid-
sparing effect. He began a steroid taper 2 weeks 
ago. His symptoms were predominantly in the 
lower extremities and face, and he has improved 
considerably. He no longer needs a cane and his 
voice has returned to normal. Laboratory data 
show a creatine kinase (CK) of 1300 U/L, which 
is unchanged from 2 months ago. What is the most 
appropriate next step in this patient’s management?
A. Continue current management.
B. Continue high-dose steroids with no taper.
C. Switch mycophenolate to methotrexate.
D. Repeat muscle biopsy.
100. A 45-year-old woman who is 6 months post–liver 
transplant is admitted to the hospital after two grand 
mal seizures in the last 45 minutes. For the last day 
she has complained about headache and confu-
sion. Her medications include diltiazem, cyclospo-
rine, prednisone, and mycophenolate mofetil. She 
is now awake but somnolent. Her vital signs are 
normal except a blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg.
100. (Continued)
 There is bilateral afferent pupillary defect, and she 
reports she cannot see out of either eye. Hearing is 
intact. There is no nuchal rigidity. Her cyclospo-
rine level is therapeutic. The FLAIR image of her 
MRI is shown in Figure 100. Which of the fol-
lowing is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acoustic neuroma
B. Calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity
C. Panhypopituitarism
D. Streptococcal meningitis
E. Tuberculous meningitis
101. A 77-year-old man undergoes coronary artery by-
pass grafting for refractory angina and three-vessel 
disease. Prior to surgery he still worked as a classics 
professor at a university teaching a renowned course 
on Dante’s “Inferno.” One month after surgery, 
his cardiac status is normal and his exercise toler-
ance is better than presurgery. However, his wife re-
ports that he seems depressed and is often confused. 
His short-term memory is poor and he exhibits no 
enthusiasm for teaching. He has no fever or night 
sweats. Current medications include lovastatin and 
lisinopril. His physical examination is normal except 
for poor performance on serial 7 subtraction and 
only recalling 1 or 3 objects at 15 minutes. Which of 
the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Multiple sclerosis
B. Post–cardiac bypass brain injury
C. Streptococcal meningitis
D. Variant Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease
E. West Nile virus encephalitis
FIGURE 100
Review and Self-Assessment
818
102. A 24-year-old man is recovering from ARDS due 
to severe inﬂuenza A infection. During his compli-
cated 3-week course of respiratory failure, he was 
placed on high-frequency ventilation and prone 
positioning necessitating paralysis and heavy seda-
tion. Passive splints were placed on his upper and 
lower extremities. He is now extubated and awake, 
requiring only nasal oxygen. While starting his 
physical therapy, it is noted that he has right foot-
drop and numbness on the lateral leg. Additional 
examination reveals a unilateral right motor defect 
in foot dorsiﬂexion with intact inversion. There is 
sensory loss of the lateral aspect of the leg below the 
knee extending to the dorsum of the foot. The rest 
of the neurologic examination of the right leg and 
foot appears normal. Which of the following is the 
most likely etiology of his defects?
A. Cauda equina syndrome
B. Femoral nerve injury
C. L4 radiculopathy
D. L5 radiculopathy
E. Peroneal nerve injury
103. In the CDC diagnostic criteria for chronic fatigue 
syndrome, in addition to clearly delineated ﬁnd-
ings of fatigue, all of the following symptoms or 
ﬁndings must be concurrently present for at least 6 
months EXCEPT:
A. Delusional disorder
B. Impaired memory or concentration
C. Muscle pain
D. Sore throat
E. Tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes
104. Which of the following is a beneﬁcial therapy for 
chronic fatigue syndrome?
A. Bupropion
B. Cognitive behavioral therapy
C. Doxycycline
D. Fluoxetine
E. Olanzapine
105. A 26-year-old woman presents to the emergency 
department complaining of shortness of breath 
and chest pain. These symptoms began abruptly 
and became progressively worse over 10 minutes, 
prompting her to call 911. Over this same peri-
od, the patient describes feeling her heart pound-
ing and states that she felt like she was dying. She 
feels lightheaded and dizzy. It is currently about 
20 minutes since the onset of symptoms and the 
severity has abated, although she continues to feel 
not back to her baseline. She denies any immediate 
precipitating cause, although she has been under
105. (Continued)
 increased stress as her mother has been hospitalized re-
cently with advanced breast cancer. She does not take 
any medications and has no medical history. She de-
nies tobacco, alcohol, or drug use. On initial examina-
tion, she appears somewhat anxious and diaphoretic. 
Her initial vital signs show a heart rate of 108 beats/
min, blood pressure 122/68 mmHg, and respiratory 
rate 20 breaths/min. She is afebrile. Her examination 
is normal. Her arterial blood gas shows a pH of 7.52, 
PaCO2 of 28 mmHg, and PaO2 of 116 mmHg. The 
ECG is normal as is a chest radiograph. What is the 
next best step in the management of this patient?
A. Initiate therapy with alprazolam 0.5 mg four times daily.
B. Initiate therapy with ﬂuoxetine 20 mg daily.
C. Perform a CT pulmonary angiogram.
D. Reassure the patient and suggest medical and/
or psychological therapy if symptoms recur on a 
frequent basis.
E. Refer for cognitive behavioral therapy.
106. All of the following antidepressant medications 
are correctly paired with their class of medication 
EXCEPT:
A. Duloxetine—Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
B. Fluoxetine—Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
C. Nortriptyline—Tricyclic antidepressant
D. Phenelzine—Monoamine oxidase inhibitor
E. Venlafaxine—Mixed norepinephrine/serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor and receptor blocker
107. A 42-year-old woman seeks your advice regarding 
symptoms concerning for post-traumatic stress disor-
der. She was the victim of a home invasion 6 months 
previously where she was robbed and beaten by a 
man at gunpoint. She thought she was going to die 
and was hospitalized with multiple blunt force injuries 
including a broken nose and zygomatic arch. She now 
states that she is unable to be alone in her home and 
frequently awakens with dreams of the event. She is 
irritable with her husband and children and cries fre-
quently. She has worsening insomnia and often stays 
awake most of the night watching out her window 
because she is afraid her assailant will return. She has 
begun drinking a bottle of wine nightly to help her 
fall asleep, although she notes that this has worsened 
her nightmares in the early morning hours. You con-
cur that post-traumatic stress disorder is likely. What 
treatment do you recommend for this patient?
A. Avoidance of alcohol
B. Cognitive behavioral therapy
C. Paroxetine 20 mg daily
D. Trazodone 50 mg nightly
E. All of the above
Review and Self-Assessment
819
108. A 36-year-old man is being treated with venlafax-
ine 150 mg twice daily for major depression. He 
has currently been on the medication for 4 months. 
After 2 months, his symptoms were inadequately 
controlled, necessitating an increase in the dose of 
venlafaxine from 75 mg twice daily. He has had 
one prior episode of major depression when he 
was 25. At that time, he was treated with ﬂuoxetine 
80 mg daily for 12 months, but found the sexual 
side effects difﬁcult to tolerate. He asks when he 
can safely discontinue his medication. What is your 
advice to the patient?
A. He should continue on the medication indeﬁnitely 
as his depression is likely to recur.
B. The current medication should be continued for a 
minimum of 6–9 months following control of his 
symptoms.
C. The medication can be discontinued safely if he 
establishes a relationship with a psychotherapist who 
will monitor his progress and symptoms.
D. The medication can be discontinued safely now as 
his symptoms are well controlled.
E. The medication should be switched to ﬂuoxetine to 
complete 12 months of therapy, as this was previ-
ously effective for him.
109. Which of the following will lead to a faster rate of 
absorption of alcohol from the gut into the blood?
A. Coadministration with a carbonated beverage
B. Concentration of alcohol of more than 20% by 
volume
C. Concurrent intake of a high-carbohydrate meal
D. Concurrent intake of a high-fat meal
E. Concurrent intake of a high-protein meal
110. Which of the following best reﬂects the effect of 
alcohol on neurotransmitters in the brain?
A. Decreases dopamine activity
B. Decreases serotonin activity
C. Increases γ-aminobutyric acid activity
D. Stimulates muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
E. Stimulates N-methyl-D-aspartate excitatory gluta-
mate receptors
111. In an individual without any prior history of alco-
hol intake, what serum concentration of ethanol 
(in grams per deciliter) would likely result in death?
A. 0.02
B. 0.08
C. 0.28
D. 0.40
E. 0.60
112. All of the following statements regarding the epi-
demiology and genetics of alcoholism are true 
EXCEPT:
A. Among individuals who have demonstrated alcohol 
abuse, about 10% will develop true alcohol depen-
dence.
B. Approximately 60% of the risk for alcohol abuse 
disorders is attributed to genetics.
C. Children of alcoholics have a 10-fold higher risk of 
alcohol abuse and dependence.
D. The presence of a mutation of aldehyde dehydro-
genase that results in intense ﬂushing with alcohol 
consumption confers a decreased risk of alcohol 
dependence.
E. The lifetime risk of alcohol dependence in most 
Western countries is about 10–15% for men and 
5–8% for women.
113. A 42-year-old man with alcohol dependence is admit-
ted to the hospital for acute pancreatitis. Upon admis-
sion, he has an abdominal CT scan that shows edema 
without necrosis or hemorrhage of the pancreas. He 
is treated with IV ﬂuids with dextrose, multivitamins, 
thiamine 50 mg daily, pain control, and bowel rest. 
He typically drinks 24 12-ounce beers daily. Forty-
eight hours after admission, you are called because 
the patient is febrile and combative with the nursing 
staff. His vital signs demonstrate a heart rate of 132 
beats/min, blood pressure of 184/96 mmHg, respira-
tory rate of 32 breaths/min, temperature of 38.7°C 
(101.7°F), and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. 
He is agitated, diaphoretic, and pacing his room. He is 
oriented to person only. His neurologic examination 
appears nonfocal, although he does not cooperate. He 
is tremulous. What is the next step in the manage-
ment of this patient?
A. Administer a bolus of 1 L of normal saline and thia-
mine 100 mg IV.
B. Administer diazepam 10–20 mg IV followed by 
bolus doses of 5–10 mg as needed until the patient is 
calm but able to be aroused.
C. Perform an emergent head CT.
D. Perform two peripheral blood cultures and begin 
treatment with imipenem 1 g IV every 8 hours.
E. Place the patient in four-point restraints and treat 
with haloperidol 5 mg IV.
114. A 48-year-old woman is recovering from alcohol 
dependence and requests medication to help pre-
vent relapse. She has a medical history of stroke oc-
curring during a hypertensive crisis. Which of the 
following medications could be considered?
A. Acamprosate
B. Disulﬁram
Review and Self-Assessment
820
114. (Continued)
C. Naltrexone
D. A and C
E. All of the above
115. What is the most common initial illicit drug of 
abuse among U.S. adolescents?
A. Benzodiazepines
B. Heroin
C. Marijuana
D. Methamphetamines
E. Prescription narcotics
116. A 32-year-old woman is admitted to the hospi-
tal for drainage and treatment of a soft tissue ab-
scess of her left forearm. She uses IV heroin on a 
daily basis, often spending $100 or more per day 
on drugs. Upon admission, she has a 4 × 2-cm 
ﬂuctuant mass in the left forearm associated with 
fevers to 39.3°C (102.7°F) and tachycardia. The 
abscess is drained and packed, and the patient is 
initiated on therapy with IV clindamycin. About 
10 hours after admission, you are called to the pa-
tient’s bedside for a change in the patient’s condi-
tion. You are suspecting narcotic withdrawal. All 
of the following symptoms are consistent with this 
diagnosis EXCEPT:
A. Hyperthermia
B. Hypotension
C. Piloerection
D. Sweating
E. Vomiting
117. A 24-year-old man is brought to the emergency 
department by emergency medical services (EMS) 
about 2 hours after an intentional overdose of sus-
tained-release oxycodone that was taken in con-
junction with alcohol. Upon arrival at the scene,
117. (Continued)
 emergency medical technicians found an empty 
bottle of sustained-release oxycodone tablets with 
a dose of 20 mg. It is unknown how many pills the 
patient ingested, but the prescription was written 
for 60 tablets. The patient was unresponsive with a 
respiratory rate of 4 breaths/min, blood pressure of 
80/56 mmHg, heart rate of 65 beats/min, and oxy-
gen saturation of 86% on room air. The patient was 
intubated in the ﬁeld and naloxone 2 mg IM was 
administered. He is currently intubated and unre-
sponsive without spontaneous respiration above 
the set ventilator rate. His blood pressure is 82/50 
mmHg and heart rate is 70 beats/min. Which of 
the following is most appropriate at the present 
time in the evaluation and treatment of this patient?
A. Activated charcoal
B. IV saline bolus 1 L followed by repeated 500–1000 mL 
boluses to maintain adequate blood pressure
C. Naloxone continuous infusion at a rate of 0.4 mg/h
D. Urine drug screen, acetaminophen levels, and blood 
alcohol content
E. All of the above
118. Which of the following statements is TRUE with 
regard to the chronic effects of marijuana use?
A. Chronic use of marijuana is associated with low 
testosterone levels.
B. Chronic use of marijuana is the primary cause of 
amotivational syndrome.
C. Marijuana use is associated with an increased risk of 
psychotic symptoms in individuals with a past his-
tory of schizophrenia.
D. Physical and psychological tolerance does not de-
velop in chronic users of marijuana.
E. There is no withdrawal syndrome associated with 
cessation of marijuana use.
ANSWERS
1 and 2. The answers are D and D, respectively. 
(Chap. 1) The ability to perform a thorough neurologic ex-
amination is an important skill for all internists to master. A 
careful neurologic examination can localize the site of the 
lesion and is important in directing further workup. The 
components of the neurologic examination include mental 
status, cranial nerves, motor, sensory, gait, and coordina-
tion. The motor examination is further characterized by 
appearance, tone, strength, and reﬂexes. Pronator drift is a 
useful tool for determining if upper extremity weakness is 
present. In this test, an individual is asked to stand with both 
arms fully extended and parallel to the ﬂoor while closing 
his or her eyes. If the arms ﬂex at the elbows or ﬁngers 
or there is pronation of the forearm, this is considered a 
positive test. Other tests of motor strength include tests of 
maximal effort in a speciﬁc muscle or muscle group. Most 
commonly this type of strength testing is graded from 0 (no 
movement) to 5 (full power) with varying degrees of weak-
ness noted against resistance. However, many individuals 
ﬁnd it more practical to use qualitative grading of strength, 
such as paralysis, severe weakness, moderate weakness, mild 
weakness, or full strength.
 Babinski sign is a sign of upper motor neuron disease 
above the level of the S1 vertebra and is characterized 
Review and Self-Assessment
821
by paradoxical extension of the great toe with fanning 
and extension of the other toes as well. Dysdiadochoki-
nesis refers to the inability to perform rapid alternating 
movements and is a sign of cerebellar disease. Lhermitte 
symptom causes electric shock–like sensations in the ex-
tremities associated with neck ﬂexion. It has many causes 
including cervical spondylosis and multiple sclerosis. 
Romberg sign is performed with an individual standing 
with feet together and arms at the side. The individual is 
then asked to close his or her eyes. If the individual begins 
to sway or fall, this is considered a positive test and is a sign 
of abnormal proprioception.
3. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 1) This patient likely has metastatic disease to the 
cervical spinal cord. The patient’s symptoms are bilateral 
with sparing of the cranial nerves and normal mental sta-
tus, localizing the lesion below the level of the brainstem 
and cerebrum. The patient demonstrates mixed upper and 
lower motor neuron signs with decreased sphincter tone 
and a positive Babinski sign, placing the lesion at the level 
of the spinal cord. As the weakness is involving both the 
arms and legs, this would indicate a lesion in the lower 
cervical or upper thoracic spine. Symptoms of abnormali-
ties at the level of the neuromuscular junction include bi-
lateral weakness that can include the face having normal 
sensation.
4. The answer is C.
(Chap. 4) Appropriate and timely evaluation is needed to 
determine if a subarachnoid hemorrhage is present as it 
can be rapidly fatal if undetected. The procedure of choice 
for initial diagnosis is a CT of the head without IV con-
trast. On the CT, blood in the subarachnoid space would 
appear whiter compared to the surrounding brain tissue. 
The CT of the head is most sensitive when it is performed 
shortly after the onset of symptoms, but declines over sev-
eral hours. It can also demonstrate the presence of mass 
effect and midline shift, factors that increase the severity 
of the underlying hemorrhage. In the situation where the 
CT head is negative but clinical suspicion is high, a lum-
bar puncture can be performed. This may demonstrate 
increased numbers of red blood cells that do not clear with 
successive aliquots of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. If the lumbar 
puncture is performed more than 12 hours after a small 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, then the red blood cells may 
begin to decompose, leading to xanthochromia—a yel-
low to pink coloration of cerebrospinal ﬂuid that can be 
measured spectrographically. A basic CT of the head with 
IV contrast is rarely useful in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
as the brightness of the contrast material may make it dif-
ﬁcult to identify blood in the subarachnoid space. How-
ever, a CT angiography that is performed with IV contrast 
can be useful in identifying the aneurismal vessel leading 
to the bleeding. Classic angiography is a more direct way 
to visualize the anatomy of the cranial vasculature and is 
now often combined with interventional procedures to 
coiling a bleeding vessel. Transcranial Doppler ultrasound 
is a test that measures the velocity of blood ﬂow through 
the cranial vasculature. It is used in some centers follow-
ing subarachnoid hemorrhage to assess for the develop-
ment of vasospasm, which can worsen ischemia leading to 
increased damage to brain tissue following subarachnoid 
hemorrhage.
5. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 4) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is gener-
ated from the interaction between the hydrogen protons 
in biologic tissues, the magnetic ﬁeld, and the radiofre-
quency (Rf) of waves generated by the coil placed next to 
the body part of interest. The Rf pulses transiently excite 
the protons of the body with a subsequent return to the 
equilibrium energy state, a process known as relaxation. 
During relaxation, the protons release Rf energy creat-
ing an echo that is then transformed via Fourier analysis 
to generate the MR image. The two relaxation rates that 
inﬂuence the signal intensity of the image are T1 and T2. 
T1 refers to the time in milliseconds that it takes for 63% 
of protons to return to their baseline state. T2 relaxation 
is the time for 63% of protons to become dephased ow-
ing to interactions among nearby protons. The intensity 
of the signal is also inﬂuenced by the interval between 
Rf pulses (TR) and the time between the Rf pulse and 
the signal reception (TE). T1-weighted images are pro-
duced by keeping both TR and TE relatively short, while 
T2-weighted images require long TR and TE times. Fat 
and subacute hemorrhages have relatively shorted TR and 
TE times and thus appear more brightly on T1-weighted 
images. Structures with more water such as cerebrospinal 
ﬂuid or edema conversely have long T1 and T2 relaxation 
times, resulting in higher signal intensity on T2-weighted 
images. T2 images are also more sensitive for detecting 
demyelination, infarction, or chronic hemorrhage.
 FLAIR stands for ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recov-
ery and is a type of T2-weighted image that suppresses 
the high-intensity signal of CSF. Because of this, images 
created by the FLAIR technique are more sensitive to de-
tecting water-containing lesions or edema than the stan-
dard spin images.
 MR angiography refers to several different techniques 
that are useful for assessing vascular structures, but does 
not provide details of the underlying brain parenchyma.
6. The answer is E.
(Chap. 4) For many years, MRI imaging was considered 
the modality of choice for patients with renal insufﬁciency 
because it does not lead to acute renal failure. However, 
gadolinium was recently linked to a rare disorder called 
nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis. This newly described dis-
order results in widespread ﬁbrosis in skin, skeletal muscle, 
bone, lungs, pleura, pericardium, myocardium, and many 
other tissues. Histologically, thickened collagen bundles 
Review and Self-Assessment
822
are seen in the deep dermis of the skin with increased 
numbers of ﬁbrocytes and elastic ﬁbers. There is no 
known medical treatment for nephrogenic systemic ﬁbro-
sis (NSF), although improvement may be seen following 
kidney transplantation. It has only recently been linked 
to the receipt of gadolinium-containing contrast agents 
with a typical onset between 5 and 75 days following ad-
ministration of the contrast. The incidence of NSF fol-
lowing administration of gadolinium in individuals with a 
glomerular ﬁltration rate of less than 30 mL/min may be 
as high as 4% and is thus considered absolutely contraindi-
cated in individuals with severe renal dysfunction.
 Pseudohypocalcemia can occur following administra-
tion of gadolinium in individuals with renal dysfunction, 
but not true hypocalcemia. This occurs because of an in-
teraction of the contrast dye with standard colorimetric 
assays for serum calcium that are commonly used. If ion-
ized calcium is measured it would be normal, often in the 
face of very low levels of serum calcium.
 The other reported complications can be seen follow-
ing administration of iodinated contrast that is used for 
CT imaging. The most common complication of CT 
imaging outside of allergic reactions is the development 
of worsening renal function or acute renal failure. The 
risk of this can be minimized if the patient is adequately 
hydrated. Lactic acidosis is a rare but dreaded side effect 
of iodinated contrast that has been linked to the coad-
ministration of metformin in diabetic patients. Typically 
a patient is asked to hold metformin for 48 hours before 
and after a CT scan. The reason for the development of 
lactic acidosis is actually related to the development of 
renal insufﬁciency and a subsequent buildup of lactic acid. 
In very rare instances, administration of iodinated contrast 
can unmask hyperthyroidism.
7. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 5) While seldom diagnostic, the EEG can often 
provide clinically useful information in comatose patients. 
In patients with an altered mental state or some degree of 
obtundation, the EEG tends to become slower as con-
sciousness is depressed, regardless of the underlying cause. 
The EEG generally slows in metabolic encephalopathies, 
and triphasic waves may be present. The ﬁndings do not 
permit differentiation of the underlying metabolic distur-
bance but help to exclude other encephalopathic processes 
by indicating the diffuse extent of cerebral dysfunction. 
As the depth of coma increases, the EEG becomes non-
reactive and may show a burst-suppression pattern, with 
bursts of mixed-frequency activity separated by intervals 
of relative cerebral inactivity. The EEG is usually normal 
in patients with locked-in syndrome and helps in distin-
guishing this disorder from the comatose state with which 
it is sometimes confused clinically. Epileptiform activ-
ity characterized by bursts of abnormal discharges con-
taining spikes or sharp waves may be useful to diagnose 
and treat nonconvulsive status in a presumed comatose 
patient. Patients with herpes simplex encephalitis may 
show a characteristic pattern of focal (often in the tempo-
ral regions) or lateralized periodic slow-wave complexes. 
Periodic lateralizing epileptiform discharges (PLEDs) are 
commonly found with acute hemispheric pathology such 
as a hematoma, abscess, or rapidly expanding tumor.
8. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 10) Syncope is a common medical complaint that 
occurs when there is global cerebral hypoperfusion. Syn-
cope accounts for 3% of all emergency department vis-
its and 1% of all hospitalizations. Additionally, it is esti-
mated that 35% of all individuals will experience at least 
one syncopal event in their lifetimes. The most common 
cause of syncope in young adults is neurally mediated 
syncope. The incidence of neurally mediated syncope is 
higher in females and has a familial predisposition. Neu-
rally mediated syncope represents a complex reﬂex arc of 
the autonomic nervous system and inherently requires 
an intact autonomic nervous system to occur. The ﬁnal 
pathway of neurally mediated syncope is a surge of para-
sympathetic activity with inhibition of the sympathetic 
nervous system. This results in hypotension with accom-
panying bradycardia. Syncope occurs when blood ﬂow to 
the brain drops abruptly. Triggers of the reﬂex pathway 
are varied. Vasovagal syncope is one category without a 
clearly deﬁned trigger but can occur with intense emo-
tions, strong odors, or orthostatic stress. Individuals who 
faint at the sight of blood experience vasovagal syncope. 
Neurally mediated syncope can also be brought about by 
speciﬁc situations such as cough, micturition, swallowing, 
or carotid sensitivity. The primary symptoms of neurally 
mediated syncope include premonitory symptoms such as 
lightheadedness and dizziness as well as parasympathetic 
symptoms such as diaphoresis, pallor, hyperventilation, 
pallor, and palpitation. Myoclonic jerks of the extremi-
ties can occur and be difﬁcult to distinguish from seizure 
activity. On rare occasions, an individual may experience 
urinary incontinence, but fecal incontinence does not oc-
cur. Individuals usually recover very quickly from neural-
ly mediated syncope with a rapid return to consciousness 
and previous level of alertness. Reassurance and avoidance 
of triggers are the primary treatments. Liberal intake of 
ﬂuids and salt expand plasma volume and are protective 
against syncopal events. In randomized controlled tri-
als, isometric counterpressure maneuvers (leg crossing or 
handgrip) are also protective. In patients with refractory 
syncope, ﬂudrocortisone, beta-blockers, or vasoconstrict-
ing agents have been used with clinical success, although 
there are no clinical trial data to support their use.
9. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 10) The cornerstone of the evaluation of syn-
cope is to perform an thorough history and examination. 
Clues to the cause of syncope include the presence of 
prodromal symptoms, presence of injury, and eyewit-
Review and Self-Assessment
823
ness accounts of the event. Neurally mediated synco-
pe is one of the most common causes of syncope and 
often has preceding lightheadedness or dizziness. Ortho-
static hypotension is also frequently preceded by symp-
toms of lightheadedness and is more common in older 
individuals. Likewise, older individuals are at greater risk 
of cardiac syncope. Cardiac syncope needs to be consid-
ered as cardiac syncope caused by structural heart disease 
or primary arrhythmia is associated with an increased 
risk of sudden cardiac death. Cardiac syncope is more 
likely to occur without warning symptoms and is more 
likely to have associated serious injury. Hypoglycemia 
can present with syncope as well and needs to be consid-
ered in this case. Neurologic causes of syncope include 
seizures and vertebrobasilar insufﬁciency. A cerebrovas-
cular accident does not commonly cause syncope be-
cause bihemispheric disruption of cerebral blood ﬂow is 
necessary to cause loss of consciousness.
 In this individual, evaluation should include ﬁngerstick 
glucose measurement, orthostatic blood pressures, and an 
electrocardiogram. Tilt table testing can be considered, 
particularly because the patient has had recurrent episodes 
of syncope in the past. A head CT scan, however, should 
not be a routine part of the evaluation of syncope unless 
there is concern about a head injury that occurred as a 
result of the syncope.
10. The answer is D.
(Chap. 11) Dizziness is a common complaint affecting 
approximately 20% of the population over the course 
of the year. Most dizziness is benign, self-limited, and 
must be distinguished from vertigo. Although dizziness 
is often described as a sensation of lightheadedness, ver-
tigo is more often described as a sensation that the room 
is spinning. Vertigo is most commonly from peripheral 
causes affecting labyrinths of the inner ear or the ves-
tibular nerve. However, central lesions of the brainstem 
and cerebellum can also lead to vertigo. Features of the 
history and physical examination can be useful in de-
termining central versus peripheral causes of vertigo. 
By history, deafness or tinnitus is typically absent with 
central lesions. On physical examination, spontaneous 
nystagmus is most often a sign of central vertigo, al-
though it can be seen with acute vestibular neuritis. Spe-
ciﬁc patterns of vertigo that are characteristic of lesions 
in the cerebellar pathways are vertical nystagmus with a 
downward fast phase (downbeat nystagmus) and hori-
zontal nystagmus that changes direction with gaze (gaze-
evoked nystagmus). Alternatively, in peripheral vertigo, 
nystagmus typically is provoked by positional maneuvers 
and can be inhibited by visual ﬁxation. Visual ﬁxation 
does not, however, inhibit nystagmus in central lesions. 
Finally, central causes of nystagmus are more likely to be 
associated with other symptoms that would lead one to 
suspect a central cause. These include hiccups, diplopia, 
cranial neuropathies, and dysarthria.
11. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 11) The symptoms and physical examination of this 
patient are typical of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
(BPPV). Episodes of BPPV are typically quite brief, lasting 
no more than 1 minute, and are brought about by changes 
in position relative to gravity. Typical movements that elicit 
the vertigo are lying down, rolling over in bed, rising from 
the supine position, and tilting the head to look upward. 
The labyrinth of the inner ear is responsible for process in-
formation with regards to position and movement. It con-
sists of three semicircular canals: the superior canal, the pos-
terior canal, and the horizontal canal. BPPV results when 
calcium carbonate crystals called otoconia migrate from 
the utricle of the inner ear into the semicircular canals. By 
far, the most commonly affected canal is the posterior one. 
When this occurs, vertigo is accompanied by nystagmus 
that beats upward and torsionally toward the affected ear. 
This can be brought about by the Dix-Hallpike maneuver, 
which is described in the clinical scenario. Less commonly, 
the horizontal canal is affected, leading to horizontal nys-
tagmus. The primary treatment of BPPV is repositioning 
therapy that uses gravity to remove the otoconia from the 
affected canal. The Epley maneuver is the most common 
repositioning procedure.
 The history and physical examination are not consis-
tent with a central cause of vertigo; therefore, a brain 
MRI is not indicated. Methylprednisolone is the primary 
treatment of acute vestibular neuritis if used within the 
ﬁrst 3 days of symptoms. Acute vestibular neuritis often 
presents with more prolonged symptoms that persist even 
when there is no movement of the head. Most patients 
recover spontaneously, but when used early, methylpred-
nisolone will decrease the duration of symptoms. There is 
no indication for the use of antiviral therapy unless there is 
obvious herpes zoster infection. Likewise, the symptoms 
are not consistent with migrainous vertigo, which would 
be persistent for hours and not be affected by positional 
changes. Thus, the use of rizatriptan would not be helpful.
12. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 12) Complaints of weakness in a patient have a 
multitude of causes, and it is important to perform a thor-
ough history and physical examination to help localize 
the site of weakness. Lower motor neuron diseases occur 
when there is destruction of the cell bodies of the lower 
motor neurons in the brainstem or the anterior horn of 
the spinal cord. Lower motor neuron diseases can also oc-
cur because of direct axonal dysfunction and demyelin-
ation. The primary presenting symptoms are those of distal 
muscle weakness such as tripping or decreased hand grip 
strength. When a motor neuron becomes diseased, it may 
discharge spontaneously, leading to muscle fasciculations 
that are not seen in disease of the upper motor neurons or 
myopathies. Additionally, on physical examination, lower 
motor neuron disease leads to decreases in muscle tone 
and decreased or absent deep tendon reﬂexes. Over time, 
Review and Self-Assessment
824
severe muscle atrophy can occur. A Babinski sign should 
not be present. If there is evidence of a Babinski sign in 
the presence of lower motor neuron disease, this should 
raise the suspicion of a disorder affecting both upper and 
lower motor neurons such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
13. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 13) Approximately 15% of individuals older 
than 65 years have an identiﬁable gait disorder. By age 
80 years, 25% of individuals require a mechanical aid to 
assist ambulation. Proper maintenance of gait requires 
a complex interaction between central nervous system 
centers to integrate postural control and locomotion. 
The cerebellum, brainstem, and motor cortex simulta-
neously process information regarding the environment 
and purpose of the motion to allow for proper gait and 
avoidance of falls. Any disorder affecting either sensory 
input regarding the environment or central nervous 
system output has the potential to affect gait. In most 
case series, the most common cause of gait disorders is a 
sensory deﬁcit. The causes of sensory deﬁcits can quite 
broad and include peripheral sensory neuropathy from 
a variety of causes, including diabetes mellitus, periph-
eral vascular disease, and vitamin B12 deﬁciency, among 
many others. Other common causes of gait disorders 
include myelopathy and multiple cerebrovascular in-
farcts. Although Parkinson’s disease is almost inevitably 
marked by gait abnormalities, it occurs less commonly 
in the general population than the previously discussed 
disorders. Likewise, cerebellar degeneration is frequently 
associated with gait disturbance but is a less common 
disorder in the general population.
14. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 13) Characteristics found during the neurologic 
examination can assist with the localization of disease in 
gait disorders. In this case, the patient presents with signs 
of a frontal gait disorder or parkinsonism. The speciﬁc 
characteristics that would be seen with a frontal gait dis-
order are a wide-based stance with slow and short shuf-
ﬂing steps. The patient may have difﬁculty rising from a 
chair and has a slow, hesitating start. Likewise, there is 
great difﬁcult with turning with multiple steps required to 
complete a turn. The patient has very signiﬁcant postural 
instability. However, cerebellar signs are typically absent. 
Romberg sign may or may not be positive, and seated cer-
ebellar testing results are normal, including heel-to-shin 
testing and rapid alternating movements. Additionally, 
there should otherwise be normal muscle bulk and tone 
without sensory or strength deﬁcits. The most common 
cause of frontal gait disorders (sometimes known as gait 
apraxia) is cerebrovascular disease, especially small vessel 
subcortical disease. Communicating hydrocephalus also 
presents with a gait disorder of this type. In some indi-
viduals, the gait disorder precedes other typical symptoms 
such as incontinence or mental status change.
 Alcoholic cerebellar degeneration and multiple system 
atrophy present with signs of cerebellar ataxia. Character-
istics of cerebellar ataxia include a wide-based gait with 
variable velocity. Gait initiation is normal, but the pa-
tient is hesitant during turns. The stride is lurching and 
irregular. Falls are a late event. The heel-to-shin test is 
abnormal, and the Romberg test is variably positive.
 Neurosyphilis and lumbar myelopathy are examples of 
sensory ataxia. Sensory ataxia presents with frequent falls. 
The gait with sensory ataxia, however, is narrow based. 
Often the patient is noted to be looking down while 
walking. The patient tends to walk slowly but have path 
deviation. Gait is initiated normal, but the patient may 
have some difﬁculty with turning. The Romberg test is 
typically unsteady and may result in falls.
15. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 16) Delirium is an acute confusional state that most 
frequently occurs in the context of an acute medical ill-
ness. Fluctuating levels of cognitive function with a par-
ticular deﬁcit of attention are the primary clinical features 
of delirium. All levels of cognitive function, however, are 
invariably involved, including memory, language, and ex-
ecutive functioning. Other common associated symptoms 
are sleep–wake disturbances, hallucinations or delusions, 
affect changes, and changes in heart rate or blood pressure. 
Delirium remains a clinical diagnosis and is believed to 
affect as much as 50% of hospitalized patients. For elderly 
patients in intensive care, the incidence rises to between 
70 and 87%. However, it has been estimated the diagnosis 
is missed in one-third of individuals with delirium. Once 
thought of as an acute but benign condition, increasing 
research is demonstrating delirium to have persisting ef-
fects on cognition and functioning. Delirium typically 
is short lived, but some episodes of delirium can last for 
weeks, months, or even years. When delirium persists for 
longer periods of time, it is thought to represent inad-
equate treatment of the cause of delirium or permanent 
neuronal damage from the episode. Delirium also has sig-
niﬁcant associated morbidity and mortality. A single epi-
sode of delirium in hospitalized patients has been associ-
ated with an in-hospital mortality rate as high as 25–33%. 
However, the increased mortality is not simply limited 
to the hospital stay. Individuals experiencing delirium in 
the hospital have increased mortality for the next several 
months to years. In addition, these individuals experience 
a longer hospital length of stay and are less likely to return 
to functional independence. Individuals who experience 
delirium are more likely to be discharged to nursing home 
care and are at increased risk of rehospitalization.
16. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 16) This patient has features of acute delirium, 
which can be precipitated by many causes in hospitalized 
patients. Broad categories of causes of delirium include 
toxins, medication reactions, metabolic disorders, infec-
Review and Self-Assessment
825
tions, endocrine disorders, cerebrovascular disorders (es-
pecially hypertensive encephalopathy), autoimmune dis-
orders, seizures, neoplastic disorders, and hospitalization. 
Although the list of causes is broad, the initial history 
and physical examination are important to establish po-
tential etiologies of delirium and guide further workup. 
In most patients with delirium, it is difﬁcult to obtain an 
accurate history; therefore, it is important to seek out a 
spouse of family member to outline the history further. 
In this case, there are features that could suggest alco-
hol withdrawal (hypertension, tachycardia, fevers, trem-
ors), and one should clarify his alcohol intake with his 
wife. Another primary consideration in determining the 
etiology of a delirium episode is the time course over 
which it evolves and the current medications. Particu-
larly in older hospitalized individuals, common medica-
tions used as sleep aids, such as diphenhydramine, can 
have a paradoxical effect with delirium and agitation. It 
is estimated that as many as one-third of episodes of de-
lirium in hospitalized patients are the result of medica-
tions. Worsening infection also needs to be considered 
because the change in the patient’s vital signs could be 
indicative of an infectious source, although the elevated 
blood pressure is not consistent with this. Because the 
patient has required oxygen during his hospitalization, 
it is important to check an oxygen saturation or arterial 
blood gas because acute hypoxemia or hypercarbia can 
precipitate delirium. Likewise, given the patient’s his-
tory of diabetes mellitus, a ﬁngerstick glucose is neces-
sary because hypoglycemia could also lead to alterations 
in mental status with evidence of tachycardia, tremor, 
and diaphoresis. Other initial tests to consider in an indi-
vidual with delirium are electrolytes and basic liver and 
kidney function. Although commonly ordered, brain 
imaging is most often not helpful in the evaluation of 
delirium.
17. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) Confusion is deﬁned as a mental and behavioral 
state of reduced comprehension, coherence, and capacity 
to reason. Delirium is used to describe an acute confusional 
state. Delirium often goes unrecognized despite clear evi-
dence that it is often a cognitive manifestation of many 
medical and neurologic illnesses. Delirium is a clinical di-
agnosis that may be hyperactive (e.g., alcohol withdrawal) 
or hypoactive (e.g., opiate intoxication). There is often 
dramatic ﬂuctuation between states. Delirium is associated 
with a substantial mortality rate with in-hospital mortal-
ity estimates ranging from 25–33%. Overall estimates of 
delirium in hospitalized patients range from 15–55% with 
higher rates in elderly adults. Patients in the intensive care 
unit have especially high rates of delirium, ranging from 
70–87%. The clinic setting represents the lowest risk. 
Postoperative patients, especially after hip surgery, have 
an incidence of delirium that is somewhat higher than pa-
tients admitted to the medical wards.
18. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 17) Alterations in consciousness are among the most 
common reasons for admission to the hospital and occur 
frequently in seriously ill patients. When evaluating a pa-
tient with an alteration in consciousness, one must have a 
framework for understanding the spectrum of arousability 
one may encounter. Coma is a frequently misunderstood 
term that refers to a deep sleeplike state from which a 
patient cannot be aroused. A stuporous patient can be 
aroused brieﬂy with noxious stimuli, and drowsiness refers 
to a patient who can be aroused easily with maintenance 
of attention for brief periods. Other conditions that alter 
the ability of a patient to respond appropriately to stimuli 
and are often confused with coma. A vegetative state is 
an awake but unresponsive condition that can occur in a 
patient who has emerged from a coma and is associated 
with extensive bilateral cerebral damage. A patient in a 
vegetative state can open the eyes spontaneously and of-
ten track objects. In addition, the patient has retention 
of respiratory and autonomic functions as well as spon-
taneous movement of extremities. However, meaningful 
responses to stimuli do not occur, and a vegetative state is 
sometimes referred to as an “awake coma.” This patient 
would be characterized as being in a persistent vegeta-
tive state because the duration of the vegetative state has 
been 1 year. At this point, the likelihood of meaningful 
recovery of mental faculties is almost zero. A minimally 
conscious state is a less severe manifestation of bilateral 
cerebral injury. A patient in a minimally conscious state 
may have rudimentary vocal or motor behaviors and min-
imal responses to external stimuli. Other conditions that 
may be misinterpreted as a coma include akinetic mutism, 
catatonia, abulia, and locked-in syndrome.
19. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 17) Brain death occurs when all cerebral function 
has ceased but the patient continues to have cardiac activ-
ity while supported by artiﬁcial means. If an individual is 
determined to have brain death, life-sustaining therapies 
are withdrawn. Although this can occur without the con-
sent of the family, certainly it is important to have open 
communication with the family to allow the withdrawal 
of care without conﬂict. Most hospitals have developed 
speciﬁc protocols to diagnose a patient with brain death. 
Three essential elements should be demonstrated for the 
diagnosis of brain death. First, the patient should wide-
spread cortical damage with complete absence of response 
to all external stimuli. Second, the patient should have no 
evidence of brainstem function with loss of oculovestibu-
lar and corneal reﬂexes and absent pupillary reaction to 
light. Finally, there should be no evidence of medullary 
activity manifested by apnea. When a brain death exami-
nation is performed, the patient should not be receiving 
any medications that could alter consciousness. The bed-
side examination will conﬁrm absence of responsiveness 
to stimuli and lack of brainstem function. Apnea testing 
Review and Self-Assessment
826
is the ﬁnal examination in the performance of the brain 
death examination. This test is important for document-
ing the absence of medullary function. For an apnea test 
result to be accurate, the carbon dioxide must be allowed 
to rise to a level that would stimulate respiration. When 
performing the test, the patient is preoxygenated with 
100% oxygen, which is sustained throughout the test. At 
this point, ventilator support is stopped. In the absence of 
any respiration, carbon dioxide rises by 2–3 mmHg/min, 
and it is necessary for arterial partial pressure of carbon 
dioxide to rise to between 50–60 mmHg. If the patient 
has a normal PaCO2 before beginning the apnea test, the 
test would typically need to continue for at least 5 minutes 
to be valid. The patient is observed for respiratory effort, 
and a PaCO2 level is often measured at the end of the test 
to document that the rise in carbon dioxide is adequate to 
stimulate respiration. Some patients may have cardiovas-
cular instability that makes the performance of apnea test-
ing risky because one does not wish for the apnea test to 
lead to cardiovascular collapse. In this setting, an electro-
encephalogram demonstrating absence of electrical activ-
ity is used as an adjunctive diagnostic test. Newer methods 
of testing, including radionuclide brain scanning, cerebral 
angiography, and transcranial Doppler ultrasonography, 
may be used, but these tests are less well validated. In most 
cases, clinical evidence of brain death must be sustained 
for 6–24 hours before withdrawal of care.
20. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) Foraminal herniation, which forces the cer-
ebellar tonsils into the foramen magnum, leads to com-
pression of the medulla and subsequent respiratory arrest. 
Central transtentorial herniation occurs when the medial 
thalamus compresses the midbrain as it moves through the 
tentorial opening; miotic pupils and drowsiness are the 
classic clinical signs. A locked-in state is usually caused 
by infarction or hemorrhage of the ventral pons; other 
causes include Guillain-Barré syndrome and use of certain 
neuromuscular blocking agents. Catatonia is a semi-awake 
state seen most frequently as a manifestation of psychotic 
disorders such as schizophrenia. Third-nerve palsies arise 
from an uncal transtentorial herniation in which the an-
terior medial temporal gyrus herniates into the anterior 
portion of the tentorial opening anterior to the adjacent 
midbrain. Coma may occur because of compression of 
the midbrain.
21. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 18) When evaluating someone who reports dif-
ﬁculty with language, it is important to assess speech in 
several different domains, which are spontaneous speech, 
comprehension, repetition, naming, reading, and writ-
ing. Anomia refers to the inability to name common ob-
jects and is the most common ﬁnding in patients with 
aphasia. Indeed, anomia is present in all types of aphasia 
except pure word deafness or pure alexia. Anomia can 
present in many fashions, including complete an inability 
to name, provision of a related word (“pen” for “pen-
cil”), a description of the word (“a thing for writing”), 
or the wrong word. Fluency is assessed by listening to 
spontaneous speech. Fluency is decreased in Broca’s or 
global aphasia but is relatively preserved in other forms 
of aphasia. Comprehension is assessed by asking patients 
to follow conversation and provide simple answers (yes/
no, pointing to appropriate objects). The most common 
aphasia presenting with deﬁcits of comprehension is Wer-
nicke’s aphasia in which ﬂuent but nonsensical spontane-
ous speech (word salad) is present. Repetition asks patients 
to repeat a string of words, sentences, or a single word and 
is impaired in many types of aphasia. In addition, repeti-
tion of tongue twisters can be useful in the evaluation of 
dysarthria or palilalia as well. Alexia refers to the inability 
to read aloud or comprehend written language.
22. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 18) The parietofrontal area of the brain is respon-
sible for spatial orientation. The major components of the 
network include the cingulate cortex, posterior parietal 
cortex, and the frontal eye ﬁelds. In addition, subcorti-
cal areas in the striatum and thalamus are also important. 
Together, these systems integrate information to maintain 
spatial cognition, and a lesion in any of these areas can 
lead to hemispatial neglect. In neglect syndromes, three 
behavioral manifestations are seen: Sensory events in the 
neglected hemisphere have less overall impact; there is a 
paucity of conscious acts directed toward the neglected 
hemisphere; and the patient behaves as if the neglected 
hemisphere is devalued. In Figure 22, almost all of the 
A’s (the target) represented on the left half of the ﬁgure 
are missed. This is an example of a target detection task. 
Hemianopia alone is not sufﬁcient to cause this ﬁnding 
because the individual can turn his or her head left and 
right to identify the targets.
 Bilateral disorders of the parietofrontal area of the brain 
can lead to severe spatial disorientation known as Balint’s 
syndrome. In Balint’s syndrome, there is inability to or-
derly scan the environment (oculomotor apraxia) and in-
accurate manual reaching for objects (optic apraxia). A 
third ﬁnding in Balint’s syndrome is simultanagnosia. Si-
multanagnosia is the inability to integrate information in 
the center of the gaze with peripheral information. An ex-
ample is a target detection test in which only the A’s pres-
ent in the outer portion of the ﬁgure would be indicated. 
Individuals with this ﬁnding also tend to miss the larger 
objects in a ﬁgure and would not be able to accurately 
identify the target when it was made much larger than 
the surrounding letters. Construction apraxia refers to the 
inability to copy a simple line drawing such as a house or 
star and occurs most commonly in association with pa-
rietal lesions. Object agnosia is the inability to name a 
generic object or describe its use in contrast to anomia 
when an individual should be able to describe the use of 
Review and Self-Assessment
827
the object even if it cannot be named. The defect in the 
object agnosia is usually in the territory of the bilateral 
posterior cerebral arteries.
23. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 20) Shift work sleep disorder is a disorder of the 
circadian rhythm that is common in any individual who 
has to commonly work at night. At present, an estimated 7 
million individuals in the United States work permanently 
at night or on rotating shifts. Increasing research devoted 
to sleep disorders in night shift workers has demonstrat-
ed that the circadian rhythm never fully shifts to allow 
one to perform at full alertness at night. The reason for 
this is likely multifactorial and includes the fact that most 
individuals who work at night try to abruptly shift their 
sleep schedules to a more normal pattern on days when 
they are not working. Consequently, night shift work-
ers often have chronic sleep deprivation, increased length 
of time awake before starting work, and misalignment of 
their circadian phase with the intrinsic circadian phase. 
The results of this lead to decreased alertness and increased 
errors during night shifts. In an estimated 5–10% of indi-
viduals working night shifts, the excessive sleepiness dur-
ing the night and insomnia during the day are deemed to 
be clinically signiﬁcant. Strategies for treating shift work 
sleep disorder use a combination of behavioral and phar-
macologic strategies. Caffeine does promote wakefulness, 
but the effects are not long lasting, and tolerance develops 
over time. Brief periods of exercise frequently boost alert-
ness and can be used before starting a night shift or dur-
ing the shift at times of increased sleepiness. Many sleep 
experts support strategic napping during shifts for no more 
than 20 minutes at times of circadian nadirs. Naps longer 
than 20 minutes can lead to sleep inertia during which 
an individual may feel very disoriented and groggy and 
experience a decline in motor skills upon abrupt awaken-
ing from sleep. Bright lights before and during night shift 
work may improve alertness, but one must be careful to 
avoid bright lights in the morning after a night shift be-
cause light entrainment is a powerful stimulus of the in-
ternal circadian clock. If an individual is exposed to bright 
light in the morning, it will interfere with the ability to 
fall asleep during the day. Night shift workers should be 
encouraged to wear dark sunglasses in the morning on the 
way home. Sleep during the day is frequently disrupted 
in night shift workers. Creating a quiet, dark, and com-
fortable environment is important, and sleep should be a 
priority for the individual during the day. The only phar-
macologic therapy approved by the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration for treatment of shift work sleep disorder is 
modaﬁnil 200 mg taken 20–30 minutes before the start of 
a night shift. Modaﬁnil has been demonstrated to increase 
sleep latency and decrease attentional failures during night 
shifts but does not alleviate the feelings of excessive sleepi-
ness. Melatonin is not one of the recommended therapies 
for shift work sleep disorder. If used, it should be taken 
2–3 hours before bedtime rather than right before bed-
time to simulate the normal peaks and troughs of melato-
nin secretion.
24. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 20) This patient complains of symptoms that are 
consistent with restless legs syndrome (RLS). This disor-
der affects 1–5% of young to middle-aged individuals and 
as many as 20% of older individuals. The symptom of RLS 
is a nonspeciﬁc uncomfortable sensation in the legs that 
begins during periods of quiescence and is associated with 
the irresistible urge to move. Patients frequently ﬁnd it 
difﬁcult to describe their symptoms but usually describe 
the sensation as deep within the affected limb. Rarely is 
the sensation described as distinctly painful unless an un-
derlying neuropathy is also present. The severity of the 
disorder tends to wax and wane over time and tends to 
worsen with sleep deprivation, caffeine intake, pregnancy, 
and alcohol. Renal disease, neuropathy, and iron deﬁ-
ciency are known secondary causes of RLS symptoms. 
In this patient, correcting the iron deﬁciency is the best 
choice for initial therapy because this may entirely relieve 
the symptoms of RLS. For individuals with primary RLS 
(not related to another medical condition), the dopami-
nergic agents are the treatment of choice. Pramipexole 
or ropinirole is recommended as ﬁrst-line treatment. Al-
though carbidopa/levodopa is highly effective, individuals 
have a high risk of developing augmented symptoms over 
time with increasingly higher doses needed to control 
the symptoms. Other options for treating RLS include 
narcotics, benzodiazepines, and gabapentin. Hormone re-
placement therapy has no role in the treatment of RLS.
25. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 20) Narcolepsy is a sleep disorder characterized 
by excessive sleepiness with intrusion of rapid eye move-
ment (REM) sleep into wakefulness. Narcolepsy affects 
about one in 4000 individuals in the United States with a 
genetic predisposition. Recent research has demonstrated 
that narcolepsy with cataplexy is associated with low or 
undetectable levels of the neurotransmitter hypocretin 
(orexin) in the CSF. This neurotransmitter is released from 
a small number of neurons in the hypothalamus. Given 
the association of narcolepsy with the major histocompat-
ibility antigen human leukocyte antigen DQB1*0602, it 
is thought that narcolepsy is an autoimmune process that 
leads to destruction of the hypocretin-secreting neurons 
in the hypothalamus. The classic symptom tetrad of nar-
colepsy is (1) cataplexy, (2) hypnagogic or hypnopompic 
hallucinations, (3) sleep paralysis, and (4) excessive day-
time somnolence. Of these symptoms, cataplexy is the 
most speciﬁc for the diagnosis of narcolepsy. Cataplexy 
refers to the sudden loss of muscle tone in response to 
strong emotions. It most commonly occurs with laugh-
ter or surprise but may be associated with anger as well. 
Cataplexy can have a wide range of symptoms from mild 
Review and Self-Assessment
828
sagging of the jaw lasting for a few seconds to a complete 
loss of muscle tone lasting several minutes. During this 
time, individuals are aware of their surroundings and are 
not unconscious. This symptom is present in 76% of indi-
viduals diagnosed with narcolepsy and is the most speciﬁc 
ﬁnding for the diagnosis. Hypnagogic and hypnopompic 
hallucinations and sleep paralysis can occur from any cause 
of chronic sleep deprivation, including sleep apnea and 
chronic insufﬁcient sleep. Excessive daytime somnolence 
is present in 100% of individuals with narcolepsy but is 
not speciﬁc for the diagnosis because this symptom may 
be present with any sleep disorder as well as with chronic 
insufﬁcient sleep. The presence of two or more REM pe-
riods occurring during a daytime multiple sleep latency 
test is suggestive but not diagnostic of narcolepsy. Other 
disorders that may lead to presence of REM during short 
daytime nap periods include sleep apnea, sleep phase delay 
syndrome, and insufﬁcient sleep.
26. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 20; http://www.sleepfoundation.org/site/c.huIXKj-
M0IxF/b.2417355/k.143E/2002_Sleep_in_America_Poll.
htm, accessed May 12, 2011) Insomnia is the most com-
mon sleep disorder in the population. In the 2002 Sleep 
in America Poll, 58% of respondents reported at least one 
symptom of insomnia on a weekly basis, and one-third 
of individuals experience these symptoms on a nightly 
basis. Insomnia is deﬁned clinically as the inability to fall 
asleep or stay asleep, which leads to daytime sleepiness 
or poor daytime function. These symptoms occur despite 
adequate time and opportunity for sleep. Insomnia can 
be further characterized as primary or secondary. Primary 
insomnia occurs in individuals with an identiﬁable cause 
of insomnia and is often a long-standing diagnosis for 
many years. Within the category of primary insomnia is 
adjustment insomnia, which is typically of short duration 
with a well-deﬁned stressor. Secondary causes of insomnia 
include comorbid medical or psychiatric conditions and 
can be related to caffeine or illegal and prescribed drugs. 
Obstructive sleep apnea is thought to affect as many as 10–
15% of the population and is currently underdiagnosed in 
the United States. In addition, because of the rising inci-
dence of obesity, obstructive sleep apnea is also expected 
to increase in incidence over the coming years. Obstruc-
tive sleep apnea occurs when there is ongoing effort to 
inspire against an occluded oropharynx during sleep. It is 
directly related to obesity and has an increased incidence 
in men and in older populations. Narcolepsy affects 1 in 
4000 people and is caused by deﬁcit of hypocretin (orex-
in) in the brain. Symptoms of narcolepsy include a sudden 
loss of tone in response to emotional stimuli (cataplexy), 
hypersomnia, sleep paralysis, and hallucinations with sleep 
onset and waking. Physiologically, there is intrusion or 
persistence of rapid eye movement sleep during wake-
fulness that accounts for the classic symptoms of narco-
lepsy. Restless legs syndrome is estimated to affect 1–5% 
of young to middle-aged adults and as many as 10–20% 
of elderly adults. Restless legs syndrome is marked by 
uncomfortable sensations in the legs that are difﬁcult to 
describe. The symptoms have an onset with quiescence, 
especially at night, and are relieved with movement. De-
layed sleep phase syndrome is a circadian rhythm disorder 
that commonly presents with a complaint of insomnia and 
accounts for as much as 10% of individuals referred to the 
sleep clinic for evaluation of insomnia. In delayed sleep 
phase syndrome, the intrinsic circadian rhythm is delayed 
such that sleep onset occurs much later than normal. 
When allowed to sleep according to the intrinsic circadian 
rhythm, individuals with delayed sleep phase syndrome 
sleep normally and do not experience excessive somno-
lence. This disorder is most common in adolescence and 
young adulthood.
27. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 20) Parasomnias are abnormal behaviors or expe-
riences that arise from slow-wave sleep. Also known as 
confusional arousals, the electroencephalogram during a 
parasomnia event frequently shows persistence of slow-
wave (delta) sleep into arousal. Non–rapid eye movement 
(NREM) parasomnias may also include more complex be-
havior, including eating and sexual activity. Treatment of 
NREM parasomnias is usually not indicated, and a safe en-
vironment should be assured for the patient. When injury is 
likely to occur, treatment with a drug that decreases slow-
wave sleep will treat the parasomnia. Typical treatment is a 
benzodiazepine. There are no typical parasomnias that arise 
from stage I or stage II sleep. REM parasomnias include 
nightmare disorder and REM-behavior disorder. REM-
behavior disorder is increasingly recognized as associated 
with Parkinson’s disease and other parkinsonian syndromes. 
This disorder is characterized by the absence of decreased 
muscle tone in REM sleep, which leads to the acting out of 
dreams, sometimes resulting in violence and injury.
28. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 21) (See  Figure 21-3.) Bitemporal hemianopia is 
caused by a lesion at the optic chiasm because ﬁbers there 
decusate into the contralateral optic tract. Crossed ﬁbers 
are more damaged by compression than uncrossed ﬁbers. 
This ﬁnding is usually caused by symmetric compression 
in the sellar region by a pituitary adenoma, meningioma, 
craniopharyngioma, glioma, or aneurysm. These lesions 
are often insidious and may be unnoticed by the patient. 
They will escape detection by the physician unless each 
eye is tested separately. Lesions anterior to the chiasm 
(retinal injury, optic nerve injury) will cause unilateral 
impairment and an abnormal pupillary response. Postchi-
asmic lesions (temporal, parietal, occipital cortex) cause 
homonymous lesions (similar ﬁeld abnormalities in both 
eyes) that vary with location. Occlusion of the posterior 
cerebral artery supplying the occipital lobe is a common 
cause of total homonymous hemianopia.
Review and Self-Assessment
829
29. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 21) The differential diagnosis of a red, painful eye 
is broad and includes corneal abrasion, subconjunctival 
hemorrhage, infective or allergic conjunctivitis (the most 
common cause of red, painful eye), keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca (medications, Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis), kera-
titis (contact lens injury, trachoma, vitamin A deﬁciency), 
herpes infection, episcleritis (autoimmune, idiopathic), 
scleritis (autoimmune), uveitis, endophthalmitis, or acute 
angle-closure glaucoma. Uveitis requires slit-lamp exami-
nation for diagnosis. Anterior uveitis involving the iris is 
usually idiopathic but may be associated with sarcoidosis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, in-
ﬂammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, inﬂammatory arthritis, 
Behçet’s disease, and a variety of infections. Posterior uve-
itis in the vitreous, retina, or choroid is more likely to be 
associated with a systemic disease or infection than anterior 
uveitis. Acute angle-closure glaucoma, although rare, is of-
ten misdiagnosed unless intraocular pressure is measured. 
Many physicians avoid dilating patients’ pupils for fear of 
provoking acute angle-closure glaucoma. The risk is re-
mote and rarely causes permanent vision loss. The value 
of a complete funduscopic examination outweighs the risk 
of this rare event. Transient ischemic attack (TIA) caused 
by temporary interruption of blood ﬂow to the retina for 
more than a few seconds causes transient visual abnormality 
(amaurosis fugax). TIA is usually associated with atheroscle-
rosis. If ﬂow is restored quickly vision returns to normal.
30. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 21) Age-related macular degeneration is a major 
cause of painless, gradual bilateral central visual loss. It 
occurs as nonexudative (dry) or exudative (wet) forms. 
Recent genetic data have shown an association with the 
alternative complement pathway gene for complement 
factor H. The mechanism link for that association is un-
known. The nonexudative form is associated with retinal 
drusen that leads to retinal atrophy. Treatment with vita-
min C, vitamin E, beta-carotene, and zinc may retard the 
visual loss. Exudative macular degeneration, which is less 
common, is caused by neovascular proliferation and leak-
age of choroidal blood vessels. Acute visual loss may occur 
because of bleeding. Exudative macular degeneration may 
be treated with intraocular injection of a vascular endo-
thelial growth factor antagonist (bevacizumab or ranibi-
zumab). Blepharitis is inﬂammation of the eyelids usually 
related to acne rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, or staphy-
lococcal infection. Diabetic retinopathy, now a leading 
cause of blindness in the United States, causes gradual bi-
lateral visual loss in patients with long-standing diabetes. 
Retinal detachment is usually unilateral and causes visual 
loss and an afferent pupillary defect.
31. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 23) A history of severe respiratory infection, in-
cluding the common cold, inﬂuenza, pneumonia, or HIV, 
is the most common cause of long-lasting loss of smell. 
The mechanism, along with cases of chronic rhinosinusitis 
(another common cause) is likely related to permanent 
damage to the olfactory epithelium. Head trauma, caus-
ing shearing and scarring of olfactory ﬁla at the cribriform 
plate, may cause anosmia. Fewer than 10% of patients with 
posttraumatic anosmia regain normal function. The sever-
ity of disease is associated with the likelihood of olfactory 
abnormality in trauma and chronic rhinosinusitis. Signiﬁ-
cant decrements in smell are present in more than 50% of 
people older than 65 years old. This ﬁnding may explain 
the common ﬁnding of loss of food ﬂavor and nutritional 
deﬁciencies in elderly adults. Conﬁrming popular wisdom 
studies have shown that at any age, women have a better 
ability to identify odorants than men (Figure 23-6).
32. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 24) Hearing loss is a common complaint, partic-
ularly in older individuals. In this age group, 33% have 
hearing loss to a degree that requires hearing aids. When 
evaluating hearing loss, the physician should attempt to 
determine whether the cause is conductive, sensorineural, 
or mixed. Sensorineural hearing loss results from injury of 
the cochlear apparatus or disruption of the neural pathways 
from the inner ear to the brain. The primary site of dam-
age is the hair cells of the inner ear. Common causes of 
hair cell injury include prolonged exposure to loud noises, 
viral infections, ototoxic drugs, cochlear otosclerosis, Mé-
nière’s  disease, and aging. In contrast, conductive hearing 
loss results from impairment of the external ear and audi-
tory canal to transmit and amplify sound through the mid-
dle ear to the cochlea. Causes of conductive hearing loss 
include cerumen impaction, perforations of the tympanic 
membrane, otosclerosis, cholesteatomas, large middle ear 
effusions, and tumors of the external auditory canal or 
middle ear among others. The initial physical examination 
can often differentiate between conductive or sensorineu-
ral hearing loss. Examination of the external auditory ca-
nal can identify cerumen or foreign body impaction. On 
otoscopic examination, it is more important to assess the 
topography of the tympanic membrane than to look for 
the presence of a light reﬂex. Of particular attention is the 
area in the upper third of the tympanic membrane known 
as the pars ﬂaccida. This area can develop chronic retrac-
tion pockets that are indicative of Eustachian tube dys-
function or a cholesteatoma, a benign tumor composed 
of keratinized squamous epithelium. Bedside tests with a 
tuning fork also are useful for differentiating conductive 
from sensorineural hearing loss. In the Rinne’s test, air 
conduction is compared with bony conduction of sound. 
A tuning fork is placed over the mastoid process and then 
in front of the external ear. In conductive hearing loss, the 
intensity of sound is louder when placed on the bone, but 
in sensorineural hearing loss, the intensity is greatest at the 
external ear. In the Weber test, the tuning fork is placed in 
the midline of the head. In unilateral conductive hearing 
Review and Self-Assessment
830
loss, the intensity of sound is loudest in the affected ear, 
but in unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, the intensity of 
sound is loudest in the unaffected ear. This patient reports 
left greater than right hearing loss that is suspected to be 
sensorineural in nature. Thus, the sound is expected to 
be greatest in the right ear on the Weber test. A more 
formal evaluation of hearing loss would include pure tone 
audiometry that plots hearing threshold versus frequency. 
Pure tone audiometry establishes the severity, type, and 
laterality of hearing loss. In this patient, high-frequency 
hearing loss would be expected based on his complaints of 
inability to hear the alarm tone of his digital watch.
33. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 25) Channelopathies, disorders of ion channels 
that lead to disease, are a growing mechanism to explain a 
number of neurologic diseases. Most are caused by a muta-
tion in the ion channel gene or by autoimmune alteration 
of ion channel proteins. Some forms of epilepsy, including 
benign neonatal familial convulsions and generalized epi-
lepsy with febrile convulsions, are associated with genetic 
abnormalities of sodium or potassium channels. Familial 
hemiplegic migraines are associated with genetic abnor-
malities in sodium and calcium channels. Spinocerebellar 
ataxia and other ataxias are associated with genetic abnor-
malities in potassium or calcium channels. Lambert-Eaton 
syndrome is an example of autoimmune-related abnor-
malities in calcium channel function. Parkinson’s disease is 
the classic example of neurotransmitter system–mediated 
disease.
34. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 25) Synaptic neurotransmission is the predomi-
nant mechanism for neuronal communication. Therefore, 
it is not surprising that dysfunction with any step in the 
presynaptic synthesis, vesicular storage, and synaptic cleft 
release, and receptor binding in the postsynaptic cell may 
be associated with disease. Neurotransmitters bind to spe-
ciﬁc receptors that are either ionotropic or metabotropic. 
Functions related to ionotropic receptors are generally fast 
(<1 millisecond) and metabotropic receptors are more 
prolonged. Antibodies to the acetylcholine receptors or 
motor neuron calcium channels cause myasthenia gravis 
and Lambert-Eaton syndrome, respectively. Parkinson’s 
syndrome is related to selective cell death in the nigros-
triatal dopamine pathway. Stiff-person syndrome is re-
lated to antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase, the 
biosynthetic pathway for GABA. Orthostatic tachycardia 
syndrome is related to mutations in the norepinephrine 
transporter. Abnormalities with serotonin neurotransmit-
ter function are implicated in mood disorders, migraine 
pain pathways, and somatic pain pathways.
35. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 26) The International League against Epilepsy 
(ILAE) Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology, 
2005–2009, has provided an updated approach to the clas-
siﬁcation of seizures. This system is based on the clinical 
features of seizures and associated electroencephalographic 
ﬁndings. Seizures are classiﬁed as focal or generalized. Fo-
cal seizures arise from a neuronal network either discretely 
localized within one cerebral hemisphere or more broadly 
distributed but still within the hemisphere. They are fre-
quently associated with a structural lesion. Generalized 
seizures are thought to arise at some point in the brain 
but immediately and rapidly engage neuronal networks in 
both cerebral hemispheres. Focal seizures are subdivided 
into those with or without dyscognitive features depend-
ing on the patient’s ability to interact with the environ-
ment during an episode. The terms “simple partial sei-
zure” and “complex partial seizure” have been eliminated. 
Typical absence seizures are characterized by sudden, brief 
lapses of consciousness without loss of postural control. 
The seizure typically lasts for only seconds, consciousness 
returns as suddenly as it was lost, and there is no post-
ictal confusion. Myoclonus is a sudden and brief muscle 
contraction that may involve one part of the body or the 
entire body. Although the distinction from other forms 
of myoclonus (e.g., metabolic, degenerative neurologic 
disease, anoxic encephalopathy) is imprecise, myoclonic 
seizures are considered to be true epileptic events since 
they are caused by cortical dysfunction.
36. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 26) Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy is the most com-
mon epilepsy syndrome associated with focal seizures with 
dyscognitive features. Patients are unable to respond to 
verbal or visual commands during the seizure and they of-
ten manifest complex automatisms or complex posturing. 
An aura is common before the seizures. There is postictal 
memory loss or disorientation. Patients often have a his-
tory of febrile seizures or a family history of seizures. MRI 
will show hippocampal sclerosis, a small temporal lobe, or 
enlarged temporal horn. Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy is 
important to recognize as a distinct syndrome because it 
tends to be refractory to treatment with anticonvulsants 
but responds extremely well to surgical intervention. Hy-
pothyroidism, herpes virus infection, diabetes, and tuber-
ous sclerosis are not associated with mesial temporal lobe 
epilepsy.
37. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 26) Focal seizures without dyscognitive features 
cause motor, sensory, autonomic, or psychic symptoms 
without an obvious alteration in consciousness. The 
phenomenon of abnormal motor movements beginning 
in a restricted area then progressing to involve a larger 
area is termed Jacksonian march. The patient is describing 
Todd’s paralysis, which may take minutes to many hours 
to return to normal. Although meningitis is a common 
cause of seizure in young patients, it is unlikely to be the 
cause in someone who has a known seizure disorder. 
Review and Self-Assessment
831
If his symptoms were to persist beyond many hours, it 
would be reasonable to investigate a different etiology of 
his hand weakness with imaging studies. Overt deﬁcits 
in strength are not compatible with a primary psychiat-
ric disorder. Magnetic resonance angiogram and cerebral 
angiogram are useful to evaluate for cerebrovascular dis-
orders, but there is no evidence of subarachnoid bleed-
ing or vasculitis.
38. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 26) Nuchal rigidity and an elevated white blood 
cell count are very concerning for meningitis as the etiol-
ogy for this patient, and lumbar puncture must be per-
formed to rule this out. In addition, acute cocaine in-
toxication is a plausible reason for this new-onset seizure. 
Figure 26-2 illustrates the evaluation of the adult patient 
with a seizure. MRI would be indicated if the patient had 
a negative metabolic and toxicologic screening. Substance 
abuse counseling, while indicated, is not indicated at this 
point in his workup since he is postictal. The patient is not 
having seizures, does not have a known seizure disorder, 
and has not been treated for the underlying metabolic ab-
normality, making IV loading with an antiepileptic medi-
cation premature at this time.
39. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 26) Optimal medical therapy for epilepsy depends 
on the underlying cause, type of seizure, and patient fac-
tors. The goal is to prevent seizures and minimize the side 
effects of therapy. The minimal effective dose is deter-
mined by trial and error. In choosing medical therapies, 
drug interactions are a key consideration. Certain medi-
cations, such as tricyclic antidepressants, may lower the 
seizure threshold and should be avoided. Patients who 
respond well to medical therapy and have completely 
controlled seizures are good candidates for the discon-
tinuation of therapy, with about 70% of children and 60% 
of adults being able to discontinue therapy eventually. 
Patient factors that aid in this include complete medical 
control of seizures for 1–5 years, a normal neurologic ex-
amination, a normal EEG, and single seizure type. On the 
other end of the spectrum, about 20% of these patients 
are completely refractory to medical therapy and should 
be considered for surgical therapy. In the best examples, 
such as mesial temporal sclerosis, resection of the temporal 
lobe may result in about 70% of these patients becoming 
seizure-free and an additional 15–25% having a signiﬁcant 
reduction in the incidence of seizures. In patients with 
epilepsy other considerations are critical. Psychosocial se-
quelae such as depression, anxiety, and behavior problems 
may occur. Approximately 20% of epileptic patients have 
depression, with their suicide rate being higher than that 
of age-matched controls. There is an impact on the ability 
to drive, perform certain jobs, and function in social situ-
ations. Furthermore, there is a two- to threefold increase 
in mortality for patients with epilepsy compared with 
age-matched controls. Although most of the increased 
mortality results from the underlying etiology of epilepsy, 
a signiﬁcant number of these patients die from accidents, 
status epilepticus, and a syndrome known as sudden un-
expected death in epileptic patients (SUDEP). A recent 
meta-analysis demonstrated that treatment of patients with 
refractory seizures with an antiepileptic drug could reduce 
the frequency of SUDEP (Lancet Neurol 2011;10:961).
40. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 26) Adolescence and early adulthood mark the period 
where idiopathic or genetic epilepsy syndromes become less 
common and seizures due to acquired central nervous system 
(CNS) lesions become more common. The most common 
causes of seizures in the young adults are head trauma, CNS 
infections, brain tumors, congenital CNS lesions, illicit drug 
use, or alcohol withdrawal. Fever rarely causes seizure in pa-
tients older than 12 years. Amyloid angiopathy and uremia 
are more common in older adults.
41. The answer is A.
(Chap. 26) Status epilepticus refers to continuous seizures 
or repetitive, discrete seizures with impaired conscious-
ness in the interictal period. The duration of seizure activ-
ity sufﬁcient to meet the deﬁnition of status epilepticus has 
traditionally been speciﬁed as 15–30 minutes. Generalized 
convulsive status epilepticus (GCSE) is typically when 
seizures last beyond 5 minutes. GCSE is an emergency 
and must be treated immediately, since cardiorespiratory 
dysfunction, hyperthermia, and metabolic derangements 
can develop as a consequence of prolonged seizures, and 
these can lead to irreversible neuronal injury. Further-
more, CNS injury can occur even when the patient is 
paralyzed with neuromuscular blockade but continues to 
have electrographic seizures. The most common causes of 
GCSE are anticonvulsant withdrawal or noncompliance, 
metabolic disturbances, drug toxicity, CNS infection, 
CNS tumors, refractory epilepsy, and head trauma. GCSE 
is obvious when the patient is having overt convulsions. 
However, after 30–45 minutes of uninterrupted seizures, 
the signs may become increasingly subtle. Patients may 
have mild clonic movements of only the ﬁngers or ﬁne, 
rapid movements of the eyes. There may be paroxysmal 
episodes of tachycardia, hypertension, and pupillary dila-
tion. In such cases, the EEG may be the only method of 
establishing the diagnosis. Thus, if the patient stops hav-
ing overt seizures yet remains comatose, an EEG should 
be performed to rule out ongoing status epilepticus. The 
ﬁrst steps in the management of a patient in GCSE are 
to attend to any acute cardiorespiratory problems or hy-
perthermia, perform a brief medical and neurologic ex-
amination, establish venous access, and send samples for 
laboratory studies to identify metabolic abnormalities. 
Anticonvulsant therapy should then begin without delay; 
a treatment approach is shown in Figure 26-3. Carbam-
azepine is a ﬁrst-line therapy for focal seizures.
Review and Self-Assessment
832
42. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 27) Cardioembolism accounts for up to 20% of all 
ischemic strokes. Stroke caused by heart disease is due to 
thrombotic material forming on the atrial or ventricular 
wall or the left heart valves. If the thrombus lyses quickly, 
only a transient ischemic attack may develop. If the arte-
rial occlusion lasts longer, brain tissue may die and a stroke 
will occur. Emboli from the heart most often lodge in 
the middle cerebral artery (MCA), the posterior cerebral 
artery (PCA), or one of their branches. Atrial ﬁbrillation 
is the most common cause of cerebral embolism overall. 
Other signiﬁcant causes of cardioembolic stroke include 
myocardial infarction, prosthetic valves, rheumatic heart 
disease, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Furthermore, para-
doxical embolization may occur when an atrial septal de-
fect or a patent foramen ovale exists. This may be detected 
by bubble-contrast echocardiography. Bacterial endocar-
ditis may cause septic emboli if the vegetation is on the left 
side of the heart or if there is a paradoxical source.
43. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 27) Nonrheumatic atrial ﬁbrillation is the most 
common cause of cerebral embolism overall. The pre-
sumed stroke mechanism is thrombus formation in the 
ﬁbrillating atrium or atrial appendage. The average annual 
risk of stroke is around 5%. However, the risk varies with 
the following factors: age, hypertension, left ventricular 
function, prior embolism, diabetes, and thyroid func-
tion. The risk of stroke can be estimated by calculating 
the CHADS2 score (see  Table 27-3). Patients younger 
than 60 years of age without structural heart disease or 
without one of these risk factors have a very low annual 
risk of cardioembolism of less than 0.5%. Therefore, it is 
recommended that these patients only take aspirin daily 
for stroke prevention. Older patients with numerous risk 
factors may have annual stroke risks of 10–15% and must 
take a vitamin K antagonist indeﬁnitely. Cardioversion 
is indicated for symptomatic patients who want an initial 
opportunity to remain in sinus rhythm. However, studies 
have shown that there is an increased stroke risk for weeks 
to months after a successful cardioversion, and these pa-
tients must remain on anticoagulation for a long period. 
Patients who do not respond to cardioversion and do not 
want catheter ablation have mortality and morbidity with 
rate control and anticoagulation similar to those of pa-
tients who opt for cardioversion. Low-molecular-weight 
heparin may be used as a bridge to vitamin K–antagonist 
therapy and may facilitate outpatient anticoagulation in 
selected patients.
44. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 27) Numerous studies have identiﬁed key risk fac-
tors for ischemic stroke. Old age, family history, diabetes, 
hypertension, tobacco smoking, and cholesterol are all risk 
factors for atherosclerosis and therefore stroke. Hyperten-
sion is the most signiﬁcant among these risk factors. All 
cases of hypertension must be controlled in the setting of 
stroke prevention. Antiplatelet therapy has been shown to 
reduce the risk of vascular atherothrombotic events. The 
overall relative risk reduction of nonfatal stroke is about 
25–30% across most large clinical trials. The “true” abso-
lute beneﬁt is dependent on the individual patient’s risk; 
therefore, patients with a low risk for stroke (e.g., young-
er patients with minimal cardiovascular risk factors) may 
have a relative risk reduction with antiplatelet therapy but 
a meaningless “beneﬁt.” Numerous studies have shown 
the beneﬁt of statin therapy in the reduction of stroke 
risk even in the absence of hypercholesterolemia. Antico-
agulation is the treatment of choice to prevent stroke in 
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation and other potential causes 
of cardiocerebral emboli. However, data do not support 
the use of long-term vitamin K antagonists for preventing 
atherothrombotic stroke for either intracranial or extra-
cranial cerebrovascular disease. The WARSS study found 
no beneﬁt of warfarin (INR 1.4–2.8) over aspirin 325 mg 
for secondary prevention of stroke but did ﬁnd a slightly 
higher bleeding rate in the warfarin group. A recent Euro-
pean study conﬁrmed this ﬁnding. The Warfarin-Aspirin 
Symptomatic Intracranial Disease (WASID) study dem-
onstrated no beneﬁt of warfarin (INR 2–3) over aspirin in 
patients with symptomatic intracranial atherosclerosis, and 
also found higher rates of bleeding complications.
45. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 27) Once the diagnosis of stroke is made, a brain 
imaging study is necessary to determine if the cause of 
stroke is ischemia or hemorrhage (Figure 27-1). There are 
no clinical ﬁndings that deﬁnitively distinguish ischemia 
from hemorrhage. If the stroke is ischemic, administration 
of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) or en-
dovascular mechanical thrombectomy may be beneﬁcial 
in restoring cerebral perfusion. Medical management to 
reduce the risk of complications becomes the next pri-
ority, followed by plans for secondary prevention. For 
ischemic stroke, several strategies can reduce the risk of 
subsequent stroke in all patients, while other strategies are 
effective for patients with speciﬁc causes of stroke such 
as cardiac embolus and carotid atherosclerosis. For hem-
orrhagic stroke, aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(SAH) and hypertensive intracranial hemorrhage are two 
important causes. The National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) recombinant TPA (rtPA) 
Stroke Study showed a clear beneﬁt for IV rtPA in se-
lected patients with acute stroke. The NINDS study used 
IV rtPA (0.9 mg/kg to a 90-mg max; 10% as a bolus, then 
the remainder over 60 minutes) versus placebo in patients 
with ischemic stroke within 3 hours of onset. Subsequent 
studies using different dosing and timing ranges have not 
been as positive. rtPA is being reviewed for approval in the 
3- to 4.5-hour window in Europe, but is only approved 
for 0–3 hours in the United States and Canada. Use of IV 
rtPA is considered a central component in primary stroke 
Review and Self-Assessment
833
centers as the ﬁrst treatment proven to improve clinical 
outcomes in ischemic stroke and is cost-effective and cost 
saving. Because collateral blood ﬂow within the ischemic 
brain is blood pressure dependent, there is controversy 
about whether blood pressure should be lowered acutely. 
Blood pressure should be lowered if there is malignant 
hypertension or concomitant myocardial ischemia or if 
blood pressure is above 185/110 mmHg and thrombolytic 
therapy is anticipated. When faced with the competing 
demands of myocardium and brain, lowering the heart 
rate with a β1-adrenergic blocker (such as esmolol) can 
be a ﬁrst step to decreasing cardiac work and maintaining 
blood pressure. Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy 
has recently shown promise as an alternative or adjunc-
tive treatment of acute stroke in patients who are ineli-
gible for, or have contraindications to, thrombolytics or in 
those who have failed to have vascular recanalization with 
IV thrombolytics. Studies have shown excellent acute and 
chronic recanalization rates and the FDA has approved 
some devices for intracerebral use. Hypothermia is a pow-
erful neuroprotective treatment in patients with cardiac 
arrest and is neuroprotective in animal models of stroke, 
but it has not been adequately studied in patients with 
ischemic stroke.
46. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 29) All the choices given in the question are causes 
of or may be associated with dementia. Binswanger’s 
disease, the cause of which is unknown, often occurs in 
patients with long-standing hypertension and/or athero-
sclerosis; it is associated with diffuse subcortical white 
matter damage and has a subacute insidious course. Al-
zheimer’s disease, the most common cause of dementia, 
is also slowly progressive and can be conﬁrmed at autopsy 
by the presence of amyloid plaques and neuroﬁbrillary 
tangles. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a prion disease, is as-
sociated with a rapidly progressive dementia, myoclonus, 
rigidity, a characteristic EEG pattern, and death within 
1–2 years of onset. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency, which often is 
seen in the setting of chronic alcoholism, most commonly 
produces a myelopathy that results in loss of vibration and 
joint position sense, and brisk deep tendon reﬂexes (dorsal 
column and lateral corticospinal tract dysfunction). This 
combination of pathologic abnormalities in the setting of 
vitamin B12 deﬁciency is also called subacute combined 
degeneration. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency may also lead to a 
subcortical type of dementia. Recent studies have dem-
onstrated that elevated levels of MMA, which is a more 
sensitive measure of vitamin B12 deﬁciency, may increase 
the risk of cognitive decline in elderly patients. The thera-
peutic implications of this ﬁnding are not yet clear but 
emphasize the importance of adequate vitamin B12 intake. 
Multi-infarct dementia, as in this case, presents with a his-
tory of sudden stepwise declines in function associated 
with the accumulation of bilateral focal neurologic deﬁ-
cits. Brain imaging demonstrates multiple areas of stroke.
47. The answer is D.
(Chap. 30) The differential diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease 
is broad, and the disease can be difﬁcult to diagnose, with 
an estimated misdiagnosis of 10–25% even by experienced 
physicians. This patient exhibits several atypical features 
that should alert the physician to search for alternative 
diagnoses. These include early age of onset, prominent 
orthostasis, autonomic symptoms of ﬂushing and diapho-
resis, and failure to respond to dopaminergic agents. In 
addition, recurrent urinary tract infections should prompt 
an evaluation for urinary retention due to autonomic dys-
function in this patient. These symptoms are most consis-
tent with multiple system atrophy with parkinsonian fea-
tures (MSA-p). The average age of onset is 50 years, and 
these individuals more frequently present with bilateral, 
symmetric tremor and more prominent spasticity than 
those with Parkinson’s disease. Orthostasis and autonomic 
symptoms are typically prominent. On MRI, one would 
expect to ﬁnd volume loss and T2-hyperintensity in the 
area of the putamen, globus pallidus, and white matter. 
On pathologic examination, α-synuclein–positive inclu-
sions would be seen in the affected areas. Median sur-
vival after diagnosis is 6–9 years. Dopaminergic agents are 
not helpful in the treatment of this disorder and are usu-
ally associated with drug-induced dyskinesias of the face 
and neck, rather than the limbs and trunk. Corticobasal 
degeneration is a sporadic tauopathy that presents in the 
sixth to seventh decades. In contrast to Parkinson’s dis-
ease, this disorder is frequently associated with myoclonic 
jerks and involuntary purposeful movements of a limb. Its 
progressive nature leads to spastic paraplegia. Diffuse Lewy 
body disease has prominent dementia with parkinsonian 
features. Neuropsychiatric complaints including paranoia, 
delusions, and personality changes are more common than 
in Parkinson’s disease. Drug-induced Parkinson’s disease 
is not seen with nitrofurantoin, and the patient has no his-
tory of illicit drugs such as MTPT, which could cause Par-
kinson’s disease. Finally, this is unlikely to be inadequately 
treated Parkinson’s disease because one would expect at 
least an initial improvement on dopaminergic agents.
48. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 30) Therapy for Parkinson’s disease should be ini-
tiated when symptoms interfere with the patient’s qual-
ity of life. Choice of initial drug therapy is usually with 
dopamine agonists, levodopa, or MAO inhibitors. The 
initial choice in most individuals is a dopamine agonist 
(pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine), and monotherapy 
with dopamine agonists usually controls motor symptoms 
for several years before levodopa therapy becomes nec-
essary. Over this period, escalating doses are frequently 
required, and side effects may be limiting. It is thought 
that dopamine agonists delay the onset of dyskinesias 
and on-off motor symptoms such as freezing. By 5 years, 
over half of individuals will require levodopa to control 
motor symptoms. Levodopa remains the most effective 
Review and Self-Assessment
834
therapy for the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, 
but once levodopa is started, dyskinesias and on-off mo-
tor ﬂuctuations become more common. MAO inhibitors 
(selegiline, rasagiline) work by decreasing the postsynaptic 
breakdown of dopamine. As monotherapy, these agents 
have only small effects and are most often used as adjuncts 
to levodopa. Surgical procedures such as pallidotomy and 
deep-brain stimulation are reserved for advanced Parkin-
son’s disease with intractable tremor or drug-induced mo-
tor ﬂuctuations or dyskinesias. In this setting, deep-brain 
stimulation can alleviate disabling symptoms.
49. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 30) Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic 
disorder that affects approximately 10% of the adult popu-
lation, causing signiﬁcant morbidity in some. It is rare in 
Asians. The four core symptoms required for diagnosis 
are as follows: an urge to move the legs, usually caused 
or accompanied by an unpleasant sensation in the legs; 
symptoms begin or worsen with rest; partial or com-
plete relief by movement; worsening during the evening 
or night. Symptoms most commonly begin in the legs, 
but can spread to or even begin in the upper limbs. In 
about 80% of patients, RLS is associated with periodic leg 
movements (PLMs) during sleep and occasionally while 
awake. These involuntary movements are usually brief, 
lasting no more than a few seconds, and recur every 5–90 
seconds. The restlessness and PLMs are a major cause of 
sleep disturbance in patients, leading to poor-quality sleep 
and daytime sleepiness. Primary RLS is genetic, and sev-
eral loci have been found with an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance, although penetrance may be vari-
able. The mean age of onset in genetic forms is 27 years, 
although pediatric cases are recognized. The severity of 
symptoms is variable. Secondary RLS may be associated 
with pregnancy or a range of underlying disorders, in-
cluding anemia, ferritin deﬁciency, renal failure, and pe-
ripheral neuropathy. The pathogenesis probably involves 
disordered dopamine function, which may be peripheral 
or central, in association with an abnormality of iron me-
tabolism. Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds but can be 
supported by polysomnography and the demonstration of 
PLMs. The neurologic examination is normal. Secondary 
RLS should be excluded, and ferritin levels, glucose, and 
renal function should be measured. Most RLS sufferers 
have mild symptoms that do not require speciﬁc treat-
ment. If symptoms are intrusive, low doses of dopamine 
(pramipexole, ropinirole) may be administered before 
bedtime. Levodopa can be effective but is frequently asso-
ciated with augmentation (spread and worsening of rest-
lessness and its appearance earlier in the day) or rebound 
(reappearance sometimes with worsening of symptoms at 
a time compatible with the drug’s short half-life). Other 
drugs that can be effective include anticonvulsants, anal-
gesics, and even opiates. Management of secondary RLS 
should be directed to correcting the underlying disorder.
50. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 29) Approximately 10% of all persons over the age 
of 70 have signiﬁcant memory loss, and in more than half 
the cause is Alzheimer’s disease (AD). AD can occur in 
any decade of adulthood, but it is the most common cause 
of dementia in the elderly. AD most often presents with 
an insidious onset of memory loss followed by a slowly 
progressive dementia over several years. Pathologically, 
atrophy is distributed throughout the medial temporal 
lobes, as well as lateral and medial parietal lobes and lateral 
frontal cortex. Microscopically, there are neuroﬁbrillary 
tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau ﬁlaments, 
and accumulation of amyloid in blood vessel walls in the 
cortex and leptomeninges. The cognitive changes of AD 
tend to follow a characteristic pattern beginning with 
memory impairment and spreading to language and vi-
suospatial deﬁcits. Yet approximately 20% of patients with 
AD present with nonmemory complaints such as word-
ﬁnding, organizational, or navigational difﬁculty. In the 
early stages of the disease, the memory loss may go unrec-
ognized or be ascribed to benign forgetfulness. Slowly the 
cognitive problems begin to interfere with daily activities, 
such as keeping track of ﬁnances, following instructions 
on the job, driving, shopping, and housekeeping. Some 
patients are unaware of these difﬁculties (anosognosia), 
while others remain acutely attuned to their deﬁcits. So-
cial graces, routine behavior, and superﬁcial conversation 
may be surprisingly intact. Language becomes impaired—
ﬁrst naming, then comprehension, and ﬁnally ﬂuency. In 
some patients, aphasia is an early and prominent feature. 
Word-ﬁnding difﬁculties and circumlocution may be a 
problem even when formal testing demonstrates intact 
naming and ﬂuency. Visuospatial deﬁcits begin to interfere 
with dressing, eating, or even walking, and patients fail to 
solve simple puzzles or copy geometric ﬁgures. Simple 
calculations and clock reading become difﬁcult in parallel. 
Loss of judgment and reasoning is inevitable. Delusions 
are common and usually simple, with common themes 
of theft, inﬁdelity, or misidentiﬁcation. In end-stage AD, 
patients become rigid, mute, incontinent, and bedridden. 
Hyperactive tendon reﬂexes and myoclonic jerks may oc-
cur spontaneously or in response to physical or auditory 
stimulation. Generalized seizures may also occur. Often 
death results from malnutrition, secondary infections, 
pulmonary emboli, heart disease, or, most commonly, as-
piration. The typical duration of AD is 8–10 years, but 
the course can range from 1 to 25 years. For unknown 
reasons, some AD patients show a steady decline in func-
tion, while others have prolonged plateaus without major 
deterioration.
51. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 32) The combination of upper and lower mo-
tor neuron ﬁndings is highly suggestive of ALS. Indolent 
presentation is typical and many patients receive alterna-
tive diagnoses before deﬁning ALS. There is currently 
Review and Self-Assessment
835
no curative therapy for ALS; therefore, treatable causes 
of motor nerve dysfunction should be ruled out. Com-
pression of the cervical spinal cord or cervicomedul-
lary junction from tumors in the cervical regions or at 
the foramen magnum or from cervical spondylosis with 
osteophytes projecting into the vertebral canal can pro-
duce weakness, wasting, and fasciculations in the upper 
limbs and spasticity in the legs, closely resembling ALS. 
Absence of pain or of sensory changes, normal bowel and 
bladder function, normal roentgenographic studies of the 
spine, and normal cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) all favor ALS. 
Another important entity in the differential diagnosis of 
ALS is multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction 
block (MMCB). In this disorder, remarkably focal blocks 
in conduction regionally and chronically disrupt lower 
motor neuron function. Many cases have elevated serum 
titers of mono- and polyclonal antibodies to ganglioside 
GM1; it is hypothesized that the antibodies produce se-
lective, focal, paranodal demyelination of motor neurons. 
MMCB is not typically associated with corticospinal signs. 
In contrast with ALS, MMCB may respond dramatically 
to therapy such as IV immunoglobulin or chemotherapy; 
it is thus imperative that MMCB be excluded when con-
sidering a diagnosis of ALS. A diffuse, lower motor axonal 
neuropathy mimicking ALS sometimes evolves in associa-
tion with hematopoietic disorders such as lymphoma or 
multiple myeloma. Lyme disease may also cause an axo-
nal, lower motor neuropathy, although typically with in-
tense proximal limb pain and a CSF pleocytosis.
 Other treatable disorders that occasionally mimic ALS 
are chronic lead poisoning and thyrotoxicosis. Vitamin C 
deﬁciency may cause myalgias in addition to fatigue, leth-
argy, and skin ﬁndings, but motor neuron ﬁndings are not 
typical.
52. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 33) Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome is 
characterized by symptomatic orthostatic intolerance and 
either an increase in heart rate to more than 120 beats/
min or an increase of 30 beats/min with standing that 
subsides on sitting or lying down. There is no orthostat-
ic hypotension. Women are affected approximately ﬁve 
times more often than men, and most develop the syn-
drome between the ages of 15 and 50. Approximately half 
of affected patients report an antecedent viral infection. 
Lightheadedness, weakness, and blurred vision combined 
with symptoms of autonomic over activity (palpitations, 
tremulousness, nausea) are common. Recurrent, unex-
plained episodes of dysautonomia and fatigue also occur. 
The pathogenesis is unclear in most cases; hypovolemia, 
deconditioning, venous pooling, impaired brainstem reg-
ulation, or adrenergic receptor supersensitivity may play a 
role. Although up to 80% of patients improve, only about 
25% eventually resume their usual daily activities (includ-
ing exercise and sports). Expansion of ﬂuid volume and 
postural training are initial approaches to treatment. If 
these approaches are inadequate, then midodrine, ﬂudro-
cortisone, phenobarbital, beta blockers, or clonidine may 
provide some beneﬁt. Reconditioning and a sustained ex-
ercise program are very important. All of the other listed 
choices are associated with orthostatic hypotension.
53. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 33) Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) 
types I and II are the terms that have replaced reﬂex sym-
pathetic dystrophy (RSD) or causalgia because of the ab-
sence of a proven causative role for the autonomic ner-
vous system. CRPS type I is a regional pain syndrome that 
usually develops after tissue trauma. Examples of associ-
ated trauma include myocardial infarction, minor shoul-
der or limb injury, and stroke. Allodynia, hyperpathia, and 
spontaneous pain occur. The symptoms are unrelated to 
the severity of the initial trauma and are not conﬁned to 
the distribution of a single peripheral nerve. CRPS type II 
is a regional pain syndrome that develops after injury to 
a speciﬁc peripheral nerve, usually a major nerve trunk. 
Spontaneous pain initially develops within the territory 
of the affected nerve but eventually may spread outside 
the nerve distribution. Pain is the primary clinical feature 
of CRPS. Vasomotor dysfunction, sudomotor abnormali-
ties, or focal edema may occur alone or in combination 
but must be present for diagnosis. Localized sweating and 
changes in blood ﬂow may produce temperature differ-
ences between affected and unaffected limbs. CRPS type I 
has classically been divided into three clinical phases but 
is now considered to be more variable. Phase I consists of 
pain and swelling in the distal extremity occurring within 
weeks to 3 months after the precipitating event. The pain 
is diffuse, spontaneous, and either burning, throbbing, or 
aching in quality. The involved extremity is warm and 
edematous, and the joints are tender. Increased sweating 
and hair growth develop. In phase II (3–6 months after 
onset), thin, shiny, cool skin appears. After an additional 
3–6 months (phase III), atrophy of the skin and subcuta-
neous tissue plus ﬂexion contractures complete the clini-
cal picture. A variety of surgical and medical treatments 
have been developed for CRPS, with conﬂicting reports 
of efﬁcacy. Clinical trials suggest that early mobilization 
with physical therapy or a brief course of glucocorticoids 
may be helpful for CRPS type I. Other medical treat-
ments include the use of adrenergic blockers, nonsteroidal 
anti-inﬂammatory drugs, calcium channel blockers, phe-
nytoin, opioids, and calcitonin. Stellate ganglion blockade 
is a commonly used invasive technique that often provides 
temporary pain relief, but the efﬁcacy of repetitive blocks 
is uncertain.
54. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 34) Trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical diagnosis 
based entirely on patient history. The disorder is charac-
terized by paroxysms of excruciating pain in the lips, gums, 
cheeks, and chin that resolves over seconds to minutes. It 
Review and Self-Assessment
836
is caused by ectopic action potentials in afferent pain ﬁbers 
of the ﬁfth cranial nerve, due either to nerve compression 
or other causes of demyelination. Symptoms are often, but 
not always, elicited by tactile stimuli on the face, tongue, 
or lips. An elevated ESR is not part of the clinical syn-
drome. Elevated ESR is associated with temporal arteritis, 
a vasculitis associated with jaw claudication, unilateral vi-
sion loss, and symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica. Tri-
geminal neuralgia is speciﬁcally notable for a lack of sen-
sory ﬁndings on examination, unless the diagnosis is made 
in conjunction with another disorder such as a midbrain 
mass lesion or aneurysm. Deep-seated facial and head pain 
is more commonly a feature of migraine headache, den-
tal pathology, or sinus disease. First-line therapy is with 
carbamazepine, not gabapentin. It should be started and 
increased gradually until pain symptoms subside; 50–75% 
of patients will respond to this therapy. If treatment is ef-
fective, it is continued for 1 month then tapered.
55. The answer is C.
(Chap. 34) Trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical diagnosis based 
entirely on patient history, and as such should be treated 
once a patient presents with the virtually pathognomonic 
complaints of paroxysms of excruciating pain in the lips, 
gums, cheeks, and chin that resolve over seconds to min-
utes. Carbamazepine is ﬁrst-line therapy. Oxcarbazepine 
likely has equivalent efﬁcacy to carbamazepine with less 
toxicity. Lamotrigine, orphenytoin, and baclofen are other 
potential therapeutic options. Surgical approaches, such as 
radiofrequency thermal rhizotomy, gamma-knife radiosur-
gery, and microvascular decompression, should be con-
sidered only when medical options fail. Steroids have no 
therapeutic role, as trigeminal neuralgia is not an inﬂam-
matory condition. Neuroimaging is not indicated, unless 
other clinical features or a focal neurologic deﬁcit elicited 
on history or physical examination suggest another possible 
diagnosis such as intracranial mass or multiple sclerosis.
56. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 34) Brief paroxysms of severe, sharp pains in the face 
without demonstrable lesions in the jaw, teeth, or sinuses 
are called tic douloureux, or trigeminal neuralgia. The pain 
may be brought on by stimuli applied to the face, lips, or 
tongue or by certain movements of those structures. Aneu-
rysms, neuroﬁbromas, and meningiomas impinging on the 
ﬁfth cranial nerve at any point during its course typically 
present with trigeminal neuropathy, which will cause sen-
sory loss on the face, weakness of the jaw muscles, or both; 
neither symptom is demonstrable in this patient. Amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a motor neuron disease that 
may present with bulbar motor ﬁndings but sensory ﬁnd-
ings (in the absence of muscle spasms) are uncommon.
57. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 35) The MRI shows an inﬁltrated and collapsed 
second thoracic vertebral body with posterior displacement 
and compression of the upper thoracic spinal cord due to 
metastatic breast cancer. The low-intensity bone marrow 
signal in panel A of Figure 57 signiﬁes replacement by 
tumor. When a patient presents with possible myelopa-
thy, the ﬁrst priority is to distinguish between a compres-
sive or noncompressive etiology. The common causes of 
compressive myelopathy are tumor, epidural abscess or 
hematoma, herniated disk, or vertebral pathology. Epidu-
ral compression due to malignancy or abscess often causes 
warning signs of neck or back pain, bladder disturbances, 
and sensory symptoms that precede the development of 
paralysis. MRI is the optimal diagnostic modality to im-
age the spinal cord. In adults, most neoplasms are epidural 
in origin, resulting from metastases to the adjacent spinal 
bones. The propensity of solid tumors to metastasize to 
the vertebral column probably reﬂects the high propor-
tion of bone marrow located in the axial skeleton. Al-
most any malignant tumor can metastasize to the spinal 
column, with breast, lung, prostate, kidney, lymphoma, 
and plasma cell dyscrasia occurring particularly frequently. 
The thoracic spinal column is most commonly involved; 
exceptions are metastases from prostate and ovarian can-
cer, which occur disproportionately in the sacral and 
lumbar vertebrae, probably resulting from spread through 
Batson’s plexus, a network of veins along the anterior epi-
dural space. Retroperitoneal neoplasms (especially lym-
phomas or sarcomas) enter the spinal canal through the 
intervertebral foramens and produce radicular pain with 
signs of root weakness prior to cord compression. Pain is 
usually the initial symptom of spinal metastasis and char-
acteristically awakens patients at night. A recent onset of 
persistent back pain, particularly if in the thoracic spine 
(which is uncommonly involved by spondylosis), should 
prompt consideration of vertebral metastasis. Infections 
of the spinal column (osteomyelitis and related disorders) 
are distinctive in that, unlike tumor, they may cross the 
disk space to involve the adjacent vertebral body. Man-
agement of cord compression includes glucocorticoids to 
reduce cord edema, local radiotherapy (initiated as early as 
possible) to the symptomatic lesion, and speciﬁc therapy 
for the underlying tumor type. Spinal epidural abscess 
presents as a clinical triad of midline dorsal pain, fever, 
and progressive limb weakness. Risk factors include an 
impaired immune status (diabetes mellitus, renal failure, 
alcoholism, malignancy), IV drug abuse, and infections of 
the skin or other tissues. Two-thirds of epidural infections 
result from hematogenous spread of bacteria from the skin 
(furunculosis), soft tissue (pharyngeal or dental abscesses), 
or deep viscera (bacterial endocarditis). Hemorrhage into 
the epidural (or subdural) space causes acute focal or ra-
dicular pain followed by variable signs of a spinal cord or 
conus medullaris disorder. Therapeutic anticoagulation, 
trauma, tumor, or blood dyscrasias are predisposing condi-
tions. Hemorrhage into the substance of the spinal cord is 
a rare result of trauma, intraparenchymal vascular malfor-
mation, vasculitis due to polyarteritis nodosa or systemic 
Review and Self-Assessment
837
lupus erythematosus (SLE), bleeding disorders, or a spinal 
cord neoplasm. Hematomyelia presents as an acute, pain-
ful transverse myelopathy.
58. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 35) This patient has a history and examination 
consistent with a myelopathy. The rapidity of onset and 
the lack of other antecedent symptoms (e.g., pain) make a 
noncompressive etiology most likely. An MRI is the ini-
tial test of choice and will easily identify a structural lesion 
such as a neoplasm or subluxation. Noncompressive my-
elopathies result from ﬁve basic causes: spinal cord infarc-
tion; systemic disorders such as vasculitis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), and sarcoidosis; infections (particu-
larly viral); demyelinating disease such as multiple sclero-
sis; and idiopathic. Therefore, serologies for antinuclear 
antibodies, viral serologies such as HIV and HTLV-I, and 
lumbar puncture are all indicated. Because the clinical sce-
nario is consistent with a myelopathy, an electromyogram 
is not indicated.
59. The answer is A.
(Chap. 35) Syringomyelia is a developmental, slowly en-
larging cavitary expansion of the cervical cord that pro-
duces a progressive myelopathy. Symptoms typically 
begin in adolescence or early adulthood. They may un-
dergo spontaneous arrest after several years. More than 
half are associated with Chiari malformations. Acquired 
cavitations of the spinal cord are referred to as syrinx cavi-
ties. They may result from trauma, myelitis, infection, or 
tumor. The classic presentation is that of a central cord 
syndrome with sensory loss of pain and temperature sensa-
tion, and weakness of the upper extremities. Vibration and 
position sensation are typically preserved. Muscle wasting 
in the lower neck, shoulders, arms, and hands with asym-
metric or absent reﬂexes reﬂects extension of the cavity to 
the anterior horns. With progression, spasticity and weak-
ness of the lower extremities, and bladder and bowel dys-
function may occur. MRI scans are the diagnostic modal-
ity of choice. Surgical therapy is generally unsatisfactory. 
Syringomyelia associated with Chiari malformations may 
require extensive decompressions of the posterior fossa. 
Direct decompression of the cavity is of debatable beneﬁt. 
Syringomyelia secondary to trauma or infection is treat-
ed with decompression and a drainage procedure, with 
a shunt often inserted that drains into the subarachnoid 
space. Although relief may occur, recurrence is common.
60. The answer is A.
(Chap. 36) Concussions result from blunt head trauma 
that causes anterior-posterior movement of the brain 
within the skull. Transient loss of consciousness is com-
mon, as are confusion and amnesia. Many patients do not 
lose consciousness but feel dazed, stunned, or confused. A 
brief period of both retrograde and anterograde amnesia is 
characteristic of concussion and it recedes rapidly in alert 
patients. Head imaging is typically normal. Postconcus-
sive syndrome is a constellation of symptoms including 
fatigue, headache, dizziness, and difﬁculty concentrating 
that follows a concussion. The patient described ﬁts this 
diagnosis; strict diagnostic criteria do not exist. Typically 
patients will improve over a 6- to 12-month period. Pa-
tients who were energetic and highly functioning prior 
to their trauma have an excellent prognosis. Treatment is 
aimed at reassurance and relieving prominent symptoms. 
Dizziness can be treated with Phenergan, which acts as a 
vestibular suppressant. He should avoid contact sports at 
least until his symptoms resolve.
61. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 36) The head CT (Figure 61) shows chronic bilat-
eral subdural hematomas of varying age. The collections 
began as acute hematomas and have become hypodense 
in comparison to the adjacent brain. Some areas of re-
solving blood are contained in the more recently formed 
collection on the left. Acute hematomas (which would 
be as bright as the resolving blood shown in arrows) be-
come hypodense in comparison with adjacent brain af-
ter approximately 2 months. During the isodense phase 
(2–6 weeks after injury), they may be difﬁcult to discern. 
Chronic subdural hematoma may present without a his-
tory of trauma or injury in 20–30% of patients. Headache 
is common. Other symptoms may be vague, as in this 
case, or there may be focal signs including hemiparesis 
mimicking stroke. Underlying cortical damage may serve 
as a seizure focus. In relatively asymptomatic patients with 
small hematomas, observation and serial imaging may be 
reasonable; however, surgical evacuation is often neces-
sary for large or symptomatic chronic hematomas.
62. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 36) Hemorrhages beneath the dural layer (sub-
dural) or between the skull and the dura (epidural) are 
common sequelae of head trauma. They can be life-
threatening, and prompt evaluation and management are 
imperative. Several clinical features allow these conditions 
to be distinguished from one another. Acute subdural he-
matomas typically arise from venous sources, often the 
bridging veins located immediately under the dura mater. 
As the brain volume decreases with age, traction on these 
venous structures increases and even minor head trauma 
in the elderly can lead to a subdural hematoma. A “lucid 
interval” of several minutes to hours before coma super-
venes is most characteristic of epidural hemorrhage, but 
it is still uncommon, and epidural hemorrhage is not the 
only cause of this temporal sequence. Subdural bleeding is 
typically slower than epidural bleeding due to their differ-
ent sources. Small subdural bleeds are asymptomatic and 
often do not require evacuation. Epidural hematomas, on 
the other hand, can arise quickly and typically represent 
arterial bleeding. A lacerated middle meningeal artery 
from an overlying skull fracture often causes these. A rapid 
Review and Self-Assessment
838
increase in intracranial pressure from these bleeds can ne-
cessitate arterial ligation or emergent craniotomy. Most 
patients with epidural bleeding are unconscious when ﬁrst 
evaluated; a “lucid interval” can occasionally be seen.
63. The answer is D.
(Chap. 37) Distinguishing CNS toxoplasmosis from pri-
mary CNS lymphoma in a patient with HIV infection 
is often difﬁcult. The standard approach in a neurologi-
cally stable patient is to treat the patient for toxoplasmosis 
for 2–3 weeks then repeat neuroimaging. If the imaging 
shows clear improvement, continue antibiotics. If there 
is no response to therapy after 2 weeks, therapy does not 
need to be continued and a stereotactic brain biopsy is in-
dicated. In this immunocompromised patient who has not 
responded to treatment for CNS toxoplasmosis, a positive 
CNS EBV DNA would be diagnostic of CNS lymphoma. 
Whole-brain radiation therapy is part of the treatment for 
CNS lymphoma, which is not yet diagnosed in this pa-
tient, and should not be instituted empirically. Treatments 
directed at viral infections of the CNS or CNS lympho-
mas are not indicated at this time since a diagnosis is still 
yet to be made. In the absence of a change in neurologic 
status or evidence of mass effect on CT, there is no in-
dication for dexamethasone. Of note, the incidence of 
primary CNS lymphoma appears to be increasing in im-
munocompetent individuals for unclear reasons.
64. The answer is A.
(Chap. 37) Endocrine dysfunction resulting in hypopi-
tuitarism frequently follows exposure of the hypothala-
mus or pituitary gland to therapeutic radiation. Growth 
hormone is the most sensitive to the damaging effects of 
WBRT, and thyroid-stimulating hormone is the least 
sensitive. ACTH, prolactin, and gonadotropins have an 
intermediate sensitivity. Other complications of radiation 
therapy to the brain include acute radiation injury mani-
fest by headache, sleepiness, and worsening of preexisting 
neurologic defects. Early delayed radiation injury occurs 
within the ﬁrst 4 months after therapy. It is associated with 
increased white matter signal on MRI and is steroid re-
sponsive. Late delayed radiation injury occurs more than 
4 months after therapy, typically 8–24 months. There may 
be dementia, gait apraxia, focal necrosis (after focal irra-
diation), or the development of secondary malignancies.
65. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 37) The postgadolinium MRI shows multiple me-
ningiomas along the falx and left parietal cortex. Menin-
giomas derive from the cells that give rise to the arachnoid 
granulations. They are now the most common primary 
brain tumor, accounting for approximately 32% of the 
total, and occur more commonly in women than men. 
They are usually benign (WHO classiﬁcation grade 1) 
and attached to the dura. They rarely invade the brain. 
Meningiomas are diagnosed with increasing frequency as 
more people undergo neuroimaging studies for various 
indications. Their incidence increases with age, and they 
are more common in patients with a history of cranial ir-
radiation. They are most commonly located over the ce-
rebral convexities, especially adjacent to the sagittal sinus, 
but can also occur in the skull base and along the dorsum 
of the spinal cord. Many meningiomas are found inci-
dentally following neuroimaging for unrelated reasons. 
They can also present with headaches, seizures, or focal 
neurologic deﬁcits. On imaging studies they have a char-
acteristic appearance usually consisting of a partially calci-
ﬁed, densely enhancing extra-axial tumor arising from the 
dura. The main differential diagnosis of meningioma is a 
dural metastasis. Total surgical resection of a meningioma 
is curative. Low-grade astrocytoma and high-grade astro-
cytoma (glioblastoma) often inﬁltrate into adjacent brain 
and rarely have the clear margins seen in Figure 65. Oli-
godendroma comprise approximately 15% of all gliomas 
and show calciﬁcation in roughly 30% of cases. They have 
a more benign course and are more responsive than other 
gliomas to cytotoxic therapy. For low-grade oligodendro-
mas, the median survival is 7–8 years. Brain abscess will 
have distinctive ring-enhancing features with a capsule, 
will often have mass effect, and will have evidence of in-
ﬂammation on MRI scanning.
66. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 38) Hormones produced by the anterior pitu-
itary include adrenocorticotropic hormone, thyroid-
stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stim-
ulating hormone, prolactin, and growth hormone. The 
posterior pituitary produces vasopressin and oxytocin. 
The anterior and posterior pituitary has a separate vascular 
supply, and the posterior pituitary is directly innervated 
by the hypothalamic neurons via the pituitary stalk, thus 
making it susceptible to shear stress–associated dysfunc-
tion. Hypothalamic control of anterior pituitary function 
is through secreted hormones; thus it is less susceptible to 
traumatic injury.
67. The answer is B.
(Chap. 38) The patient has evidence of Sheehan’s syn-
drome postpartum. In this syndrome, the hyperplastic 
pituitary postpartum is at increased risk for hemorrhage 
and/or infarction. This leads to bilateral visual changes, 
headache, and meningeal signs. Ophthalmoplegia may 
be observed. In severe cases, cardiovascular collapse and 
altered levels of consciousness may be observed. Labo-
ratory evaluation commonly shows hypoglycemia. Pitu-
itary CT or MRI may show signs of sellar hemorrhage 
if present. Involvement of all pituitary hormones may be 
seen, though the most acute ﬁnding is often hypoglycemia 
and hypotension from the failure of adrenocorticotropic 
hormone. The hypoglycemia and hypotension present in 
this case suggest failure of the glucocorticoid system; thus 
treatment with a corticosteroid is indicated. There is no 
Review and Self-Assessment
839
evidence of sepsis; thus antibiotics and drotrecogin alfa 
are not indicated. With a normal hematocrit and no re-
ported evidence of massive hemorrhage, packed red cell 
transfusion is unlikely to be helpful. Although thyroid-
stimulating hormone production is undoubtedly low in 
this patient, the most immediate concern is replacement 
of glucocorticoid.
68. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 38) Functional pituitary adenoma presentations in-
clude acromegaly, as in this patient, prolactinomas, and 
Cushing’s syndrome. Hypersecretion of growth hormone 
underlies this syndrome in patients with pituitary masses, 
though ectopic production of growth hormone, particu-
larly by tumors, has been reported. Because growth hor-
mone is secreted in a highly pulsatile fashion, obtaining 
random serum levels is not reliable. Thus, the downstream 
mediator of systemic effects of growth hormone, IGF-1, is 
measured to screen for growth hormone excess. IGF-1 is 
made by the liver in response to growth hormone stimu-
lation. An oral glucose tolerance test with growth hor-
mone obtained at 0, 30, and 60 minutes may also be used 
to screen for acromegaly, as normal persons should sup-
press growth hormone to this challenge. Serum prolactin 
level is useful to screen for prolactinomas; 24-hour urinary 
free cortisol and ACTH assay are useful screens for Cush-
ing’s disease.
69. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 38) Hyperprolactinemia is the most common pi-
tuitary hormone hypersecretion syndrome in both men 
and women. Although pituitary adenoma is a frequent 
cause, there are several physiologic, medication-related, 
and potentially reversible etiologies. Prolactin is normally 
elevated during pregnancy and lactation, though lev-
els should fall to normal within 6 months of cessation of 
breastfeeding. Nipple stimulation, sleep, and stress may 
all increase prolactin levels. Systemic disorders such as 
chronic renal failure and cirrhosis may also cause elevated 
prolactin levels. Prolactin levels are also typically elevated 
after generalized seizures, which may be useful in the eval-
uation of pseudoseizures. Drug-induced hypersecretion is 
associated with dopamine receptor blockers, dopamine 
synthesis inhibitors, opiates, H2 antagonists, imipramines, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and calcium chan-
nel blockers. Hypothalamic-pituitary stalk damage may 
also cause hyperprolactinemia. Rathke’s cysts, which are 
benign intrasellar lesions, may produce endocrinologic 
abnormalities similar to pituitary adenomas.
70. The answer is E.
(Chap. 38) Tumors arising from the lactotrope cells of 
the pituitary account for half of all functioning pituitary 
tumors and most commonly affect women. The most 
common presentations are amenorrhea, infertility, and/or 
galactorrhea. Microadenomas rarely progress to become 
macroadenomas. For symptomatic disease, the primary 
goals of therapy are control of hyperprolactinemia, reduc-
tion of tumor size, restoration of menses and fertility, and 
resolution of galactorrhea. Usually oral dopamine ago-
nists, such as cabergoline and bromocriptine, are used for 
this purpose.
71. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 38) Adult growth hormone deﬁciency is usually 
caused by hypothalamic or pituitary damage. Because 
growth hormone is no longer important for achiev-
ing stature, the presentation is different from childhood 
growth hormone deﬁciency. Although growth hormone 
has direct tissue effects, it primarily acts through increas-
ing secretion of IGF-1, which in turn stimulates lipoly-
sis, increases circulating fatty acids, reduces omental fat 
mass, and enhances lean body mass. Thus, deﬁciency of 
growth hormone causes the opposite effects. In addition, 
hypertension, left ventricular dysfunction, and increased 
plasma ﬁbrinogen levels may also be present with deﬁ-
cient growth hormone. Reduced, not increased, bone 
mineral density may also occur in adults with growth hor-
mone deﬁciency.
72. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 38) The patient has a clinical presentation con-
sistent with Cushing’s syndrome. Although many cases 
of inappropriate elevation of ACTH are due to pitu-
itary tumors, a substantial proportion are due to ectopic 
ACTH secretion. Clues to this diagnosis include a rapid 
onset of hypercortisolism features associated with skin 
hyperpigmentation and severe myopathy. Additionally, 
hypertension, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, glucose 
intolerance, and edema are more prominent in ectopic 
ACTH secretion than in pituitary tumors. Serum po-
tassium below 3.3 mmol/L is present in 70% of ectopic 
ACTH cases, but in less than 10% of pituitary-dependent 
Cushing’s syndrome. ACTH levels will be high, as this 
is the underlying cause of both types of Cushing’s syn-
drome. Corticotropin-releasing hormone is rarely the 
cause of Cushing’s syndrome. Unfortunately, MRI of the 
pituitary gland will not visualize lesions less than 2 mm; 
thus occasional sampling of the inferior petrosal veins is 
required, but this is not indicated in the case presented at 
this time in the evaluation.
73. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 38) The patient has panhypopituitarism and is un-
able to make TSH; thus her plasma TSH level will always 
be low, regardless of the adequacy of her T4 replacement. 
A free T4 level will allow the determination of whether 
her plasma level is in the normal range of thyroid hor-
mone. This, coupled with her symptoms, will aid in the 
determination of proper levothyroxine dosing. There is 
no evidence of recurrent disease clinically; thus MRI is 
not useful. She is unlikely to have primary thyroid disease, 
Review and Self-Assessment
840
and T4 level is unknown presently, so thyroid uptake scan 
is not indicated at this time.
74. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 38) The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome relies on 
documentation of endogenous hypercortisolism. Of the 
list of choices, the most cost-effective and precise test is 
the 24-hour urine free cortisol. Failure to suppress plasma 
morning cortisol after overnight suppression with 1 mg 
dexamethasone is an alternative. Most ACTH-secreting 
pituitary adenomas are less than 5 mm in diameter, and ap-
proximately half are not detected even with sensitive MRI. 
Further, because incidental microadenomas are common 
in the pituitary, the presence of a small pituitary abnor-
mality on MRI may not establish the source of ACTH 
production. Basal plasma ACTH levels are used to distin-
guish between ACTH-independent (adrenal or exogenous 
glucocorticoid) and ACTH-dependent (pituitary, ectopic 
ACTH) sources of hypercortisolism. Mean basal ACTH 
levels are higher in patients with ectopic ACTH production 
than in patients with pituitary ACTH adenomas. There is 
signiﬁcant overlap in ACTH levels, however, and this test 
should not be used as an initial diagnostic test. Rarely, pa-
tients have Cushing’s syndrome and elevated ACTH due 
to a CRH-releasing tumor. In this case, CRH levels are 
elevated. Inferior petrosal venous sampling can be used to 
identify a pituitary source of ACTH secretion when imag-
ing modalities do not reveal a source.
75. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 38) The identiﬁcation of an empty sella is often 
the result of an incidental MRI ﬁnding. Typically these 
patients will have normal pituitary function and should 
be reassured. It is likely that the surrounding rim of pitu-
itary tissue is functioning normally. An empty sella may 
signal the insidious onset of hypopituitarism, and labora-
tory results should be followed closely. Unless her clinical 
situation changes, repeat MRI is not indicated. Endocrine 
malignancy is unlikely, and surgery is not part of the man-
agement of an empty sella.
76. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 39) The onset of multiple sclerosis (MS) may be 
abrupt or insidious. Symptoms may be severe or seem so 
trivial that a patient may not seek medical attention for 
months or years. Indeed, at autopsy, approximately 0.1% 
of individuals who were asymptomatic during life will be 
found, unexpectedly, to have pathologic evidence of MS. 
Similarly, in the modern era, an MRI scan obtained for 
an unrelated reason may show evidence of asymptomatic 
MS. Symptoms of MS are extremely varied and depend 
on the location and severity of lesions within the CNS 
(see Table 39-2). Examination often reveals evidence of 
neurologic dysfunction, often in asymptomatic locations. 
For example, a patient may present with symptoms in one 
leg but signs in both.
77. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 39) The four clinical types of multiple sclerosis 
(MS) include relapsing/remitting, secondary progressive, 
primary progressive, and progressive relapsing. Relapsing/
remitting MS (RRMS) accounts for 85% of MS cases at 
onset and is characterized by discrete attacks that gener-
ally evolve over days to weeks (rarely over hours). There 
is often complete recovery over the ensuing weeks to 
months. However, when ambulation is severely impaired 
during an attack, approximately half will fail to improve. 
Between attacks, patients are neurologically stable. Sec-
ondary progressive MS (SPMS) always begins as RRMS. 
At some point, however, the clinical course changes so 
that the patient experiences a steady deterioration in func-
tion unassociated with acute attacks (which may continue 
or cease during the progressive phase). SPMS produces a 
greater amount of ﬁxed neurologic disability than RRMS. 
For a patient with RRMS, the risk of developing SPMS 
is approximately 2% each year, meaning that the great 
majority of RRMS ultimately evolves into SPMS. SPMS 
appears to represent a late stage of the same underlying 
illness as RRMS. Primary progressive MS (PPMS) ac-
counts for approximately 15% of cases. These patients do 
not experience attacks but only a steady functional decline 
from disease onset. Compared to RRMS, the sex distri-
bution is more even, the disease begins later in life (mean 
age approximately 40 years), and disability develops faster 
(at least relative to the onset of the ﬁrst clinical symptom). 
Despite these differences, PPMS appears to represent the 
same underlying illness as RRMS. Progressive/relapsing 
MS (PRMS) overlaps PPMS and SPMS and accounts for 
about 5% of MS patients. Like patients with PPMS, these 
patients experience a steady deterioration in their con-
dition from disease onset. However, like SPMS patients, 
they experience occasional attacks superimposed upon 
their progressive course. Autoimmune autonomic neu-
ropathy is a distinct clinical syndrome not related to MS. 
It presents with the subacute development of autonomic 
disturbances with orthostatic hypotension, enteric neu-
ropathy (gastroparesis, ileus, constipation/diarrhea), and 
cholinergic failure; the latter consists of loss of sweating, 
sicca complex, and a tonic pupil. Autoantibodies against 
the ganglionic ACh receptor (A3 AChR) are present in 
the serum of many patients and are now considered to be 
diagnostic of this syndrome.
78. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 40) In a patient with suspected bacterial meningi-
tis empirical therapy should be administered promptly to 
reduce mortality and morbidity. The decision to obtain an 
imaging study prior to lumbar puncture (LP) is based on 
the concern of precipitating herniation in a patient with 
elevated intracranial pressure or focal CNS lesions. There-
fore, patients with the presence of papilledema on physi-
cal examination, history of recent head trauma, known or 
suspected intracranial lesions (immunosuppressed, known 
Review and Self-Assessment
841
malignancy), focal neurologic ﬁndings, or depressed level 
of consciousness should have a head CT or MRI prior to 
LP. In an immunocompetent patient with no known his-
tory of recent head trauma, a normal level of conscious-
ness, and no evidence of papilledema or focal neurologic 
deﬁcits, it is considered safe to perform LP without prior 
neuroimaging studies. Kernig’s sign is elicited in a supine 
patient by ﬂexing the thigh and knee. A positive sign oc-
curs when the patient has head/neck pain when passively 
straightening the knee. The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 
this sign (also Brudzinski’s) for bacterial meningitis are 
unknown, but they imply meningeal irritation, not an in-
tracranial lesion or elevated intracranial pressure. While 
cerebrospinal ﬂuid cultures may be impacted by adminis-
tration of antibiotics prior to LP, stains, antigen tests, and 
polymerase chain reaction tests will not be affected.
79. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 40) The release of bacterial cell wall components 
after killing by antibiotics may evoke a marked inﬂam-
matory cytokine response in the subarachnoid space. 
This inﬂammation may lead to increased damage of the 
blood-brain barrier and central nervous system damage. 
Glucocorticoids can blunt this response by inhibiting tu-
mor necrosis factor and interleukin-1. They work best if 
administered before antibiotics. Clinical trials have dem-
onstrated that dexamethasone, 10 mg IV administered 20 
minutes before antibiotics, reduced unfavorable outcomes, 
including death. The dexamethasone was continued for 
4 days. The beneﬁts were most striking in pneumococ-
cal meningitis. Because this is the most common cause 
of meningitis in the elderly, empirical coverage should 
include this intervention as well. The efﬁcacy of dexa-
methasone therapy in preventing neurologic sequelae is 
different between high- and low-income countries. Ran-
domized trials in low-income countries (sub-Saharan Af-
rica, Southeast Asia) failed to show beneﬁt in subgroups 
of patients. The lack of efﬁcacy of dexamethasone in these 
trials has been attributed to late presentation to the hos-
pital with more advanced disease, antibiotic pretreatment, 
malnutrition, infection with HIV, and treatment of pa-
tients with probable, but not microbiologically proven, 
bacterial meningitis. The results of these clinical trials sug-
gest that patients in sub-Saharan Africa and those in low-
income countries with negative CSF Gram stain and cul-
ture should not be treated with dexamethasone. Empirical 
antibiotics in this case should include a third-generation 
cephalosporin, vancomycin, and ampicillin. However, 
dexamethasone may decrease vancomycin penetration 
into the CSF, so its use should be considered carefully in 
cases where the most likely organism requires vancomycin 
coverage. Acyclovir or valacyclovir may be used as initial 
empiric treatment in cases of suspected herpes CNS infec-
tion. However, in this case the LP is highly suggestive 
of acute bacterial infection. Intravenous gamma globu-
lin is used as adjunctive therapy in children with known 
immunoglobulin deﬁciency who are at risk of viral men-
ingitis/encephalitis.
80. The answer is D.
(Chap. 40) Listeria has become an increasingly important 
cause of bacterial meningitis in neonates (<1 month of 
age), pregnant women, individuals more than 60 years 
old, and immunocompromised individuals. Infection is 
acquired by eating contaminated foods such as unpasteur-
ized dairy products, coleslaw, milk, soft cheeses, delicates-
sen meats, and uncooked hot dogs. Ampicillin is the agent 
most often added to the initial empirical regimen to cover 
L. monocytogenes.
81. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 41) Ibuprofen, isoniazid, ciproﬂoxacin, tolmetin, 
sulfa-containing medicines, and phenazopyridine have 
been implicated in drug hypersensitivity leading to men-
ingitis. The cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) will typically show 
neutrophils, but mononuclear cells or eosinophils are oc-
casionally present. Most causes of chronic (not recurrent) 
meningitis cause a predominance of mononuclear cells. 
The differential for chronic meningitis is broad and a di-
agnosis is often difﬁcult to make. The treating physician 
needs to consider a diverse array of viral, fungal, bacte-
rial, mycobacterial, helminthic, and protozoal pathogens, 
both common and exotic, and therefore should obtain a 
detailed social history and consult an expert in the ﬁeld. 
Recurrent meningitis is often due to herpes simplex virus 
type 2 infection and this should be ruled out, particu-
larly if active genital ulcers develop concurrently. Malig-
nancy, sarcoidosis, and vasculitis are all potential causes, 
and history, physical examination, and appropriate further 
testing should dictate the degree to which these possibili-
ties are explored. Medications are often overlooked as a 
cause of chronic meningitis and should always be carefully 
considered. When CSF neutrophils predominate after 3 
weeks of illness, Nocardia, Actinomyces, Brucella, tuberculo-
sis (<10% of cases), and fungal and noninfectious causes of 
chronic meningitis should be considered.
82. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 43) Prions are infectious particles that cause cen-
tral nervous system degeneration. The human prion dis-
eases described to date include Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease 
(CJD), kuru, Gerstmann-Straüssler-Scheinker disease, and 
fatal insomnia. The most common prion disease is sporadic 
CJD (sCJD), which occurs in a seemingly random pattern 
in adults in their ﬁfth and sixth decades of life. sCJD ac-
counts for about 85% of cases of CJD and occurs in approx-
imately 1 per 1 million population. Variant CJD (vCJD) 
results from infection from bovine exposure to tainted beef 
from cattle with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). 
There has been a steady decline of cases of vCJD in Europe 
over the past decade. Infectious CJD (iCJD) has resulted 
from injection of tainted human growth hormone, as well 
Review and Self-Assessment
842
as transplant of infected dura mater grafts into humans. Fa-
milial CJD (fCJD) is due to germ-line mutations that follow 
an autosomal dominant inheritance. Kuru is due to infec-
tion through ritualistic cannibalism. Gerstmann-Straüssler-
Scheinker disease and familial fatal insomnia (FFI) occur as 
dominantly inherited prion diseases. Sporadic cases of fatal 
insomnia (sFI) have been described.
83. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 43) Startle myoclonus is a worrisome sign but is 
neither sensitive nor speciﬁc for CJD, though it is more 
worrisome if it occurs during sleep. The constellation of 
dementia, myoclonus, and periodic electrical bursts in 
an afebrile 60-year-old patient generally indicates CJD. 
Clinical abnormalities in CJD are conﬁned to the CNS. 
Lewy body dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, central nervous 
system infections, and myoclonic epilepsy can all cause 
myoclonus. Both EEG and MRI can help differentiate 
CJD from these disorders. The MRI ﬁnding of corti-
cal ribboning and intensity in the basal ganglia on ﬂuid-
attenuated inversion recovery sequences is characteristic 
of CJD. EEG is useful if stereotypical periodic bursts every 
1–2 seconds are present, but this is seen in only 60% of 
cases, and other ﬁndings may be less speciﬁc. Demonstra-
tion of speciﬁc immunoassays for proteolytic products of 
disease-causing prion proteins (PrPSc) at brain biopsy may 
be necessary to conﬁrm diagnosis in some cases. However, 
these proteins are not uniformly distributed throughout 
the brain and false-negative biopsies occur. Both surgeons 
and pathologists must be warned to use standard precau-
tions under these circumstances. These proteins cannot be 
measured from cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). CSF in CJD is 
usually normal except for a minimally elevated protein. 
Many patients with CJD have elevated CSF stress protein 
14-3-3. This test alone is neither sensitive nor speciﬁc, 
as patients with herpes simplex virus encephalitis, multi-
infarct dementia, and stroke may have similar elevations.
84. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 44) One of the better characterized paraneoplastic 
neurologic syndromes is cerebellar ataxia caused by Pur-
kinje cell drop-out in the cerebellum; it is manifested by 
dysarthria, limb and gait ataxia, and nystagmus. Radiologic 
imaging reveals cerebellar atrophy. Many antibodies have 
been associated with this syndrome, including anti-Yo, 
anti-Tr, and antibodies to the glutamate receptor. Although 
lung cancer, particularly small cell cancer, accounts for a 
large number of patients with neoplasm-associated cerebel-
lar ataxia, those with the syndrome who display anti-Yo 
antibodies in the serum typically have breast or ovarian 
cancer. Cerebellar ataxia may also be seen in Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma in association with anti-Tr antibodies.
85. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 45) Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) syndrome is 
the most common type of hereditary neuropathy. CMT 
is comprised of several similar but genetically distinct 
conditions with different associated mutations. CMT1 
is the most common and is an inherited demyelinating 
sensorimotor neuropathy. CMT1 affects patients in the 
ﬁrst to third decades of life with distal leg weakness, i.e., 
footdrop. Although patients generally do not complain of 
sensory symptoms, these can often be elicited on physical 
examination. Muscle stretch reﬂexes are unobtainable or 
reduced throughout and calves are often atrophied, which 
makes legs appear to have a so-called inverted champagne 
bottle appearance. Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy 
(HNA) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by recurrent attacks of pain, weakness, and sensory loss in 
the distribution of the brachial plexus that often begins in 
childhood. Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 
(HSAN) is a very rare group of hereditary neuropathies in 
which sensory and autonomic dysfunction predominates 
over muscle weakness. This would not ﬁt the clinical pat-
tern described here. Guillain-Barré syndrome presents 
generally acutely with involvement of both proximal and 
distal weakness and sensory loss. The prolonged symp-
tom period and distribution described here is not typical 
for Guillain-Barré syndrome. Fabry disease is an X-linked 
disorder in which men are more commonly affected than 
women. Patients have angiokeratomas, which are reddish-
purple lesions usually found around the umbilicus, scro-
tum, and inguinal region. Burning pain in the hands and 
feet often is found in late childhood or early adult life. 
Patients also have premature atheroscloerosis from the 
underlying mutation in the alpha-galactosidase gene with 
accumulation of ceramide in nerves and blood vessels.
86. The answer is E.
(Chap. 45) One of the most common side effects of iso-
niazid treatment is peripheral neuropathy. The elderly, 
malnourished, and “slow acetylators” are at increased risk 
for developing the neuropathy. INH inhibits pyridoxal 
phosphokinase, resulting in pyridoxine (vitamin B6) de-
ﬁciency and the neuropathy. Prophylactic administration 
of pyridoxine can prevent the neuropathy from devel-
oping. Symptoms are generally dysesthesias and sensory 
ataxia. Impaired large-ﬁber sensory modalities are found 
on examination. Cobalamin (B12) is not reduced in this 
condition and is unaffected by isoniazid. Neurontin and 
pregabalin may alleviate symptoms but will not reverse 
the neuropathy. There is no indication that hypothyroid-
ism is present.
87. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 45) Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most common 
cause of peripheral neuropathy in developed countries and 
is associated with several different types of polyneuropathy 
including distal symmetric sensory or sensorimotor poly-
neuropathy, autonomic neuropathy, diabetic neuropathic 
cachexia, polyradiculoneuropathies, cranial neuropa-
thies, and other mononeuropathies. Risk factors for the 
Review and Self-Assessment
843
development of neuropathy include long-standing and 
poorly controlled diabetes and the presence of retinopathy 
or nephropathy. The patient here appears to have diabetic 
distal symmetric sensory and sensorimotor polyneuropa-
thy (DSPN), which is the most common form of diabetic 
neuropathy and presents with sensory loss beginning in 
the toes and gradually progresses over time up the legs 
and into the ﬁngers and arms. Symptoms also may include 
tingling, burning, and deep, aching pains. Nerve biopsy, 
though rarely indicated, often shows axonal degeneration, 
endothelial hyperplasia, and occasionally perivascular in-
ﬂammation. Tight glucose control prevents the develop-
ment of disease but does not reverse established disease. 
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy is often seen in combi-
nation with DSPN and manifests by abnormal sweating, 
dysfunctional thermoregulation, dry eyes and mouth, pos-
tural hypotension, gastrointestinal abnormalities including 
gastroparesis, and genitourinary dysfunction.
88. The answer is B.
(Chap. 45) Peripheral neuropathy is a general term indi-
cating peripheral nerve disorders of any cause. The causes 
are legion, but peripheral neuropathy can be classiﬁed by 
a number of means: axonal versus demyelinating, mono-
neuropathy versus polyneuropathy versus mononeuritis 
multiplex, sensory versus motor, and by the tempo of 
the onset of symptoms. Mononeuropathy typically results 
from local compression, trauma, or entrapment of a nerve. 
Polyneuropathy often results from a more systemic pro-
cess. The distinction between axonal and demyelinating 
can often be made only with nerve conduction studies. 
HIV infection causes a common, distal, symmetric, mainly 
sensory polyneuropathy. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency typically 
causes a sensory neuropathy that predominantly involves 
the dorsal columns. Hypothyroidism and acromegaly may 
both cause compression and swelling of nerve ﬁbers, re-
sulting ﬁrst in sensory symptoms and later in disease with 
motor symptoms. Critical illness polyneuropathy is pre-
dominantly motor in presentation. Patients typically pres-
ent with weakness that can be profound. These patients 
may recover over the course of weeks to months. The 
etiology is unknown, but an association may exist with 
prolonged immobilization, severity of illness, neuromus-
cular blockade, and corticosteroids.
89. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 45) Carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by the en-
trapment of the median nerve at the wrist. Symptoms 
begin with paresthesias in the median nerve distribution. 
With worsening, atrophy and weakness may develop. 
This condition is most commonly caused by excessive 
use of the wrist and situations involving repetitive mo-
tion. Most cases are idiopathic other than those related 
to occupational or environmental associations. Less com-
monly, systemic disease may result in carpal tunnel syn-
drome related to nerve compression or inﬁltrative disease. 
This may be suspected when bilateral disease is apparent. 
Tenosynovitis with arthritis, as in the case of rheumatoid 
arthritis, and thickening of the connective tissue, as in the 
case of amyloid or acromegaly, may cause carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Other systemic diseases, such as hypothyroid-
ism and diabetes mellitus, are also possible etiologies. 
Acute or chronic leukemia is not typically associated with 
carpal tunnel syndrome.
90. The answer is B.
(Chap. 46) Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute, 
severe polyradiculoneuropathy that is autoimmune in na-
ture. GBS manifests as rapidly evolving, areﬂexic motor 
paralysis with or without sensory disturbance, usually with 
ascending paralysis developing over several days. Approxi-
mately 70% of GBS cases occur 1–3 weeks after an acute 
infectious process, usually respiratory or gastrointestinal. 
Twenty to thirty percent of cases in North America, Eu-
rope, and Australia are preceded by infection or reinfec-
tion with Campylobacter jejuni. Other implicated infec-
tions include Epstein-Barr virus, CMV, and Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae. T. whippelii is the etiologic agent of Whipple’s 
disease and B. henselae is implicated in cat-scratch fever.
91. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 47) Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular 
disorder characterized by weakness and fatigability of 
skeletal muscles. The primary defect is a decrease in the 
number of acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular 
junction secondary to autoimmune antibodies. MG is 
not rare, affecting at least 1 in 7500 individuals. Women 
are affected more frequently than men. Women typically 
present in the second and third decades of life, and men 
present in the ﬁfth and sixth decades. The key features of 
MG are weakness and fatigability. Clinical features include 
weakness of the cranial muscles, particularly the eyelids 
and extraocular muscles. Diplopia and ptosis are common 
initial complaints. Weakness in chewing is noticeable af-
ter prolonged effort. Speech may be affected secondary 
to weakness of the palate or tongue. Swallowing may re-
sult from weakness of the palate, tongue, or pharynx. In 
the majority of patients the weakness becomes general-
ized. The diagnosis is suspected after the appearance of 
the characteristic symptoms and signs. Edrophonium is an 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that allows ACh to interact 
repeatedly with the limited number of AChRs, produc-
ing improvement in the strength of myasthenic muscles. 
False-positive tests may occur in patients with other neu-
rologic diseases. Electrodiagnostic testing may show evi-
dence of reduction in the amplitude of the evoked muscle 
action potentials with repeated stimulation. Testing for 
the speciﬁc antibodies to AChR are diagnostic. In addi-
tion to anti-AChR antibodies, antibodies to MuSK have 
been found in some patients with clinical MG. Antibodies 
to voltage-gated calcium channels are found in patients 
with the Lambert-Eaton syndrome.
Review and Self-Assessment
844
92. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 47) Except for lumbar puncture, all of the options 
listed are indicated at this time. Thymic abnormalities are 
present in 75% of patients with myasthenia gravis. A CT 
or MRI of the mediastinum may show enlargement or 
neoplastic changes in the thymus and is recommended 
upon diagnosis. Hyperthyroidism occurs in 3–8% of pa-
tients with myasthenia gravis and may aggravate weakness. 
Testing for rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies 
should also be obtained because of the association of my-
asthenia gravis to other autoimmune diseases. Due to side 
effects of immunosuppressive therapy, a thorough evalu-
ation should be undertaken to rule out latent or chronic 
infections such as tuberculosis. Measurements of venti-
latory function are valuable as a baseline because of the 
frequency and seriousness of respiratory impairment in 
myasthenic patients, and they can be used as an objective 
measure of response to therapy.
93. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 48) All classes of lipid-lowering agents have been 
implicated in muscle toxicity including ﬁbrates, HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitors, niacin, and ezetimibe. Myal-
gia, malaise, and muscle tenderness are the most common 
manifestations, and muscle pain may be exacerbated by 
exercise. Proximal weakness may be found on examina-
tion. In severe cases, rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria 
may occur, though most cases are mild. Concomitant use 
of statins with ﬁbrates and cyclosporine are more likely to 
cause adverse muscle reactions. Elevated serum CK is of-
ten identiﬁed, and muscle weakness is evidenced by myo-
pathic EMG studies and myonecrosis on muscle biopsy. 
Severe myalgias, muscle weakness, and signiﬁcant eleva-
tions in CK (>3 × upper limit of normal) and myoglobin-
uria are indications for stopping. After cessation, improve-
ment generally occurs after several weeks.
94. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 48) A number of endocrinologic conditions are as-
sociated with myopathy. Both hypo- and hyperthyroidism 
are associated with proximal muscle weakness. Hypothy-
roidism is frequently associated with an elevated CK, even 
with minimal clinical evidence of muscle disease. Thyro-
toxic patients may have fasciculations in addition to proxi-
mal myopathy, but in contrast to hypothyroid patients, 
CK is not generally elevated. Hyperparathyroidism is as-
sociated with muscle weakness that is generally proximal. 
Muscle wasting and brisk reﬂexes are also generally pres-
ent. Serum CK levels may be normal or slightly elevated. 
Serum calcium and phosphate levels show no correlation 
with clinical weakness. Hypoparathyroid patients also of-
ten have myopathy due to hypocalcemia. Patients with 
acromegaly usually have mild proximal weakness with-
out atrophy. The duration of acromegaly, not the serum 
growth hormone levels, correlate with the degree of my-
opathy. Diabetes mellitus is a very rare cause of myopathy, 
generally due to ischemic infarction of muscle and not a 
primary myopathy. Finally, vitamin D deﬁciency is asso-
ciated with muscle weakness, as are glucocorticoid excess 
states, e.g., Cushing’s disease.
95. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 48) There are two recognized clinical forms of 
myotonic dystrophy, both of which are characterized 
by autosomal dominant inheritance. Myotonic dystro-
phy 1 (DM1) is the most common form and the most 
likely disorder in this patient. Characteristic clinical fea-
tures of this disorder include a “hatchet-faced” appear-
ance, due to wasting of the facial muscles, and weakness of 
the neck muscles. In contrast to the muscular dystrophies 
(Becker and Duchenne), distal limb muscle weakness is 
more common in DM1. Palatal, pharyngeal, and tongue 
involvement are also common and produce the dysarthric 
voice that is frequently heard. The failure of relaxation 
after a forced hand-grip is characteristic of myotonia. 
Percussion of the thenar eminence can also elicit myo-
tonia. In most individuals, myotonia is present by age 5, 
but clinical symptoms of weakness that lead to diagnosis 
may not be present until adulthood. Cardiac conduction 
abnormalities and heart failure are also common in myo-
tonic dystrophy. Diagnosis can often be made from clini-
cal features alone in an individual with classic symptoms 
and a positive family history. An electromyogram would 
conﬁrm myotonia. Genetic testing for DM1 would show 
a characteristic trinucleotide repeat on chromosome 19. 
Genetic anticipation occurs with an increasing number of 
repeats and worsening clinical disease over successive gen-
erations. Myotonic dystrophy 2 (DM2) causes primarily 
proximal muscle weakness and is also known by the name 
proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM). Other features 
of the disease overlap with DM1. Acid maltase deﬁciency 
(glucosidase deﬁciency, or Pompe’s disease) has three rec-
ognized forms, only one of which has onset in adulthood. 
In the adult-onset form, respiratory muscle weakness is 
prominent and often is the presenting symptom. As stated 
previously, Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophies 
present with primarily proximal muscle weakness and are 
X-linked recessive disorders. Becker muscular dystrophy 
presents at a later age than Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
and has a more prolonged course. Otherwise, their fea-
tures are similar. Nemaline myopathy is a heterogeneous 
disorder marked by the threadlike appearance of muscle 
ﬁbers on biopsy. Nemaline myopathy usually presents in 
childhood and includes a striking facial appearance simi-
lar to that in myotonic dystrophy with a long, narrow 
face. This disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
fashion.
96. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 49) When patients present with proximal muscle 
weakness and myositis, whether polymyositis, derma-
tomyositis, or inclusion body myositis, the diagnosis is 
Review and Self-Assessment
845
conﬁrmed by analysis of serum muscle enzymes, EMG 
ﬁndings, and muscle biopsy. The most sensitive serum en-
zyme is creatinine kinase (CK), which can be elevated as 
much as 50-fold in active disease. CK levels usually par-
allel disease activity, but can be normal in some patients 
with inclusion body myositis or dermatomyositis. CK is 
always elevated in active polymyositis and thus is consid-
ered most sensitive. Other enzymes may be elevated as 
well including glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, gluta-
mate pyruvate transaminase, lactate dehydrogenase, and 
aldolase.
97. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 49) Various autoantibodies against nuclear anti-
gens, e.g., ANAs, and cytoplasmic antigens are found in 
up to 20% of patients with inﬂammatory myopathies. The 
antibodies to cytoplasmic antigens are directed against ri-
bonucleoproteins involved in protein synthesis (antisyn-
thetases) or translational transport (anti–signal-recognition 
particles). The antibody directed against the histidyl-trans-
fer RNA synthetase, called anti-Jo-1, accounts for 75% 
of all the antisynthetases and is clinically useful because 
up to 80% of patients with this autoantibody will have 
interstitial lung disease. Patients with anti-Jo-1 may also 
have Raynaud’s phenomenon, nonerosive arthritis, and 
the MHC molecules DR3 and DRw52. Interstitial lung 
disease associated with anti-Jo-1 is often rapidly progres-
sive and fatal, even if treated aggressively with cyclophos-
phamide or other immunosuppressants.
98. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 49) Dermatomyositis is associated with malignancy 
in up to 15% of cases, thus age-appropriate cancer screen-
ing is indicated when this diagnosis is made. Exhaustive 
cancer searches are not recommended, however. Der-
matomyositis may be associated occasionally with sclero-
derma and mixed connective tissue disease, but less fre-
quently with systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid 
arthritis, or Sjögren’s syndrome, which are more closely 
associated with polymyositis or inclusion body myositis 
(IBM). Viruses may be associated with IBM and poly-
myositis, but are not proven to be associated with der-
matomyositis. Parasites and bacteria such as cestodes and 
nematodes are associated with polymyositis, but not other 
forms of inﬂammatory myopathy. Finally, thyroid-stim-
ulating immunoglobulins are not known to be associated 
with dermatomyositis.
99. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 49) A common mistake in the management of pa-
tients with inﬂammatory myopathy is to “chase the CK” 
instead of adjusting therapy based on the clinical response. 
The goal of therapy is to improve strength. If that goal is 
being achieved, no augmentation of therapy is necessary. 
In this case, the plan to switch to long-term maintenance 
with steroid-sparing immunosuppressants should still be 
pursued. There have been no controlled studies compar-
ing mycophenolate to methotrexate for long-term use in 
polymyositis, and in the absence of an adverse reaction to 
mycophenolate, therapy should not be changed. Despite 
an elevated CK, patients with polymyositis who are re-
sponding to therapy do not need a repeat muscle biopsy.
100. The answer is B.
(Chap. 50) The FLAIR MRI shows increased signal bilat-
erally in the occipital lobes predominantly involving the 
white matter. This pattern is typical of a hyperperfusion 
state, in this case secondary to calcineurin-inhibitor toxic-
ity. This clinical-radiographic abnormality was previously 
described as reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy. 
However, this characterization is no longer utilized be-
cause the syndrome may not be reversible, the territory 
may not be conﬁned posteriorly, and gray matter may 
be involved. Hyperperfusion syndrome may be due to a 
hydrostatic elevation in cerebral capillary pressure or dis-
orders with endothelial dysfunction and capillary leakage. 
Hydrostatic causes include hypertensive encephalopathy, 
post–carotid endarterectomy syndrome, (pre)eclampsia, 
and high-altitude cerebral edema. Endothelial dysfunction 
causes include calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity, other che-
motherapeutic agent toxicity, HELLP syndrome, TTP, 
SLE, or granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s). 
The diagnosis is clinical and radiographic. CSF ﬁndings 
are nonspeciﬁc. In the case of cyclosporine the syndrome 
may occur with therapeutic serum levels and sporadically 
after years of treatment. Acoustic neuroma would present 
on MRI with a discrete mass. The radiologic and clinical 
appearance is not consistent with pituitary apoplexy. Post–
liver transplant patients are at risk of acute (streptococcal) 
and chronic (tuberculous) meningitis, but the clinical and 
radiologic ﬁndings in this case would not be typical.
101. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 50) Acute neurologic events, such as encepha-
lopathy or stroke (often related to intraoperative hy-
potension or embolism), are common after open heart 
surgery or coronary artery bypass graft (CABG). Addi-
tionally, a chronic syndrome of cognitive impairment is 
now increasingly recognized after surgery. Small or mi-
croemboli during surgery are thought to be the etiol-
ogy of a hyper- or hypoactive confusional state in the 
postoperative period. A smaller burden of microemboli 
may be responsible for the more subtle post–cardiac sur-
gery syndrome characterized by confusion and depressive 
symptoms as described in this case. Cardiac surgery may 
also unmask the early manifestations of vascular dementia 
or Alzheimer’s disease. Off-pump CABG patients have 
a shorter length of hospital stay and fewer periopera-
tive complications. Recent studies do not conﬁrm the 
hypothesis that off-pump surgery results in less cognitive 
impairment than on-pump surgery. Ongoing studies are 
testing the efﬁcacy of microﬁlters to capture emboli and 
Review and Self-Assessment
846
reduce CNS complications. Given the temporal relation 
to CABG surgery and the lack of temporal variability, 
multiple sclerosis is not likely in this case. Similarly, in 
the absence of meningitis or encephalitis signs or symp-
toms, streptococcal or West Nile virus disease is unlikely. 
vCJD is associated with ingestion of prion-contaminated 
product. It is characterized by rapidly developing deliri-
um and dementia, often associated with myoclonic jerks.
102. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 50) The peroneal nerve winds around the head 
of the ﬁbula below the lateral aspect of the knee. This 
superﬁcial location makes it vulnerable to trauma. Poorly 
applied leg braces, ﬁbular fracture, tight-ﬁtting stockings, 
or casts may cause peroneal nerve injury and neuropathy. 
Patients may present with footdrop (dorsiﬂexion defect) 
with weakness of foot eversion. Intact foot inversion at 
the ankle distinguishes peroneal nerve injury from L5 ra-
diculopathy, which involves the muscles innervated by 
the tibial nerve. Sensory loss due to peroneal nerve in-
jury involves the lateral aspect of the leg below the knee 
and the dorsum of the foot. Cauda equina syndrome is 
caused by compression of the spinal nerve roots of the 
lumbar plexus usually due to tumor, trauma, or spinal 
stenosis. It typically presents with weakness of the mus-
cles innervated by the involved nerves, incontinence, and 
decreased anal sphincter tone. Cauda equina syndrome is 
usually a medical emergency to avoid permanent func-
tional loss. The femoral nerve branches into anterior 
and posterior portions in the leg. Injury of the anterior 
branches may lead to sensory ﬁndings in the thigh and 
muscular ﬁndings in the sartorius and the quadriceps. L4 
radiculopathy causes symptoms in the anterior thigh and 
knee extensors (including the patellar reﬂex).
103. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 52) Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a disorder 
characterized by persistent and unexplained fatigue re-
sulting in severe impairment in daily functioning. Besides 
intense fatigue, most patients with CFS report concomi-
tant symptoms such as pain, cognitive dysfunction, and 
unrefreshing sleep. Additional symptoms can include 
headache, sore throat, tender lymph nodes, muscle aches, 
joint aches, feverishness, difﬁculty sleeping, psychiatric 
problems, allergies, and abdominal cramps. Criteria for 
the diagnosis of CFS have been developed by the U.S. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (see Table 
52-1). CFS is seen worldwide, with adult prevalence rates 
 varying between 0.2% and 0.4%. In the United States, 
the prevalence is higher in women, members of minority 
groups (African and Native Americans), and individuals 
with lower levels of education and occupational status. 
Approximately 75% of all CFS patients are women. The 
mean age of onset is between 29 and 35 years. It is prob-
able that many patients go undiagnosed and/or do not 
seek help.
104. The answer is B. 
(Chap. 52) Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and 
graded exercise therapy (GET) have been found to be the 
only beneﬁcial interventions in chronic fatigue syndrome 
(CFS). CBT is a psychotherapeutic approach directed at 
changing condition-related cognitions and behaviors. CBT 
for CFS aims at changing a patient’s perpetuating factors by 
exploiting various techniques and components. The inter-
vention, which typically consists of 12–14 sessions spread 
over 6 months, helps CFS patients gain control over their 
symptoms. GET is based on the model of decondition-
ing and exercise intolerance and usually involves a home 
exercise program that continues for 3–5 months. Walking 
or cycling is systematically increased, with set target heart 
rates. Evidence that deconditioning is the basis for symp-
toms in CFS is lacking, however. The primary component 
of CBT and GET that results in a reduction in fatigue is a 
change in the patient’s perception of fatigue and focus on 
symptoms. CBT is generally the more complex treatment, 
which might explain why CBT studies tend to yield better 
improvement rates than GET trials. Not all patients ben-
eﬁt from CBT or GET. Predictors of poor outcome are 
somatic comorbidity, current disability claims, and severe 
pain. CBT offered in an early stage of the illness reduces 
the burden of CFS for the patient as well as society in 
terms of decreased medical and disability-related costs. Full 
recovery from untreated CFS is rare: the median annual 
recovery rate is 5% (range 0–31%) and the improvement 
rate 39% (range 8–63%). Major depressive disorder, bipo-
lar disorder, eating disorder, and schizophrenia are exclu-
sion criteria for the diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome.
105. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 54) This patient is experiencing her ﬁrst epi-
sode of a panic attack and does not meet the criteria for 
panic disorder. In this situation, no speciﬁc treatment 
is required. The patient should be reassured in a man-
ner that is empathetic and supportive that she does not 
have any evidence of a serious medical disorder. Panic 
attacks are common, with about 1–3% of the popula-
tion experiencing at least one panic attack. Panic attacks 
begin abruptly, most commonly without an immediate 
precipitating cause, and peak in severity over 10 min-
utes. The symptoms usually subside spontaneously over 
the course of an hour. Diagnostic criteria for a panic at-
tack include a minimum of four of the following criteria: 
palpitations or racing heart, sweating, trembling, short-
ness of breath, feeling of choking, chest pain, nausea or 
GI distress, dizziness, derealization, fear of losing con-
trol, fear of dying, paresthesias, or chills/hot ﬂushes. If 
a patient subsequently develops panic disorder, a variety 
of treatment options can be pursued. Panic disorder is 
marked by at least 1 month of recurrent panic attacks 
associated with excessive worry about or change in be-
havior as a result of the attacks. The goals of therapy for 
panic attacks are to decrease the frequency of attacks and 
Review and Self-Assessment
847
the severity of symptoms during the attack. Antidepres-
sant medications are the cornerstone of therapy with se-
lective serotonin reuptake inhibitors being the most fre-
quently used class of medication. The dose of medication 
for panic disorder is typically lower than the antidepres-
sant dose. For ﬂuoxetine, this would be 5–10 mg daily. 
As these medications take 2–6 weeks to become effec-
tive, they are often combined with benzodiazepines to be 
used on an as-needed basis for immediate relief of attacks. 
Alprazolam and clonazepam are common agents used for 
panic disorder, although alprazolam may have more as-
sociated dependence with the need for escalating doses of 
medications. In combination with pharmacologic thera-
py, psychotherapy and education are also useful for the 
treatment of panic disorder. The therapy often includes 
breathing techniques, cognitive behavioral therapy, and 
even homework assignments.
106. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 54) There are increasing numbers of antidepres-
sant medications available in a variety of classes. Selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the most 
commonly used antidepressant drugs. This class of medi-
cations includes ﬂuoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, ﬂu-
voxamine, citalopram, and escitalopram. These medica-
tions are taken once daily and have side effects including 
sexual dysfunction, headache, and insomnia. Tricyclic 
antidepressants were commonly used in past decades for 
the treatment of depression. However, overdoses can 
be lethal, and anticholinergic side effects including dry 
mouth, constipation, and urinary retention can limit the 
dose. Medications in the tricyclic class of antidepressants 
include amitriptyline, nortriptyline, imipramine, desipra-
mine, doxepin, and clomipramine. Mixed norepineph-
rine/serotonin reuptake inhibitors and receptor blockers 
are a newer class of medications. These medications are 
increasing in use as they are quite effective and do not 
have the same frequency of sexual dysfunction. Medica-
tions in this class include venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, du-
loxetine, and mirtazapine. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
were once a common antidepressant class of medication, 
but these medications are now only rare used. There is a 
wide range of drug and food interactions that can lead to 
hypertensive crises. Examples of medication in this class 
include phenelzine, tranylcypromine, and isocarboxazid. 
A ﬁnal class of antidepressants is called simply mixed ac-
tion drugs and includes trazodone, bupropion, and ne-
fazodone.
107. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 54) Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was 
only added as a discrete disorder in 1980. The diagnos-
tic criteria for PTSD are long and require that an indi-
vidual experiences an event where there was an actual 
or perceived threat of death or serious injury and that 
the individual’s reaction included intense fear or help-
lessness. Following the event, the individual continues 
to re-experience the event and avoids stimuli associ-
ated with the trauma. In association with this, there is 
also often a generalized withdrawal and decrease in re-
sponsiveness. At the same time, the patient exhibits an 
increase in arousal that is often exhibited by insomnia, 
irritability, hypervigilance, and difﬁculty concentrating. 
Treatment of PTSD is almost always multifactorial, in-
cluding both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. It is 
not uncommon for an individual with PTSD to de-
velop a dependence on drugs or alcohol as an attempt 
to control the symptoms, and any substance abuse issues 
need to be treated simultaneously as well. This patient’s 
treatment would include avoidance of alcohol and in-
tensive substance abuse treatment as needed. Treatment 
with antidepressant medications can decrease anxiety 
and avoidance behaviors. Trazodone is often given 
at night for its sedating properties. Psychotherapeutic 
strategies include cognitive behavioral therapy to over-
come avoidance behaviors as well.
108. The answer is B.
(Chap. 54) Fifteen percent of the population will experi-
ence at least one episode of major depression over the 
course of a lifetime, and most episodes of major depres-
sion are treated by primary care practitioners. Treatment 
can be any of a number of medications across a variety of 
classes. Despite the popularity of newer antidepressants, 
there is no evidence that these medications are more ef-
ﬁcacious than older drugs like tricyclic antidepressants. 
Indeed, 60–70% of patients will respond to any drug 
chosen if given in a sufﬁcient dose for 6–8 weeks. Once 
a patient has been on treatment for about 2 months, the 
response should be evaluated, and if there has been an 
insufﬁcient response, a dosage increase should be con-
sidered. In this patient, a dosage increase yielded control 
of depressive symptoms at 4 months. Once control of 
symptoms has been achieved, the drug should be con-
tinued for an additional 6–9 months to prevent relapse. 
If a patient experiences any additional episodes of major 
depression, he or she will likely require indeﬁnite main-
tenance treatment.
109. The answer is A. 
(Chap. 56) Alcohol is primarily absorbed through the 
proximal small intestine, but small to moderate amounts 
can also be absorbed in the mouth, esophagus, stomach, 
and large intestines. Several factors can increase the rate 
of absorption. One factor that increases absorption is 
rapid gastric emptying, which can be induced by con-
current consumption of carbonated beverages. Another 
factor that increases absorption from the gut to the blood 
is the ingestion of alcohol in the absence of other calorie 
sources such as proteins, fat, or carbohydrates. A ﬁnal fac-
tor that can increase absorption is to drink alcohol that is 
diluted to a modest concentration (~20% or less). At high 
Review and Self-Assessment
848
alcohol concentrations absorption is decreased, although 
high blood levels may be achieved because the amount of 
alcohol ingested is high.
110. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 56) Alcohol has effects on many neurotransmit-
ters in the brain. The predominant effect of alcohol lies 
in its ability to cause the release of γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) and acts primarily at the GABAA receptors. 
GABA is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the 
brain and is associated with the sedative effects of alco-
hol. Many other drugs affect the GABA system includ-
ing benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine sleep aids such 
as zolpidem, anticonvulsants, and muscle relaxants. The 
euphoric effects of alcohol consumption are related to 
increases in dopamine, which is common to all pleasur-
able activities. The effects on dopamine are thought to 
be important in alcohol craving and relapse. In addition, 
alcohol alters opioid receptors and can lead to a release 
of beta endorphins during acute ingestion. In addition to 
these effects, alcohol also inhibits postsynaptic N-methyl-
D-aspartate excitatory glutamate receptors. Glutamate is 
the primary excitatory neurotransmitter of the brain, and 
its inhibition further contributes to the sedative effects 
of alcohol. Additional important effects on neurotrans-
mitters include increased serotonin activity and decreased 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
111. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 56) The acute effects of any drug depend on many 
factors including amount consumed and absorbed, pres-
ence of other drugs, and past experience with the drug. In 
an individual who is naïve to alcohol, drug levels as low 
as 0.02 g/dL can lead to a decrease in inhibitions and a 
slight feeling of intoxication. In the United States, “legal” 
intoxication occurs at a blood alcohol level of 0.08 g/dL 
in most states. At this level, decreases in cognitive and mo-
tor abilities are seen. Once an alcohol level of 0.20 g/dL is 
achieved, an individual is obviously impaired with slurred 
speech, poor judgment, and impaired coordination. Light 
coma and depression of respiratory rate, blood pressure, 
and pulse occur at levels of around 0.30 g/dL, and death 
is likely to occur at levels of 0.40 g/dL. However, in in-
dividuals who drink heavily, tolerance begins to develop 
to alcohol. After a period of 1–2 weeks of daily alcohol 
consumption, liver metabolism of alcohol increases by 
as much as 30%, but disappears quite quickly with absti-
nence. Cellular or pharmacodynamic tolerance also occurs 
and refers to the neurochemical changes that allow an in-
dividual to maintain more normal physiologic functioning 
despite the presence of alcohol.
112. The answer is C.
(Chap. 56) Alcohol abuse is deﬁned as repetitive prob-
lems in any one of four life areas that can be attributed to 
alcohol. The four life areas that can be affected by alco-
hol include social, interpersonal, legal, or occupational. 
In addition, an individual who repetitively engages in 
hazardous behaviors while under the inﬂuence of alcohol 
would be considered to suffer from alcohol abuse. How-
ever, this is to be differentiated from alcohol dependence. 
Alcohol dependence is deﬁned in the DSM-IV as repeat-
ed alcohol-related difﬁculties in three of seven life areas 
and includes the development of tolerance and depen-
dence. If tolerance or dependence is present, this predicts 
a more severe clinical course, and the presence of alcohol 
dependence decreases overall life span by about a decade. 
Only about 50% of individuals with alcohol abuse will 
continue to experience similar alcohol-related problems 
3–5 years later, and only 10% will go on to develop alco-
hol dependence. The lifetime risk of alcohol dependence 
in most Western countries is about 10–15% in men and 
5–8% in women. However, there may be higher rates 
in Ireland, France, and Scandinavian countries. In addi-
tion, native cultures appear to be especially susceptible to 
problems with alcohol dependence. This has been seen 
in Native Americans, Maoris, and the aboriginal tribes 
of Australia.
 About 60% of the risk for alcohol use disorders is attrib-
uted to genetic inﬂuences. Children of alcoholics do have 
a higher risk of alcohol abuse and dependence; however, 
this risk is about 4 times higher, not 10. Identical twins also 
exhibit a higher risk of concurrent alcohol abuse and de-
pendence when compared to fraternal twins. The genetic 
factors that appear to be most strongly linked to alcohol 
use disorders include genes that are linked to impulsiv-
ity, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. In addition, genes 
that affect alcohol metabolism or sensitivity to alcohol also 
contribute to the genetics of alcoholism. A mutation in 
aldehyde dehydrogenase that is more common in indi-
viduals of Asian descent results in intense ﬂushing when 
alcohol is consumed and confers a decreased risk of alco-
hol dependence. Conversely, genetic variants that lead to 
a low sensitivity to alcohol increase the risk of subsequent 
alcohol abuse and dependence, as higher and higher doses 
of alcohol are required to achieve the same effects.
113. The answer is B.
(Chap. 56) Individuals with alcohol dependence are sus-
ceptible to alcohol withdrawal when alcohol intake is 
stopped abruptly. The individual in this case scenario is 
likely alcohol dependent given his large amount of alco-
hol intake on a daily basis. Symptoms of alcohol with-
drawal can range from mild tremulousness to hallucina-
tions, seizures, or the development of delirium tremens. 
Other clinical features of alcohol withdrawal include 
anxiety, insomnia, and autonomic nervous system over-
activity manifested as tachycardia, tachypnea, elevated 
blood pressure, and fever. This patient exhibits symptoms 
of the more severe delirium tremens, with mental con-
fusion, agitation, and ﬂuctuating levels of consciousness. 
While minor symptoms of alcohol withdrawal may begin 
Review and Self-Assessment
849
as soon as 5–10 hours after cessation of alcohol intake, 
the symptoms do not peak for 48–72 hours, putting this 
patient in the appropriate time frame for alcohol with-
drawal.
 The best approach for the alcohol-dependent patient 
who abruptly stops all alcohol intake is to take a prophy-
lactic approach and screen early for symptoms of alcohol 
withdrawal. Tools such as the Revised Clinical Institute 
for Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol (CIWA-Ar) may 
help clinicians and nurses screen for the early development 
of symptoms and allow intervention before symptoms es-
calate. In this setting, most experts recommend the use of 
oral long-acting benzodiazepines such as chlordiazepox-
ide or diazepam beginning on the ﬁrst day. However, in 
this case, the patient received no such treatment and is 
now experiencing severe alcohol withdrawal and delir-
ium tremens. Intravenous medications that have a rapid 
onset of action and can be titrated for more aggressive 
symptom management are often employed in this setting. 
Thus, the use of IV lorazepam or diazepam is preferred 
in this patient. Following an initial bolus, repeated doses 
can be used in short intervals until the patient is calm but 
arousable. In some instances a continuous infusion may be 
required, although bolus dosing is preferred. In the most 
severe cases, propofol or barbiturates may be required, al-
though the patient would most likely need to be intubated 
for airway protection with use of these medications.
 The other options listed are not appropriate for ini-
tial management of this patient. Intravenous ﬂuids and 
thiamine had been administered since hospital admis-
sion. Administration of glucose-containing ﬂuids without 
thiamine in the alcohol-dependent patient can precipitate 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy, which would present with 
ophthalmoparesis, ataxia, and encephalopathy. Given the 
patient’s fever, an infectious etiology can be considered, 
and it would be appropriate to perform blood cultures in 
this patient. However, given the clear symptoms of al-
cohol withdrawal and lack of necrotizing pancreatitis on 
CT abdomen, empiric treatment with antibiotics is not 
required. Likewise, without focal neurologic ﬁndings, a 
head CT would be a low-yield diagnostic procedure that 
would be difﬁcult to perform in the patient’s current agi-
tated condition and would only delay appropriate therapy. 
Finally, restraints are best avoided if the patient’s safety 
can be ensured through the appropriate use of benzodi-
azepines, as restraints are only likely to make the patient’s 
agitation worse and may lead to iatrogenic harm. Halo-
peridol may have some sedative effect on the patient, but 
could lead to torsades de pointe arrhythmia as this patient 
is at risk for electrolyte deﬁciencies from his alcoholism 
and pancreatitis.
114. The answer is D. 
(Chap. 56) In individuals recovering from alcoholism 
several medications may have a modest beneﬁt in increas-
ing abstinence rates. The two medications with the best 
risk-beneﬁt ratio are acamprosate and naltrexone. Acam-
prosate inhibits NMDA receptors, decreasing symptoms 
of prolonged alcohol withdrawal. Naltrexone is an opi-
oid antagonist than can be administered orally or as a 
monthly injection. It is thought to act by decreasing ac-
tivity in the dopamine-rich ventral tegmental area of the 
brainstem and subsequently decreasing the pleasurable 
feelings associated with alcohol consumption. There is 
some research to suggest that the use of these medications 
in combination may be more effective than either one 
alone. Disulﬁram is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibi-
tor that has been used for many years in the treatment of 
alcoholism. However, it is no longer a commonly used 
drug due to its many side effects and risks associated with 
treatment. The primary mechanism by which it acts is 
to create negative effects of vomiting and autonomic 
nervous system hyperactivity when alcohol is consumed 
concurrently with use of the medication. As it inhibits an 
enzyme that is part of the normal metabolism of alcohol, 
it allows the buildup of acetaldehyde, which creates these 
symptoms. Because of the autonomic side effects, it is 
contraindicated in individuals with hypertension, a his-
tory of stroke, heart disease, or diabetes mellitus.
115. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 57) Prescription drug abuse has increased dramati-
cally among all age groups and is strikingly common in 
teenagers. Since 2007, prescription opiates have passed 
marijuana as the most common illicit drugs that adoles-
cents initially abuse. This has occurred at the same time as 
rates of prescription narcotic abuse have increased across 
all age groups. The annual prevalence of heroin abuse 
is approximately 0.14% of the population. In contrast, 
this prevalence is only one-third the rate of prescription 
opiate abuse. Among prescription narcotics, oxycodone 
is the single most commonly abused drug. Other com-
mon prescription narcotics that are abused include mor-
phine and hydrocodone. Among health care profession-
als, meperidine and fentanyl are more frequently abused.
116. The answer is B.
(Chap. 57) Tolerance and withdrawal begin within 6–8 
weeks of chronic daily opioid use. Tolerance devel-
ops not because of increased metabolism, but through a 
change in the pharmacodynamics of the drugs, requiring 
increasing doses to achieve the euphoric effects and pre-
vent withdrawal. With the abrupt cessation of narcotics, 
acute withdrawal symptoms begin within 8–10 hours after 
the last dose. While the symptoms of narcotic withdrawal 
are noxious, they are not life threatening, as is the case 
with benzodiazepine or barbiturate withdrawal. The pri-
mary symptoms of opiate withdrawal are related to over 
activity of the autonomic nervous system. This manifests 
as increased lacrimation, rhinorrhea, and sweating. In ad-
dition, patients frequently will have diffuse piloerection 
(chill bumps), giving rise to the term “cold turkey.” As 
Review and Self-Assessment
850
withdrawal symptoms progress, patients appear restless 
with myalgias, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Hyper-
tension, hyperthermia, and tachypnea can occur as well. 
Hypotension is not a symptom of opioid withdrawal. A 
patient with known infection and new-onset hypotension 
should be evaluated for systemic infection, not withdrawal.
117. The answer is E. 
(Chap. 57) The patient is presenting with an acute over-
dose of an unknown quantity of extended-release opioid 
medications taken with alcohol. When evaluating and 
treating a patient with an intention overdose, the ﬁrst 
priority is to stabilize the patient’s condition. The patient 
was appropriately given the opiate antagonist naloxone by 
emergency responders as the patient was near-apneic. In 
addition, the patient was also appropriately intubated and 
stabilized for transport to the hospital. In the emergency 
room, however, the patient remained hypotensive and 
unresponsive. At this point, the next step in stabilizing the 
patient is to support the blood pressure with bolus ﬂuid 
resuscitation, and if the patient fails to respond, IV vaso-
pressors would be required. Given his ongoing unrespon-
sive state and the expected long duration of effect with a 
sustained-release preparation, it is appropriate to initiate a 
continuous infusion of naloxone. After a bolus dose, the 
expected onset of action is 1–2 minutes, but the duration 
of effect is only a few hours. Some care must be taken 
when giving naloxone as one only wants to reverse the 
respiratory and cardiovascular depression associated with 
the overdose. Particularly in chronic drug abusers, high 
doses of naloxone can precipitate the distressing symptoms 
of narcotic withdrawal. When long-acting preparations of 
opioids are taken, activated charcoal and gastric lavage are 
appropriate considerations to decrease the absorption of 
any undigested pills. While the patient is being stabilized 
from a cardiovascular and respiratory standpoint, it is im-
portant that the clinician consider if any other concurrent 
ingestion may have occurred that would affect the patient’s 
outcome. As the patient is unable to provide any history 
and the overdose was not witnessed, one must not focus 
solely on the opioids. The appropriate approach is to per-
form a comprehensive toxicology evaluation that should 
include a urine drug screen, blood alcohol level, and acet-
aminophen levels, at a minimum. One could also consider 
sending for levels of aspirin or tricyclic antidepressants.
118. The answer is C. 
(Chap. 58) Marijuana is the most commonly used 
illegal drug in the United States with over 6% of all in-
dividuals reporting current usage in 2009 (http://www.
whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/pdf/nsduh.
pdf, accessed July 25, 2011). In part, the prevalence of 
marijuana use is related to the widespread belief that 
marijuana is thought to have few negative health ef-
fects. Acutely, marijuana causes a sense of relaxation 
and mild euphoria, not unlike that of alcohol intoxi-
cation. In addition, impaired judgment, cognition, 
and psychomotor performance are seen. Occasionally, 
acute intoxication can lead to negative emotional re-
sponses as well. A consensus about the chronic effects 
of marijuana usage is not clearly deﬁned. Tradition-
ally, marijuana usage has been linked with an “amoti-
vational syndrome.” While it is true that chronic users 
of marijuana may lose interest in day-to-day activities 
and spend more time using the drug, this is certainly 
not speciﬁc for marijuana uses, and a speciﬁc “amoti-
vational syndrome” is not deﬁned with chronic mari-
juana use. Other symptoms that have been attributed to 
chronic marijuana use that lack good evidence for cau-
sation include depression and maturational dysfunction. 
In individuals with a history of schizophrenia, how-
ever, chronic marijuana use has been associated with an 
increased risk of psychotic symptoms.
 The physical effects of chronic marijuana use are also 
not clearly known. Acutely, marijuana causes increased 
heart rate, but tolerance for this effect occurs rapidly. 
Acute ingestion can also precipitate angina. The chronic 
effects on lung function are not known, as tobacco prod-
ucts are frequent confounders. Acute decreases in vital 
capacity and diffusion capacity are seen, but whether this 
translates into an increased risk of emphysema has not yet 
been determined. Most studies have not found an associa-
tion with emphysema. A variety of other adverse physical 
effects have been described but not conﬁrmed in a sys-
tematic fashion. This includes reports of low testosterone 
levels, decreased sperm count, impaired fetal growth, and 
chromosomal abnormalities.
 Contrary to popular belief, chronic use of marijuana 
is associated with the development of tolerance as well 
as a withdrawal syndrome. Signs of physical tolerance 
include tolerance to the development of tachycardia and 
conjunctival injection. The psychological tolerance that 
develops is more prominent and predictable. This oc-
curs rapidly, with individuals often seeking more potent 
compounds or smoking the drug more frequently. With 
cessation of marijuana use, a withdrawal syndrome can 
be demonstrated with irritability, anorexia, and sleep 
disturbance.
Bold page number indicates the start of the main discussion of the topic; page numbers with “f” and “t” refer to ﬁgures and tables, respectively.
851
AAN (autoimmune autonomic neuropathy), 387
Abdominal aortic aneurysm, 81
Abducens nerve, examination of, 6
Abducens nerve palsy, 194
Abducens nerve paresis, 194
A-beta (Aβ) ﬁbers, 40
Abetalipoproteinemia, 368
Aβ protein, 312t, 319, 319f
Abscess
brain. See Brain abscess
epidural. See Epidural abscess
Absence seizures, 233
Abstract thought, assessment of, 6
Abulia, 132, 276f
Acalculia, 147
Acamprosate, in alcoholism management, 760, 849
Acanthamoeba infections, chronic meningitis in, 530t
Acephalic migraine, 56, 257
Acetaminophen
adverse effects of, 45
for back pain, 82
for migraine, 57, 58t
for pain, 45, 46t
for spinal stenosis, 78
for tension-type headache, 122
Acetaminophen-aspirin-caffeine, for migraine, 57, 58t
Acetazolamide
for acute angle-closure glaucoma, 182
for altitude illness, 164
for hypokalemic periodic paralysis, 642
for pseudotumor cerebri, 186
for raised CSF pressure headache, 68
Acetylcholine
anatomic and clinical aspects of, 222t, 380
deﬁciency of, in delirium, 126–127
structure of, 222t
Acetylcholine receptor, in myasthenia gravis, 
609–610
Acetylcholinesterase test, in myasthenia gravis, 611
Achromatopsia, 152, 177
Acoustic neuroma. See Vestibular schwannoma 
(acoustic neuroma)
Acoustic reﬂex, 214
Acoustic reﬂex decay, 214
Acromegaly, 462
clinical features of, 463, 463f
diagnosis of, 463–464
etiology of, 462–463, 462t
familial, 447
laboratory evaluation of, 463–464
screening tests for, 451t
treatment of, 464–465, 465f
Acrylamide, 587t
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Actinomycosis, chronic meningitis in, 529t
Acupuncture, for back pain, 82
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), 491
clinical features of, 492
diagnosis of, 492
etiology of, 491
neuroimaging in, 693f
pathophysiology of, 491
treatment of, 492
Acute inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
(AIDP), 600–601, 600t, 602t, 604t
Acute necrotizing myopathy, paraneoplastic, 565
Acyclovir
for Bell’s palsy, 396
for ocular HSV infections, 181
Acyclovir (Cont.):
for viral encephalitis, 512–513
for viral meningitis, 507
AD. See Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
ADAMTS13, 775t
A-delta (Aδ) ﬁbers, 40, 41
ADEM. See Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis 
(ADEM)
Adenovirus infections, conjunctivitis, 180
Adhesive arachnoiditis, lumbar, 80
Adie’s syndrome, 176
Adolescents, seizures in, 238t
Adrenalectomy, for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
Adrenal insufﬁciency
delirium in, 129
muscle weakness in, 644
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 465
action of, 466
deﬁciency of, 446t, 466
ectopic production of, 468t
laboratory evaluation of, 445t
secretion of, 466
synthesis of, 465–466
Adrenoleukodystrophy, 575–576, 575t
Adrenomyeloneuropathy, 412, 575–576
Adult growth hormone deﬁciency
clinical features of, 460–461, 461t, 813, 839
laboratory evaluation of, 461, 461t
treatment of, 461–462, 462f
Adult Tay-Sachs disease, 374t, 377
Advanced sleep phase disorder, 172
AEDs. See Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs)
Aerophobia, 512
Aging
olfactory function and, 202, 202f, 206
sleep patterns and, 158, 159, 159f
Agnosia, object, 152, 278, 826
Agoraphobia, 102, 721, 721t
Agrammatism, 145, 148
Agraphesthesia, 122
Agraphia, 144
AIDP (acute inﬂammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy), 600–601, 600t, 602t, 604t
AIDS, 536, 537t. See also HIV infection
AIDS dementia complex (HIV-associated dementia), 
541–543, 542f, 542t
Air-conduction threshold, 213
Akathisia, 354, 740
Akinetic mutism, 132
Albendazole, for cysticercosis, 522
Alcohol, 752. See also Alcohol use
absorption of, 752–753, 819, 847–848
abuse of. See Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism)
actions of, 221, 718t, 848
blood levels of, in absence of tolerance, 753, 753t
metabolism of, 752–753, 753f, 819, 847–848
pharmacology of, 752–753, 753f
tolerance of, 753–754, 848
Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism), 756
acute intoxication, 113
adverse effects of, 166
chronic, dementia due to, 328
deﬁnition of, 756, 848
genetic factors in, 757, 848
insomnia in, 165
lifetime risk for, 756–757
myopathy in, 646, 756
natural history of, 757
neuropathy in, 387
ocular involvement in, 196
Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism) (Cont.):
olfactory/taste dysfunction in, 205
psychiatric comorbidity with, 754–755
treatment of, 758–760
acute intoxication, 758
alcohol withdrawal in. See Alcohol withdrawal 
syndrome
AUDIT in, 758, 758t
identiﬁcation of alcoholic in, 757–758, 758t
interventions, 758
rehabilitation, 759–760
relapse prevention, 759–760, 819–820, 849
Alcoholic myopathy, 756
Alcoholic neuropathy, 387
Alcohol-induced psychotic disorders, 755
Alcohol use
behavioral effects of, 753–754, 753t, 848
nutritional impact of, 752–753
in pregnancy, 756
sleep disturbances and, 166
systemic effects of, 752–753
Alcohol Use Disorder Screening Test (AUDIT), 
758, 758t
Alcohol Use Disorders Identiﬁcation Test-
Consumption (AUDIT-C) module, 
746, 747t
Alcohol withdrawal syndrome, 125, 128–129, 759, 
819, 848–849
Alexia, 144, 144t, 146–147
Alien hand (limb) syndrome, 147, 325
Allodynia, 44, 117, 389
Almotriptan, for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
α2-adrenergic agonists
for acute angle-closure glaucoma, 182
for opiate detoxiﬁcation, 764–765
α-adrenergic antagonists, adverse effects of, 95
α-lipoic acid, for olfactory dysfunction, 206
α motor neurons, 106f
Alport syndrome, hearing loss in, 212, 212t
Alprazolam
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
for panic disorder, 722
pharmacology of, 725t
ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
ALS/parkinsonian/dementia complex of Guam,  
330
Alternative splicing, 219
Aluminum toxicity, 329
Alvimopan, 48
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 316
aphasia in, 146, 149
Bálint’s syndrome in, 151–152
clinical features of, 317, 834
cost of care for, 316
diagnosis of, 318f, 833
differential diagnosis of, 311t, 317–318, 318f
early onset, 320
epidemiology of, 318
frontal lobe syndromes in, 155, 156
genetic factors in, 228, 319–320, 319f
Lewy body variant of, 326
memory loss in, 153–154, 156
molecular basis of, 312t
neurotransmitter systems in, 221
olfactory dysfunction in, 199, 202–203, 206
pathology of, 316, 318–319, 319f, 834
presenilins in, 319–320
risk factors for, 318
treatment of, 320–322
trisomy 21 and, 319
INDEX
Index
852
Amacrine cells, of retina, 174
Amantadine
for fatigue in MS, 490
for PD, 342, 346
for SSRI-related sexual dysfunction, 733
Amaurosis fugax, 182–183, 269
Amblyopia, 193
American trypanosomiasis. See Chagas’ disease
Aminoglutethimide, for Cushing’s syndrome,  
469
Aminoglycosides, 209
4-Amino pyridine, for weakness in MS, 489
Amiodarone, adverse effects of
myopathy, 645t, 647
neuropathy, 586t, 589
optic neuropathy, 185
Amitriptyline
adverse effects of, 61t, 206, 723t
for chronic daily headache, 65
for depression, 723t
dosage of, 723t
for insomnia, 164
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
for olfactory dysfunction, 206
for pain, 46t, 490
for posttraumatic headache, 68
for tension-type headache, 122
Amnesia, 152
anterograde, 153
caring for patient with, 155–156
clinical examination in, 153
etiology of, 153–154
after head injury, 415
psychogenic, dementia due to, 330
retrograde, 153
transient global, 154, 329–330
video library, 157
Amnestic state, 152
Amoxapine, for depression, 723t, 732
Amphetamine(s)
action of, 221, 718t
adverse effects of, 166
Amphotericin B
for Cryptococcus infections, 516
for Histoplasma infections, 516
Ampicillin, for meningitis, 499t, 501
Amygdalohippocampectomy, for epilepsy,  
251
Amyloid angiopathy, 319
Amyloidosis
autonomic dysfunction in, 387
neuropathy in, 387, 577
ocular involvement in, 176
pathophysiology of, 387
Amyloid polyneuropathy, familial, 575t, 577
Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 318–319,  
319f
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 370, 
834–835
clinical features of, 371–372
“deﬁnite,” criteria for, 372
diagnosis of, 86, 371–372, 372f
differential diagnosis of, 371t, 373, 376
epidemiology of, 371–372
familial, 228, 373, 374t
pathogenesis of, 376
pathology of, 370–371
treatment of, 377t
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/parkinsonian/
dementia complex of Guam, 330
Amyotrophy, 370
deﬁnition of, 370
diabetic, 579, 644
Analgesia (sensory abnormality), 117
Analgesics
for lumbar puncture, 35
medication-overuse headache and, 60, 66
Anaplasma spp. infections, 500
Andersen syndrome (type IV glycogenosis), 637
Andersen-Tawil syndrome, 641t, 643
Anemia
delirium in, 129
sideroblastic, 364t
Anesthesia (sensory abnormality), 117
Aneurysm
abdominal aortic, 81
cerebral, 15f, 69
mycotic, circle of Willis, 305
repair of, 307, 307f
saccular, 304–305
Angelman syndrome, imprinting in, 219
Angiitis, chronic meningitis in, 532t
Angina pectoris, in orthostatic hypotension, 94
Angiography
cerebral, in stroke, 285
complications, 25
CT, 14, 15f
in neurologic disease, 25
spinal, 25
Angioma, cavernous, 292–293
Angiopathy
amyloid, 319
cerebral amyloid, 322
Angiostrongylus spp. infections, chronic meningitis 
in, 530t
Anisocoria, 176
Ankylosing spondylitis
back pain in, 79
diagnosis of, 79
neck pain in, 86
ocular involvement in, 181
pathogenesis of, 79
treatment of, 79
Anomia, 143, 152, 826
color, 147, 177
ﬁnger, 147
Anosognosia, 150, 256, 317
Anterior cerebral artery
lesion in territory of, 107, 146, 153
occlusion of, 275–276, 276f
Anterior choroidal artery, occlusion of, 276, 277f
Anterior dens dislocation, 698f
Anterior horn cell disorders, weakness in, 106, 107, 
109
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, 184, 184f
Anterior pituitary, disorders of, 441
Anterior spinal artery syndrome, 403
Anterocollis, 349
Anterolateral system, 118
Anti-AChR antibody, 559t
Anti-AMPA receptor antibodies, 559t, 562
Anti-amphiphysin, 559t
Antiarrhythmics, for pain, 46t, 50
Antibacterial drugs, for bacterial meningitis, 499t, 
500–502, 501t
Antibody(ies), in neurologic paraneoplastic 
syndromes, 559t
Anticardiolipin antibodies, 183, 183f
Anticholinergics, 126–127
Anticoagulant(s)
intracerebral hemorrhage due to,  
289
for ischemic stroke, 261
in stroke prevention, 271–272
for suppurative thrombophlebitis,  
526
Anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibody, 559t, 561
Antidepressants. See also speciﬁc drugs
actions of, 716
adverse effects management, 724t
adverse effects of, 723t
classiﬁcation of, 818, 847
for depression, 723t, 731–733, 732f
dosage of, 723t
for pain, 46t, 49–50, 49t, 490
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). See also speciﬁc drugs
adverse effects of, 247–249t, 254–255
for brain abscess, 521
breast-feeding and, 255
discontinuation of, 250–251
drug interactions of, 247–249t, 255
for focal seizures, 246, 250
for generalized anxiety disorders, 726
for generalized seizures, 350
initiation of, 245
mechanisms of action of, 240–241
monitoring of, 250
oral contraceptives and, 255
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (Cont.):
for pain, 46t, 50
pharmacology of, 247–249t
for refractory epilepsy, 251
selection of, 245–246
Anti-GABA antibodies, 559t, 562
Anti-GAD antibody, 559t, 562
Anti–glycolipid antibodies, in immune neuropathies, 
600–601, 602f
Antihistamines
for insomnia, 163
for vertigo, 102t
Anti-Hu antibody, 559t, 561
Anti-Hu paraneoplastic neuropathy, 607
Anti-Jo-1, 651
Anti-Ma proteins, 559t, 561, 561f
Antineuronal antibodies, 559t
Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies, 559t, 560f, 562
Antinucleosides, adverse effects of, 587t
Antiphospholipid antibody(ies), testing for, 775t
Antiplatelet agents
for ischemic stroke, 260–261
in stroke/TIA prevention, 270–271
Antipsychotics
action of, 738–739
for acute alcohol intoxication, 758
in AD, 321–322
adverse effects of, 354, 739t, 740
for schizophrenia, 738–740, 739t
Anti-Ri antibody, 559t, 563
Antithrombin deﬁciency, 183
Antithrombotic drugs
chronic use in cardiac conditions, 264t
for ischemic stroke, 260–261
Anti-Tr antibody, 559t, 562
Anti-VGCC antibodies, 559t
Anti-VGKC-related proteins, 559t, 562
Anti-Yo antibody, 559t, 562
Anton’s syndrome, 278
Anxiety, vs. syncope, 96
Anxiety disorders, 720
generalized anxiety disorder, 722–725, 725t
insomnia in, 165
panic disorder, 721–722, 721t
phobic disorders, 726–727
stress disorders, 727–728, 727t
vertigo in, 101–102
AOA1 (ataxia with oculomotor apraxia), 363t
AOA2 (ataxia with oculomotor apraxia), 363t
Aortic aneurysm, abdominal, 81
Aortic regurgitation, 796t
Aortic stenosis
antithrombotic prophylaxis for, 264t
echocardiography in, 796t
severity classiﬁcation, 796t
APC gene, 425t
Aphasia, 142, 804, 826
anomic, 144t, 146
Broca’s, 144t, 145
caring for patient with, 155–156
conduction, 144t, 145–146
crossed, 143
ﬂuent transcortical, 144t, 146
global, 144t, 145
isolation, 144t, 146
jargon, 144
nonﬂuent transcortical, 144t, 146
primary progressive, 148–149, 156, 
 323
progressive nonﬂuent, 148
subcortical, 148
video library, 157
Wernicke’s, 144–145, 144t
Aphemia, 147
Apnea testing, 140, 826
ApoE gene, 320
Apomorphine
adverse effects of, 341
for PD, 341, 343t
Aponeurotic ptosis, 192
Apoplexy, pituitary, 443–444
Apoptosis
mitochondria in, 226–227
in neurologic disease, 226–227, 295
Index
853
APP (amyloid precursor protein), 319, 319f
Apraxia, 103, 147
buccofacial, 147
construction, 150
dressing, 150
gait, 112
ideational, 147
ideomotor, 147
limb, 147
limb-kinetic, 147
ocular, 195
oculomotor, 150
Aprosodia, 148
Aquaporins, 491
Arachnoid cysts, 448
Arachnoiditis, lumbar, 80
Argyll Robertson pupil, 176
Aripiprazole, for schizophrenia, 739t, 740
Arousal
confusional, 170
level of, in coma, 136
ARSACS (autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of 
Charlevoix-Saguenay), 362t
Arsenic exposure/poisoning
clinical features of, 329
laboratory evaluation of, 788t
neuropathies in, 588t, 590–591
optic neuropathy in, 185
Arterial blood gases, reference values,  
779t
Arteriovenous ﬁstula
dural, 293
weakness in, 107
Arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
cerebral, 292
dural, 191
spinal cord, 49–410, 410f
Arteritis, stroke due to, 267
Artery of Percheron, occlusion of, 278
Artery-to-artery embolic stroke, 263–265
Arthritis, back pain in, 79
Arthrogryposis, 630
Artiﬁcial saliva, 205
Artiﬁcial tears, 180
Ashkenazi Jewish population
dystonia in, 348
hearing loss in, 212
Asimultanagnosia, 278
Asparaginase, 438t
Aspergillus infections
cerebral, 676–677f
chronic meningitis in, 530t
sinonasal, 677–678f
Aspirin
adverse effects of, 45
as antithrombotic in cardiac conditions,  
264t
for ischemic stroke, 260–261
for migraine, 57, 59
for pain, 45, 46t
for stroke/TIA prevention, 270–271
for tension-type headache, 122
Association cortex, 142, 143f
Associative prosopagnosia, 152
Astasia-abasia, 113
Astereognosis, 122
Asterixis, 115, 136
Asthenia, 620
Asthma, sleep disruption in, 165
Astigmatism, 175
Astrocytoma
high-grade, 427–428, 427f, 428f
intramedullary, 405, 405f
low-grade, 426–427, 426f
Ataxia, 357
approach to the patient, 357
autosomal dominant, 358, 359–361t,  
364
autosomal recessive, 361–364t. See also Ataxia 
telangiectasia (AT); Friedreich’s ataxia
cerebellar, 112, 113t, 842
early-onset, 363t
etiology of, 357, 358t
with muscle coenzyme Q deﬁciency, 363t
Ataxia (Cont.):
chemotherapy-induced, 438t
clinical features of, 357–358
episodic, 220t, 362–363t, 367
focal, 358
Friedreich’s. See Friedreich’s ataxia
inherited, 358
ion channel defects causing, 220t
mitochondrial, 368
in MS, 478, 489
neoplastic, 561
ocular/optic, 150, 195
sensory, 112, 113t, 118
spinocerebellar. See Spinocerebellar ataxia
symmetric, 357–358
treatment of, 368–369
with vitamin E deﬁciency, 368
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT)
clinical features of, 363t, 368
genetic factors in, 363t, 368
treatment of, 368–369
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia (AOA1), 363t
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia (AOA2), 363t
Ataxin-1, 365
Ataxin-3, 366
Atherosclerosis
carotid. See Carotid atherosclerosis
intracranial, 265, 273
risk factors for, 269–270
Athetosis, 347t
Athlete(s), concussion in, 420, 420t
Atlastin gene, 374t, 378–379
ATM gene, 368
Atonic seizures, 234
Atrial ﬁbrillation
chronic use of antithrombotics in, 264t
stroke and, 262–263, 265t, 808, 832
Atrophy
dentatorubropallidoluysian, 361t, 366–367
muscle, 622
spinal muscle, 370, 374t, 377–378
Atropine, ocular effects of, 176
Attention, assessment of, 127
Attentional deﬁcit, 155
Audiogram, 213
Audiometry, 213–214
AUDIT (Alcohol Use Disorder Screening Test), 
758, 758t
AUDIT-C (Alcohol Use Disorders Identiﬁcation 
Test-Consumption) module, 746, 747t
Auditory brainstem responses, 214
Auditory cortex, 143f
Auditory nerve, 207
Aura, 232
Autism spectrum disorders, 710
epidemiology of, 710
genetic factors in, 711–712, 711t
neuropathology of, 710–711
pathogenesis of, 712
Autoantibody(ies), in inﬂammatory myopathies, 651
Autoimmune autonomic neuropathy (AAN), 387
Automatisms, 232
Autonomic dysfunction, 380
acute syndromes of, 389
in alcoholic neuropathy, 387
in amyloidosis, 387
approach to the patient, 383–385, 385t
in autoimmune autonomic neuropathy, 387
autonomic testing in, 384–385, 385t
in botulism, 387–388
classiﬁcation of, 380, 382t
clinical evaluation of, 381–383, 382t
clinical features of, 381–383
in CRPS, 389–390
in diabetes mellitus, 386
drug-related, 383, 384t
in Guillain-Barré syndrome, 386
heart rate variation with deep breathing in, 384, 
385t
in inherited disorders, 388
in multiple system atrophy, 385–386, 386f
in neuromuscular junction disorders, 386–388
orthostatic blood pressure recordings in, 385
orthostatic hypotension and, 383, 383t
Autonomic dysfunction (Cont.):
in PD, 345
in porphyrias, 386
in postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, 388
in primary hyperhidrosis, 388
in pure autonomic failure, 388
in reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy, 389–390
spinal cord lesions and, 386
sudomotor function in, 384–385, 385t
syndromes of, 385
tilt table testing for syncope in, 385, 385t
treatment of, 390–391, 390t
Valsalva response in, 384, 385t
Autonomic dysreﬂexia, 386, 414
Autonomic failure, pure, 388
Autonomic nervous system, 380, 381f, 381t
disorders of. See Autonomic dysfunction
Autonomic neuropathy
autoimmune, 387
diabetic, 578–579
paraneoplastic, 564–565
Autonomic storm, 389
Autophagy, 228
Autoregulation, 295
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe, 235t
Autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory 
features, 235t
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-
Saguenay (ARSACS), 362t
AVM. See Arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
Azathioprine
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
for MS, 489
for myasthenia gravis, 615
for neuromyelitis optica, 491
AZT (zidovudine), 645t, 646
Babinski sign, 8, 104, 104t, 133, 820–821
Back pain, 71
in ankylosing spondylitis, 79
approach to the patient, 72–75
in arthritis, 79
breakaway weakness in, 74
in cancer patient, 79
in cauda equina syndrome, 77–78
causes of, 75t
chronic, 82–84
in congenital anomalies of lumbar spine, 75–76, 
75t
costs of, 71
in degenerative conditions, 75t, 78–79, 78f, 79f
diagnosis of, 74–75
electromyography in, 75
idiopathic, 81
imaging in, 75
in infections/inﬂammation, 75t, 80
local, 72
in lumbar disk disease. See Intervertebral disk, 
herniation of
metabolic causes of, 75t, 80
with muscle spasm, 73
nerve conduction studies in, 75
patient education in, 82
physical examination in, 73–74, 74t
postural, 81
in psychiatric disease, 81
radicular, 72
referred, 72, 80–81
risk factors for structural cause, 73t
of spine origin, 72
in sprains and strains, 76
trauma-related, 75t, 76
treatment of, 82–84
acute pain without radiculopathy, 82
chronic pain without radiculopathy, 82–84
pain with radiculopathy, 84–85
types of, 72–73
in vertebral fracture, 76, 80
Baclofen
for dystonia, 349
for spasticity in neurologic disease, 414, 489
for stiff-person syndrome, 563
for tardive dyskinesia, 354
for trigeminal neuralgia, 393
Index
854
Bacterial endocarditis. See Infective endocarditis
Bacterial meningitis. See Meningitis, bacterial
BAEPs (brainstem auditory evoked potentials), 
29–30, 214–215
Balamuthia
in chronic meningitis, 530t
in encephalitis, 511
Balance
anatomy and physiology of, 111
disorders of, 111–112, 114. See also Fall(s)
standing, 110
Bálint’s syndrome, 150–151, 195, 278, 826
Baló’s concentric sclerosis, 694–695f
Baltic myoclonus, 362t
Bamboo spine, 79
Bannwarth’s syndrome, 529t
Barbiturates, for epilepsy, 250
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 442
Baroreceptors, 90, 91f
Basal cell nevus syndrome, 425t
Basal ganglia, 335f, 339f
Basal meningitis, 528
Basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF), 447
Basilar artery
ischemia in territory of, 195
occlusion of, 210, 279–282, 281–284f
Basilar skull fracture, 417
Bassen-Kornzweig disease, 190
Baylisascaris procyonis infections
chronic meningitis in, 531t
encephalitis in, 511
BCNU (carmustine), adverse effects of, 438t
Beck Depression Inventory, 48
Becker’s disease, 643
Becker’s muscular dystrophy, 628
clinical features of, 625t, 628, 844
genetic factors in, 625t
laboratory evaluation of, 628
treatment of, 628
Becquerel (Bq), 799t
Bed rest, for back pain, 82
Bedwetting, 170
Beevor’s sign, 401
Behavioral modiﬁcation/behavioral therapy
for insomnia, 164
for sleep enuresis, 170
Behçet’s syndrome
chronic meningitis in, 532t
neurologic involvement in, 678f
ocular involvement in, 181, 182
Bell’s palsy, 395
clinical features of, 395
differential diagnosis of, 395–396
incidence of, 395
laboratory evaluation of, 396, 396f
neuroimaging in, 691f
pathophysiology of, 395
taste disorders in, 204
treatment of, 396
Bell’s phenomenon, 394
Benedikt’s syndrome, 193
Benign familial neonatal convulsions, 235t
Benign forgetfulness of the elderly, 311
Benign hereditary chorea of childhood, 352
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, 99t, 100, 802, 
823
Benserazide/levodopa, for PD, 339, 343t
Benznidazole, for Chagas’ disease, 548
Benzodiazepine(s)
for acute alcohol intoxication, 758
adverse effects of, 128, 166
for delirium, 131
dosage of, 725t
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t, 726
in opiate overdose management, 764
pharmacology of, 725t
for restless legs syndrome, 166
withdrawal from, 128–129, 726
Benzodiazepine receptor agonists, for insomnia, 
164–165
Benztropine
for extrapyramidal symptoms, 740
for PD, 342
Beriberi, 591. See also Thiamine (vitamin B1), 
deﬁciency of
β-adrenergic antagonists (beta blockers)
for acute angle-closure glaucoma, 182
for glaucoma, 188
for migraine prevention, 60
for phobic disorders, 726
for syncope, 92
β-carotene, for macular degeneration, 189
Bethanechol
for bladder dysfunction in MS, 490
for SSRI-related sexual dysfunction, 733
Bevacizumab
adverse neurologic effects of, 438, 438t
for macular degeneration, 189
bFGF (basic ﬁbroblast growth factor), 447
Bilateral simultaneous stimulation test, 122
Biliary disease, back pain in, 81
Binswanger’s disease, 112, 322, 833
Biofeedback training, for migraine, 57
Bipolar cell antibodies, 559t
Bipolar disorder, 733
clinical features of, 733–734
diagnosis of, 734, 734t
differential diagnosis of, 734
etiology of, 734
pathophysiology of, 734
treatment of, 734–735, 735t, 736t
Bipolar II disorder, 734
Bitter taste sensation, 201
Blackout, 754
Bladder dysfunction, in neurologic disease, 413, 478
Bladder training, for sleep enuresis, 170
Blastomyces spp. infections, chronic meningitis in, 
530t
Blepharitis, 180
Blepharoptosis, 191–192
Blepharospasm, 348–349
Blessed Dementia Rating Scale, 127
Blindness
color, 177
cortical, 179
in diabetic retinopathy, 189
legal, 175
transient monocular, 182–184
Blind spot, 179
Blink reﬂexes, 34
Blood, reference values, 775–778t
Blood pressure
changes during Valsalva maneuver, 384, 385t
during sleep, 161
Body ﬂuids, reference values, 799t
Bone-anchored hearing aid, 215
Bone-conduction threshold, 213
Bone disease, neck pain in, 87
Bone marrow/bone marrow examination, normal, 
790t
Bone spicules, 189–190, 190f
BOR (branchio-oto-renal) syndrome, 212t
Bortezomib, adverse effects of, 438, 438t, 585t
Botulinum toxin
for dystonia, 349–350
for hemifacial spasm, 397
for hyperhidrosis, 388
for Tourette’s syndrome, 353
Botulism
autonomic dysfunction in, 387–388
clinical features of, 387–388, 613
diplopia in, 193
pathogenesis of, 613
treatment of, 613
Bound morphemes, 145
Bourneville’s disease. See Tuberous sclerosis
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, 550, 550t, 554
Bq (becquerel), 799t
Brachial neuritis, 87
Brachial plexopathy
immune-mediated, 87, 595
neoplastic, 595–596
neuroimaging in, 697–698f
Brachial plexus
anatomy of, 595, 596f
injury to, neck pain in, 87
Bradyarrhythmia, syncope in, 95
Bradykinesia, 103
Bradykinin, 42f
Brain
alcohol effects on, 752–753
inferior aspect of, 277f
Brain abscess, 518
approach to the patient, 493–494, 494–495f
clinical features of, 519–520
deﬁnition of, 518
diagnosis of, 18f, 520, 520f
differential diagnosis of, 520
epidemiology of, 518
etiology of, 518–519
pathogenesis of, 519
prognosis of, 521
treatment of, 521
Brain biopsy
in dementia, 316
in viral encephalitis, 510
Brain death, criteria for, 140, 804, 825–826
Brain edema, 294
Brain germ cell tumors, 448–449
Brain hemorrhage, 416, 416f
Brain injury. See also Head injury
caring for patient with, 155–156
post–cardiac bypass, 662–663, 662f, 817,  
845–846
post–solid organ transplantation, 663
Brainstem accessory optic system, 174
Brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs), 
29–30, 214–215
Brainstem disorders/lesions
clinical features of, 10t
sensory abnormalities in, 123
weakness in, 106
Brainstem ischemia, bilateral, 281
Brainstem reﬂexes, examination in coma, 136–138, 
137f
Brain tumors, 423
amnesia in, 153
approach to the patient, 423–424
clinical features of, 423–424, 423t
extrinsic “benign,” 430
craniopharyngioma. See Craniopharyngioma
meningioma. See Meningioma
pituitary tumors. See Pituitary tumors 
(adenomas)
schwannoma, 431–432, 431f
headache in, 51t, 53
hemorrhage into, 289
intrinsic malignant, 426
astrocytoma. See Astrocytoma
ependymoma, 429
medulloblastoma, 430
oligodendroglioma, 428–429
pineal region tumors, 176, 195, 430
primary lymphoma, 429–430, 429f
metastatic, 433, 433t
diagnosis of, 433–434, 434f
epidural. See Spinal cord compression, 
neoplastic
leptomeningeal, 435–436, 435f
treatment of, 434
neuroimaging of, 424
primary, 424
genetic syndromes associated with, 425t
pathogenesis of, 424–426, 425t, 426f
treatment of, 424
Branching enzyme deﬁciency (type IV glycogenosis), 
637
Branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome, 212t
Branch retinal vein occlusion, 183
Breast cancer
alcohol effects on, 755
metastatic
to CNS, 403, 404f, 433t, 801, 810–811, 811f, 
821, 836
to eye, 190
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 559t
Breast-feeding, AEDs and, 255
Broca’s aphasia, 144t, 145
Broca’s area, 142, 149f
Index
855
Bromocriptine
for acromegaly, 465
adverse effects of, 457
for prolactinoma, 457
Brown-Séquard syndrome, 106, 123, 402
Brucella spp. infections
chronic meningitis in, 529t
ocular involvement in, 182
Brudzinski’s sign, 493
Brugada syndrome, 95
Bruns-Garland syndrome, 579
Bruxism, 170
Bulbospinal pathway, 105f
Bulimia nervosa, 204
Buprenorphine
as maintenance drug, 765
for opiate detoxiﬁcation, 764
in opiate overdose management, 764
Bupropion
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t, 732
for SSRI-related sexual dysfunction, 733
Burning mouth syndrome (glossodynia), 206
Buspirone
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t, 726
for SSRI-related sexual dysfunction, 733
Busulfan, adverse effects of, 438t
Butorphanol
for migraine, 58t, 60
other opioids and, 50
for pain, 46t, 47
Cabergoline
for acromegaly, 465
adverse effects of, 457
for prolactinoma, 457
Cachectic myopathy, 304
CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant 
arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy), 268, 323, 685f
Cadmium exposure/poisoning, 788t
Caffeine
action of, 160
adverse effects of, 165–166
for hypnic headache, 70
for migraine, 58t
for shift-work disorder, 172
Calcinosis, dermatomyositis and, 659
Calcitonin gene-related peptide, 42
Calcium channel(s), disorders of, 640–642, 641t
Calculation ability, assessment of, 6
Caloric irrigation, 138, 195
Campylobacter spp. infections, Guillain-Barré 
syndrome and, 600, 601f
Cancer
alcohol effects on, 755
chronic meningitis in, 532t
depression in, 729
inﬂammatory myopathies and, 650
neuropathies associated with, 583–584
recurrent, 597–598
Cancer chemotherapy
neurologic complications of, 438, 438t, 584–585t
timing of, 173
Candida spp. infections
chronic meningitis in, 530t
in newborn, 675f
Cannabinoid(s), 769
Capgras syndrome, 312
Capillary telangiectasias, 292
Capsaicin, for neuropathy, 578t
Carbamazepine
adverse effects of
common, 393, 735t
hematologic, 246
liver dysfunction, 246, 578t
neurologic, 247t, 578t
rare, 735t
systemic, 247t
for bipolar disorder, 735, 735t
dosage of, 247t, 578t
drug interactions of, 247t
for epilepsy, 246, 247t
Carbamazepine (Cont.):
for focal seizures, 246
for neuromyotonia, 565
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 50, 489
pharmacology of, 246, 247t, 735t
for trigeminal neuralgia, 393
Carbidopa/levodopa, for PD, 339, 343t
Carbon disulﬁde, 588t
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, for glaucoma, 188
Carbon monoxide poisoning
aphasia in, 146
complications of, 300
hypoxia in, 299
optic neuropathy in, 185
treatment of, 300
Carcinoid tumors, 565
Cardiac arrhythmias, syncope in, 95–96
Cardiac catheterization , normal values, 793t
Cardiac output, calculation and normal values, 794t
Cardiac syncope, 93t, 95–96
Cardioembolic stroke, 261–263, 263t
Cardiomyopathy, syncope in, 96
Cardiopulmonary bypass, brain injury after, 662–663, 
662f, 817, 845–846
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 299, 299f
Cardiovascular disease
depression in, 729
embolic stroke in, 261–263, 263t
syncope in, 95–96
Cardiovascular system
alcohol effects on, 755
in sleep, 161
Carmustine (BCNU), adverse effects of, 438t
Carney syndrome
clinical features of, 447t
pituitary tumors in, 447, 447t
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deﬁciency, 638
Carotid artery
occlusion of, 276–277, 277f
stenosis, 69, 183, 265t
Carotid atherosclerosis
asymptomatic, surgical treatment of, 272
stroke due to, 263–265, 265t
treatment of, 272
endovascular therapy in, 273
extracranial-to-intracranial bypass surgery in,  
273
surgical, 272–273
Carotid cavernous ﬁstula, 191
Carotid sinus massage, 97
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 87, 815–816, 843
Caspase, 226
Catamenial epilepsy, 254
Cataplexy, 96, 163t, 168t, 169
Cataract, 187–188
Catatonia, 132
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia, 95
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors, 
for PD, 342, 343t
Cat-scratch disease, 182
Cauda equina syndrome
clinical features of, 77–78, 402, 846
diagnosis of, 77
treatment of, 78
weakness in, 107
Causalgia, 45
Cavernous angiomas, 292–293
Cavernous malformations, 20f
Cavernous sinus syndrome, 399, 399f
CBT. See Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
Cefepime, 501
Cefepime, for meningitis, 499t, 500
Cefotaxime, for meningitis, 499t, 501
Ceftazidime, for meningitis, 499t
Ceftriaxone, for meningitis, 499t, 501
Celecoxib, 45, 46t
Celiac disease (gluten-induced enteropathy), 580
Cellulitis, orbital, 191
Central cord syndrome, 402
Central core disease, 635
Central fever, 135
Central nervous system (CNS)
alcohol effects on, 754
electrodiagnostic studies of, 26. See also speciﬁc 
technique and Electrodiagnostic studies
paraneoplastic syndromes of, 558t
vasculitis of, 329, 686f
Central nervous system (CNS) cancer
dementia in, 329
lymphoma, 429–430, 429f, 545, 545f
primary and metastatic tumors, 423. See also speciﬁc 
types and sites
approach to the patient, 423–424
clinical features of, 423–424, 423t
Central nervous system (CNS) infections
brain abscess. See Brain abscess
cranial epidural abscess, 524, 524f
dementia due to, 328–329
empyema. See Subdural empyema
encephalitis. See Encephalitis
meningitis. See Meningitis
nonbacterial causes of, 521
sarcoidosis, 532t
treatment of, 494–495f
Central pontine myelinolysis, 301, 302f
Central retinal artery occlusion, 183–184, 183f
Central retinal vein occlusion, 183–184, 184f
Central sensitization, 41
Central sleep apnea, 169
Central transtentorial herniation, 133f, 134
Centronuclear (myotubular) myopathy, 636
Cerebellar arteries, occlusion of, 279
Cerebellar degeneration/atrophy
alcohol and, 754
gait disorders in, 111t, 112
paraneoplastic, 559t, 562
Cerebellar gait ataxia, 112, 113t
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, 289, 322
Cerebral aneurysm, 69
Cerebral angiography, in stroke, 268f, 285
Cerebral artery(ies)
aneurysm of, 15f
anterior. See Anterior cerebral artery
middle. See Middle cerebral artery
posterior. See Posterior cerebral artery
stenosis, neuroimaging in, 683f
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with 
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy 
(CADASIL), 268, 323, 685f
Cerebral blood ﬂow, autoregulation of, 295, 296f
Cerebral glioma, 21f
Cerebral hemispheres, anatomy of, 143f, 274f, 275f, 
276f
Cerebral ischemia, 256, 258f
Cerebral palsy, 111
Cerebral perfusion pressure, 295, 296f
Cerebral venous sinuses, 525–526, 525f
Cerebritis, 518
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)
leakage of, 67–68, 67f
low volume, headache with, 67–68
raised pressure. See Intracranial pressure, increased
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) analysis
in bacterial meningitis, 498–499, 499t
in chronic meningitis, 533–534
in coma, 138–139
in delirium, 130
in MS, 480t, 482
normal values, 38, 38t
reference values, 789t
in viral encephalitis, 508–509
in viral meningitis, 504
Cerebrovascular disease, 256. See also Stroke
approach to the patient, 256–257, 257f
deﬁnition of, 256
dementia associated with, 322
imaging studies of, 282
incidence of, 256
seizures due to, 238
types of, 256
Cerumen impaction, 213
Cervical angina syndrome, 87
Cervical collar, 88
Cervical dystonia, 349
Index
856
Cervical radiculopathy, 86t
Cervical spine
disk disease, 85–86, 86t
lesions of, 401
trauma to, 85
C ﬁbers, 40, 41
CHADS2 score, 262, 264t
Chagas’ disease, in HIV infection, 547–548
Chalazion, 180
Channelopathy(ies), 806, 830
muscular, 640–642, 641t, 642f
neurologic, 220, 220t
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, 571, 815, 
842
CMT1, 572–574, 572t
CMT1A, 219, 572t, 574
CMT1X, 572t, 574
CMT2, 572t, 574
CMT3, 573t, 574
CMT4, 574, 574t
connexin in, 221
genetic factors in, 572–573t
Chemical restraints, 131
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, in coma, 138
Chiari malformation, 196
headache in, 67
syringomyelia associated with, 410, 411f
Chiasmal tumor, 190
Children
GH deﬁciency in, 459–460
seizures in, 238t
Chiropractic, 82
Chlamydia trachomatis infections, 180
Chloramphenicol
adverse effects of, 185
therapeutic monitoring of, 786t
Chlordiazepoxide, 725t, 758
Chlorhexidine mouthwash, 205
Chloride channel disorders, 643
Chloroquine, adverse effects of
myopathy, 645t, 647
neuropathy, 585, 586t
ocular, 190
Chlorpromazine
for medication-overuse headache, 66
for migraine, 58t, 60
Cholesteatoma, 209
Cholinergics, for glaucoma, 188
Cholinesterase inhibitors
for dementia, 331
for dementia with Lewy bodies, 326
for myasthenia gravis, 614
Chorda tympani nerve, 201f, 202
Chordoma, 448
Chorea(s), 347t, 350
disorders associated with, 352
paraneoplastic, 352, 559t
Sydenham’s, 352
Chorea-acanthocytosis, 352
Choriocarcinoma, parasellar, 448–449
Choriomeningitis, lymphocytic, 531t
Chorioretinopathy, central serous, 189
Choroidal artery, occlusion of, 276, 277f
CHRNA4 gene, 235t
Chronic cerebrospinal insufﬁciency, in MS,  
489
Chronic fatigue syndrome, 704, 818, 846
deﬁnition of, 704
diagnosis of, 704t, 705–706
epidemiology of, 704
etiology of, 704–705, 705t
pathophysiology of, 705
prognosis of, 707
treatment of, 706–707, 706f
Chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
(CIDP), 605
clinical features of, 605
diagnosis of, 605
vs. Guillain-Barré syndrome, 605
pathogenesis of, 602t, 605
treatment of, 606
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
laboratory evaluation of, 791–792t
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) (Cont.):
neuromuscular disorders in
back pain, 81
coma, 134–135
delirium, 129, 129t
gait disorders, 113
neuropathy, 580
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
sleep disorders in, 165
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia, 192
Chronic wasting disease, 550, 550t
Cidofovir, for viral encephalitis, 513, 514
CIDP. See Chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (CIDP)
Cingulate cortex, 149
Ciproﬂoxacin, 185
Circadian pacemaker, 172–173
Circadian rhythmicity
medical implications of, 173
physiology of, 160–161, 160f
Circadian rhythm sleep disorders, 170
Cisplatin, adverse effects of
hearing loss, 209
neurologic, 438, 438t, 584t
Cisternography, CT, 14
Citalopram, 723t
CKD. See Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Cladribine, for MS, 486t, 487–488
Clasp-knife phenomenon, 103
Claude’s syndrome, 193, 278
Claudication, neurogenic, 78
Clinical Dementia Rating, 127
Clinical laboratory tests, reference values
body ﬂuids, 799t
bone marrow aspirates, 790t
cerebrospinal ﬂuid, 789t
cholesterol, 789t
circulatory function, 794t
clinical chemistry and immunology, 778–785t
echocardiographic reference limits and partition 
values, 795–796t
gastrointestinal tests, 798t
hematology and coagulation, 775–778t
normal pressures in heart and great vessels, 793t
pulmonary physiology, 797t
radiation derived units, 799t
stool analysis, 790t
toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring, 
786–788t
urine analysis and renal function, 791–792t
vitamins and trace minerals, 788t
Clomipramine
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t
for narcolepsy, 169
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 728
Clonazepam
adverse effects of, 248t
for ataxia/tremor, 489
for epilepsy, 248t
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
for myoclonus, 353
for pain, 46t
for panic disorder, 722
pharmacology of, 248t
for posthypoxic myoclonus, 300
for REM sleep behavior disorder, 170
for tardive dyskinesia, 354
for vertigo, 102t
Clonidine, for opioid withdrawal syndrome, 66, 764
Clopidogrel, for stroke/TIA prevention, 270
Clozapine
adverse effects of, 739t
for Huntington’s disease, 351
for schizophrenia, 739, 739t
Club drugs, 128
Cluster headache, 51t, 63
clinical features of, 63t
insomnia in, 165
neuroimaging in, 56f
prevention of, 64, 64t
treatment of, 64
Cluster-tic, 393
CMDs (congenital muscular dystrophies), 625t, 630, 631t
CMS (congenital myasthenic syndromes), 610–611, 612t
CMT disease. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease
CMV. See Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS)
Coagulation disorders, laboratory evaluation of, 
775–778t
Coats’ disease, 632
Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
deﬁciency of, 411–412
delirium in, 129
dementia in, 328, 833
frontal lobe syndrome in, 155
gait disorders in, 112
neuropathies in, 411–412, 591, 843
olfactory dysfunction in, 206
optic neuropathy in, 185
orthostatic hypotension, 95
sensory disturbances in, 122
malabsorption of, 206
reference range for, 788t
Cobblestone papillae, 180
Cocaine, 767
action of, 221, 718t
acute and chronic intoxication, 767–768, 807, 831
adverse effects of, 767
autonomic, 389
insomnia, 166
myopathy, 645t, 646
intracerebral hemorrhage due to, 289
reinforcing effects of, 767
systemic effects of, 767–768
Coccidioides spp. infections. See also Meningitis
chronic meningitis in, 530t, 674f
neuroimaging in, 674f
ocular involvement in, 182
subacute meningitis in, 514–515
Cochlea, 207, 207f
Cochlear implant, 210, 215–216
Codeine, for pain, 46t
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
for back pain, 83
for chronic fatigue syndrome, 706–707, 846
for PTSD, 748
Cognitive dysfunction
alcohol and, 754
caring for patient with, 155–156
delirium and, 126
in MS, 478
Cognitive evoked potentials, 30
Cognitive function assessment, 127
Cognitive rehabilitation procedures, 156
Colchicine, adverse effects of
myopathy, 645t, 647
neuropathy, 585, 586t
Collier’s sign, 195
Colloid cysts, 115, 432
Color anomia, 177
Color blindness, 177
Colorectal cancer, back pain in, 81
Color vision, assessment of, 177
Coma, 132
anatomy of, 133–135
approach to the patient
brainstem reﬂexes, 136–138, 137f
history, 135
level of arousal, 136
neurologic examination, 136
physical examination, 135–136
brain death determination in, 140
deﬁnition of, 132
differential diagnosis of, 139, 139t
due to cerebral mass lesions and herniations, 
133–134, 133f
due to metabolic disorders, 134–135
due to widespread cerebral damage, 135
EEG in, 28
epileptic, 135
imaging in, 138–139
laboratory studies in, 138–139
prognosis of, 141
toxic/drug-induced, 135
treatment of, 141
Index
857
Combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), 589
Common carotid artery, occlusion of, 277
Common cold, 203
Complement factor H, in macular degeneration, 189
Complex febrile seizures, 238
Complex partial status epilepticus, 329
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), 45, 
389–390, 810, 835
Comprehension, assessment of, 143
Comprehensive stroke centers, 285
Compression fracture, 698f
Computed tomography (CT)
in cerebral artery occlusion, 16f, 285f
in cerebral contusion, 416f
in CNS vasculitis, 686f
in coma, 137
in diffuse axonal injury, 416f
in epidural hematoma, 418f, 699f
in hearing loss, 215
in Huntington’s disease, 690f
in lacunar infarction, 684f
in neurologic critical illness, 296–297
in neurologic disease, 13
complications of, 14–17, 17t
guidelines for, 14t
indications for, 14, 14t
premedication guidelines for patients with prior 
contrast allergy, 17t
technique, 13–14, 15f
in stroke, 282–284, 285f
in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 306–307, 307f, 821
in subdural hematoma, 418f, 419f
in superior sagittal sinus thrombosis, 687f
in viral encephalitis, 510
Computed tomography (CT) angiography, 14, 15f
Computed tomography (CT) cisternography, 14
Computed tomography (CT) myelography, 14, 24
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase) inhibitors, 
for PD, 342, 343t
Concussion, 418
deﬁnition of, 415, 837
mechanics of, 415
vs. moderate/severe head injury, 745t. See also 
Head injury
sports-related, 420, 420t
treatment of, 837
in war veterans, 744–745, 745t, 749
Cone(s), 174, 177
Confabulation, 153
Confusion, 125, 825
Confusion Assessment Method, 127
Congenital amaurosis. See Leber hereditary optic 
neuropathy (congenital amaurosis)
Congenital heart disease, brain abscess and, 519
Congenital motor nystagmus, 196
Congenital muscular dystrophy(ies) (CMDs), 625t, 
630, 631t
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS), 611–612, 
612t
Congenital myopathies, 635
Congenital myotonic dystrophy, 631
Congenital sensory nystagmus, 196
Congenital vascular malformations, 292
Conjugate eye movement, 137
Conjunctivitis, 180
Connexin(s), 221
Connexin 26, 212
Consciousness, assessment of, 5
Constipation
in MS, 478
opioid-induced, 48
treatment of, 48
Contact lenses, 180
Contraception, AEDs and, 255
Contracture, 622
Contrast agents
adverse effects of
nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis, 19–21, 821–822
nephropathy, 15, 822
precautionary measures for, 17t
Contusion, cerebral, 416, 416f
Conus medullaris syndrome, 401–402
Convergence-projection hypothesis, of referred pain, 42f
Conversion disorder, 736
Convulsion, 417
Coordination, assessment of, 9
COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), sleep 
disorders in, 165
Copper
deﬁciency of, 592
reference values, 788t
Corneal blink reﬂex, 137f
Corneal light reﬂex, 177
Cortical venous thrombosis, 107
Corticobasal degeneration, 112, 147, 325, 336
Corticospinal pathway, 105f
Corticosteroids. See Glucocorticoid(s)
Corticotrope, 439t, 446t
Cotton-wool spots, 186f
Cough Assist Device, for ALS, 377
Cough headache, primary, 69
Cover test, 177, 192
Cowden syndrome, 425t
COX inhibitors. See Cyclooxygenase (COX) 
inhibitors
Coxsackievirus, in meningitis, 505
Cramps, muscle, 622
Cranial epidural abscess
clinical features of, 524–525
deﬁnition of, 524, 524f
diagnosis of, 525
etiology of, 524
pathophysiology of, 524
prognosis of, 525
treatment of, 525
Cranial nerve examination, 6–7
Cranial nerve injuries, 417
Cranial nerve palsies, 398–399, 399f
Cranial nerve syndromes, 397–398, 398t
Craniopharyngioma
clinical features of, 432, 447–448
ocular signs in, 179
treatment of, 432
C-reactive protein (CRP), 780t
Creatine kinase, CK-MB, 780t
CREB protein, 718
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
clinical course of, 555
clinical features of, 314t, 549, 554–555, 833, 842
dementia due to, 326
diagnosis of, 555, 556f
differential diagnosis of, 555
after dura matter grafts, 553
after human growth hormone therapy, 553
iatrogenic, 553
laboratory evaluation of, 555–556, 556f
molecular basis of, 312t
myoclonus in, 554–555, 842
neuropathology of, 554
after pituitary gonadotropin therapy, 553
prevention of, 557
as prion disease, 549, 841–842
prions associated with, 555–556
treatment of, 556, 557
variant, 554
Critical illness myopathy, 304
Critical illness polyneuropathy, 304, 581
Critically ill patient
neurologic disorders in, 295t
approach to the patient, 296
diagnostic studies, 296–297
elevated ICP treatment, 297–298, 298t
ICP monitoring, 297, 297f
secondary brain insults, 299–300
central pontine myelinolysis, 301, 302f
delirium, 125, 131, 300–301
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 299–300, 
300f
metabolic encephalopathies, 300–301
myopathy, 304
neuromuscular transmission disorders, 303–304
neuropathy, 303, 581
pathophysiology of
brain edema, 294
cerebral perfusion and autoregulation, 295, 
296f
Critically ill patient, neurologic disorders in, 
pathophysiology of (Cont.):
CSF and intracranial pressure, 295–296, 296f
ischemic cascade and cellular injury, 
294–295
peripheral nervous system, 295t, 303–304
respiratory evaluation in, 303
sepsis-associated encephalopathy, 301
status epilepticus, 297, 300
Wernicke’s disease, 302–303, 302f
Crohn’s disease, ocular involvement in, 182f
Crossed aphasia, 143
Crossed straight-leg raising sign, 74
Crow-Fukase syndrome (POEMS syndrome), 564
CRPS (complex regional pain syndrome), 45, 389–
390, 810, 835
Cryptococcus spp. infections
chronic meningitis in, 530t
in HIV infection, 545–546
subacute meningitis in, 514–515
Cryptogenic sensory and sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy (CSPN), 593
CSF. See Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)
CSTB gene, 235t
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
Cushing response, 136
Cushing’s disease, 451t
Cushing’s syndrome, 467
caused by ectopic ACTH production
diagnosis of, 468, 468t, 840
clinical features of, 467, 467t
differential diagnosis of, 468t, 813, 839–840
etiology of, 467
inferior petrosal venous sampling in, 468
laboratory evaluation of, 467–468
prevalence of, 467
treatment of, 469, 469f
Cutaneous reﬂexes, 9, 104
Cyanide poisoning, 300
Cyclobenzaprine
for back pain, 82
for spasticity in MS, 489
Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors
adverse effects of, 45
opioid combinations, 48
for pain, 45
Cyclopentolate hydrochloride, for red or painful 
eye, 179
Cyclophosphamide
for cerebellar degeneration, 564
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
for MS, 489
for myasthenia gravis, 616
Cyclosporine
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
for myasthenia gravis, 616
therapeutic monitoring of, 786t
Cyclothymic disorder, 734
Cyproheptadine
for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
for migraine prevention, 60
Cystatin B, 235t
Cysticercosis
chronic meningitis in, 530t
clinical features of, 521
diagnosis of, 521–522
etiology of, 521
ocular involvement in, 182, 195
treatment of, 522
Cytarabine, 438t, 585t
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections
myelopathy and polyradiculopathy in, 543
neuropathy in, 583
Cytotoxic edema, 294
Dabigatran, for stroke prevention, 271
Dacarbazine (DTIC), adverse effects of, 438t
Dacryocystitis, 180
Dalfampridine, for weakness in MS, 489
Dantrolene, for spasticity in neurologic disease, 414, 489
Dapsone, 587t
Daytime sleepiness, 163t, 166–168, 173
DDAVP. See Desmopressin (DDAVP)
Index
858
ddC (zalcitabine), adverse effects of, 589
Debranching enzyme deﬁciency (type III 
glycogenosis), 637
Decerebrate rigidity, 136
Decorticate rigidity, in coma, 136
Decubitus ulcers, prevention of, 413
Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
for dystonia, 350
for headache, 64
for PD, 343, 346
Dehydration, delirium in, 128
Déjérine-Roussy syndrome, 123, 288
Delayed puberty, anosmia in, 205
Delayed sleep phase disorder, 172
Delirium, 125
approach to the patient, 127–130, 130t, 803, 
824–825
clinical features of, 125
in critically ill patient, 125, 131, 300–301
dementia and, 126
diagnosis of, 130, 130t, 824–825
drug-induced, 126–127, 129t
in elderly, 126
epidemiology of, 126
etiology of, 128–130, 129t, 825–826
history in, 127–128
hyperactive, 125
hypoactive, 125
pathogenesis of, 126–127
physical examination in, 128
postoperative/ICU, 125, 131, 824
prevention of, 131
reversibility of, 125
risk factors for, 125–126
screening tools for, 127–128
treatment of, 131
Delirium Detection Score, 127
Delirium Rating Scale, 127
Delirium tremens, 125, 759
Demecarium bromide, 177
Dementia, 310. See also speciﬁc types
in alcoholism, 328
ALS/parkinsonian/dementia complex of Guam 
and, 330
aphasia in, 149
approach to the patient, 312, 314t, 808, 833
caring for patient with, 155–156
clinical features of, 314t
in CNS infections, 328–329
in CNS neoplasms, 329
cognitive examination in, 314–315, 315t
in corticobasal degeneration, 325
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 326
deﬁnition of, 310
delirium and, 126–127
differential diagnosis of, 311t
etiology of, 310–312, 311t
frontotemporal. See Frontotemporal dementia
functional anatomy of, 310
head trauma–related, 329
HIV-associated, 541–543, 542f, 542t
in Huntington’s disease, 326–327
insomnia in, 165
in isolated vasculitis of CNS, 329
in Korsakoff’s syndrome, 328
laboratory tests in, 314t, 315–316
memory loss in, 156
metal exposure and, 329
molecular basis of, 312t
multi-infarct, 322
neurologic examination in, 313–314, 314t
in nicotinic acid deﬁciency, 328
in normal-pressure hydrocephalus, 327–328, 327f
patient history in, 312–313, 314t
in PD, 326, 344–345
physical examination in, 313–314, 314t
in Pick’s disease, 324, 325f
prevalence of, 310
in prion diseases, 326
in progressive supranuclear palsy, 325
in psychiatric diseases, 330–331
in seizure disorders, 329
semantic, 152
Dementia (Cont.):
transient global amnesia and, 329–330
treatment of, 331–332
types of, 312, 312t
vascular, 310, 322, 322f
in vitamin B1 deﬁciency, 328
in vitamin B12 deﬁciency, 328
Dementia pugilistica, 329, 744
Dementia with Lewy bodies, 326
clinical features of, 126, 312, 314t, 326
molecular basis of, 312t
neuropathology of, 326
olfactory dysfunction in, 203
orthostatic hypotension in, 95
vs. Parkinson’s disease dementia, 344
treatment of, 326
Dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, 361t, 366–367
Dependence
alcohol. See Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism)
physical, 716
psychological (motivational), 716
substance, vs. substance abuse, 716. See also 
Substance use disorders
Depression/depressive disorders, 730
agitated, 734
chemosensory alterations in, 205
clinical features of, 730–731
diagnosis of, 730t
dizziness in, 101
drug-related, 729
in epilepsy, 253
etiology of, 731
headache and, 52
insomnia in, 164–165
major depression, 730, 730t, 732f, 819, 847
medical illness–related, 729
minor depression, 730–731
in MS, 478, 490
neural circuitry of, 715f
pain and, 48
pathophysiology of, 731
in PD, 344
treatment of
algorithm for, 732f
antidepressants, 723t, 724t, 731–733
in cerebral function disorders, 156
consensus guidelines on, 736t
supportive, 731
unipolar, 731
in war veterans, 748
Dermatomes, 120f, 121f
Dermatomyositis, 648, 817, 845
calcinosis in, 659
clinical features of, 109, 648, 649, 649t
diagnosis of, 655–657, 656t, 657f
differential diagnosis of, 653–655
drug-induced, 655
immunopathogenesis of, 650–652, 651f
malignancies associated with, 650
prognosis of, 659
treatment of, 657–659
Dermatomyositis sine myositis, 649
Dermoid cysts, 432
Desipramine
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t
dosage of, 723t
for pain, 46t, 49, 50, 490
Desmopressin (DDAVP)
for orthostatic hypotension, 95
for sleep enuresis, 170
Desvenlafaxine, for depression, 723t
Detrusor hyperreﬂexia, 490
Devic’s syndrome, 490
Dexamethasone
for bacterial meningitis, 502–503
for brain abscess, 521
for cerebral edema, 424
for increased intracranial pressure, 298t
Dextroamphetamine, for narcolepsy, 169
Diabetes mellitus (DM)
autonomic dysfunction in, 386
depression in, 730
Diabetes mellitus (DM) (Cont.):
myopathy in, 644
neuropathy in. See Diabetic neuropathy
ocular involvement in
abducens nerve palsy, 194
cataracts, 187–188
epiretinal membrane, 190
mydriasis, 176
myopia, 175
oculomotor nerve palsy, 193
optic neuropathy, 184
retinal hemorrhage, 182
retinal vein occlusion, 184
tonic pupil, 176
vitreous degeneration, 187
stroke risk in, 265t
taste disorders in, 204
type 2, in schizophrenia, 740
Diabetic amyotrophy, 579, 644
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy, 578–579
Diabetic neuropathy, 842–843
autonomic, 578–579
distal symmetric sensory and sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy, 578, 843
mononeuropathy, 579
pathophysiology of, 44
polyneuropathy, 578
radiculoplexus neuropathy, 579
treatment of, 49, 578t
Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropathy, 579
Diazepam
for alcohol withdrawal, 758
in cocaine abuse management, 768
dosage of, 725t
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
pharmacology of, 725t
for spasticity in MS, 489
for stiff-person syndrome, 563
for vertigo, 102t
Dichloralphenazone, for migraine, 58t, 60
Dichromat, 177
Diffuse axonal injury, 416
Diffuse Lewy body disease, 326
Diffuse white matter disease, 322, 322f
Diffusion-perfusion mismatch, 286f
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 23
Diffusion tractography, in cerebral glioma, 21f
DiGeorge region deletions, 713
Digitalis, 185
Digit span tests, 128, 154
Dihydroergotamine
for exertional headache, 69
for medication-overuse headache, 66
for migraine, 58t, 59–60, 59t
nasal spray, 58t, 59
Diltiazem, for sex headache prevention, 70
Dimenhydrinate. for vertigo, 102t
Dimethyl fumarate, for MS, 490
Diphtheria, neuropathy in, 581
Diplopia, 192, 478
Dipyridamole, for stroke/TIA prevention, 270–271
DISC1, 713
Discectomy with fusion, cervical, 88
Discography, 24, 83
Disequilibrium, 114. See also Balance
Distal myopathies, 633, 634t
Disulﬁram
adverse effects of, 185, 587t, 849
in alcoholism management, 760
Diuretics
adverse effects of
hearing loss, 209
for Ménière’s disease, 210
for vertigo, 102t
Dix-Hallpike maneuver, 99–100, 802, 823
Dizziness, 98
approach to the patient, 98–100, 802, 823
history in, 98–99
physical examination in, 99–100
psychosomatic, 101–102
in vascular disorders, 98
vestibular causes, 99
DJ-1, 228
Index
859
DM. See Diabetes mellitus (DM)
Docetaxel, 584t
“Doll’s eyes,” 137
Domestic abuse/violence, 741
Domoic acid intoxication, 239
Domperidone, for nausea, 66
Donepezil
for AD, 206, 321
for Parkinson’s disease dementia, 345
Dopamine
anatomic and clinical aspects of, 222t
in migraine, 54
in schizophrenia, 713
structure of, 222t
Dopamine agonists
for acromegaly, 464
adverse effects of, 341, 457
for PD, 341, 343t, 346f
for prolactinoma, 456–457
Dopamine antagonists, for migraine, 54, 58t, 60
Dopa-responsive dystonia, 348
Doppler echocardiography, 795–796t
Dorsal midbrain syndrome (Parinaud’s syndrome), 195
Dorsal root ganglia, 40, 41f3f, 42–43
Dorsal root ganglionopathy, 563–564
Dothiepin, for migraine prevention, 61t
Doublecortin gene, 235t
Downbeat nystagmus, 196
Down syndrome (trisomy 21), AD and, 319
Doxepin
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t
dosage of, 723t
for insomnia, 164
for pain, 46t
Driving ability/privileges
epilepsy and, 254
sleep disorders and, 167
Drop attacks, 115
Drowsiness, 132
Drp1, 228
Drug(s)
autonomic function effects of, 383, 384t
therapeutic monitoring, reference values, 
786–788t
time-of-day effects on, 173
Drusen, 186
in macular degeneration, 189, 189f
optic disc, 186, 186f
Dry beriberi, 591
Dry eye (keratoconjunctivitis sicca), 180
DSPN (diabetic distal symmetric sensory and 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy), 578
DTI (diffusion tensor imaging), 23
DTIC (dacarbazine), adverse effects of, 438t
Dual task walking, 111
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, 624
clinical features of, 624, 625t, 844
genetic factors in, 625t
incidence of, 624
laboratory evaluation of, 624–626
pathogenesis of, 626, 628f
treatment of, 28
Duloxetine
adverse effects of, 578t
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 49, 50
Dura, vascular malformations of, 49–410, 293, 410f
Dural arteriovenous ﬁstulas, 293
Dural sinus thrombosis, 273
Dura matter grafts, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease after, 
553
Dynamic visual acuity, 100
Dysarthria, 143
Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors, 432
Dysesthesia, 117
Dysgerminoma, brain, 448
Dysgraphia, 147
Dyskinesia(s)
diphasic, levodopa-related, 340
paroxysmal, 352
tardive, 112, 354, 740
Dyslexia, 149
Dysphagia, 397–398, 398t
Dysphonia, 397–398, 398t
Dysplasia(s)
ﬁbromuscular, 267
pituitary, 442
Dyspnea
in orthostatic hypotension, 94
paroxysmal nocturnal, 165
Dysproteinemia, 183
Dysreﬂexia, autonomic, 386
Dysthymic disorder, 730
Dystonia, 111, 347t, 348
cervical, 349
clinical features of, 348
dopa responsive, 348
drug-induced, 354
focal, 348–349
idiopathic torsion, 348
limb, 349
Oppenheim’s, 348
oromandibular, 349
pathophysiology of, 349
primary, 348
secondary, 349
Segawa variant, 348
spasmodic, 348
treatment of, 349–350
Dystonia plus syndromes, 349
Dystonic storm, 350
Dystrophin, 626, 628f, 629f
DYT1 gene, 348
Ear, 207, 207f
Ear canal, atresia of, 215
Eating disorders, sleep-related, 170
EBV infections. See Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) 
infections
Echocardiography, 795–796t
Echolalia, 144t, 146
Echo-planar magnetic resonance imaging, 23
Echovirus infections, chronic meningitis in, 531t
Ecstasy (MDMA), 128, 129t, 770
Ectropion, 180
ED. See Erectile dysfunction (ED)
Edema
brain, 294
cytotoxic, 294
vasogenic, 294
Edinger-Westphal nuclei, 174
EDSS (Expanded Disability Status Score), 484t
EEG. See Electroencephalography (EEG)
Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 500
Elderly. See also Aging
benign forgetfulness of, 311
cerumen impaction in, 213
delirium in, 126
falls in, 110, 114. See also Fall(s)
hearing loss in, 209–210
olfactory dysfunction in, 202, 202f, 206
seizures in, 238t
Electrocochleography, 214
Electroconvulsive therapy, for depression, 733
Electrodiagnostic studies, 26
electroencephalography. See 
Electroencephalography (EEG)
electrophysiologic studies. See Electrophysiologic 
studies
evoked potentials. See Evoked potentials
magnetoencephalography, 29, 243
in myasthenia gravis, 611
in myopathies, 623
in myopathy, 623
nerve conduction studies. See Nerve conduction 
studies
in peripheral neuropathy, 568–570, 570t
Electroencephalography (EEG), 26, 27f, 801, 822
in brain death, 140
in coma, 28, 138
continuous monitoring, 29
in delirium, 126
in epilepsy, 8f, 26–28
in neurologic critical illness, 297
in seizures, 233, 234, 241–243
Electrolyte disturbances
delirium in, 129, 129t
neurologic complications of, 663–665
weakness in, 108t
Electromyography (EMG)
in back pain, 75
in peripheral neuropathy, 570, 570t
principles of, 31–32, 31f
single-ﬁber, 34
Electrophysiologic studies, 31
blink reﬂexes, 34
F-wave studies, 33
H-reﬂex studies, 33
muscle response to repetitive nerve stimulation, 
33–34
in seizures, 241–243
Eletriptan, for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
Embolic stroke
artery-to-artery, 263–265
prevention of, 271–272
Embryonal carcinoma, parasellar, 448
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, 629
clinical features of, 625t, 629
genetic factors in, 625t, 629
laboratory evaluation of, 629, 629f
treatment of, 629
Emetine, 185
EMG. See Electromyography (EMG)
Emmetropia, 175
Empty sella, 444, 840
Encephalitis
amnesia in, 153
approach to the patient, 493–494, 494–495f
brainstem, 558t, 561
chronic, 516
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. 
See Progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy (PML)
progressive rubella panencephalitis, 518
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 517–518
cortical, 561
delirium in, 129, 129t
focal, 561–562
limbic, 329, 668–669f
paraneoplastic, 329, 558t, 561–562
viral, 508
approach to the patient, 493–494, 494–495f
clinical features of, 508
deﬁnition of, 508
diagnosis of, 510f, 511t
brain biopsy in, 510
CSF analysis in, 508–509
CT in, 510
MRI in, 510, 510f, 511t
serologic studies and antigen detection in, 
509–510
differential diagnosis of, 510–512
enteroviral, 505
etiology of, 503t, 508
HSV
differential diagnosis of, 500, 511, 511t
memory loss in, 153
MRI in, 19f
sequelae of, 514
treatment of, 512–514
West Nile virus, 511–512, 511t
Encephalomyelitis
acute disseminated. See Acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
deﬁnition of, 561
experimental allergic, 224, 224f
paraneoplastic, 559t, 561–562
postinfectious, 491
Encephalopathy, 125. See also Delirium
chemotherapy-induced, 438t
Hashimoto’s, 555, 696f
HIV, 541–543, 542f, 542t
hypertensive, 129t, 289
hypoxic-ischemic, 256, 299–300, 300f
metabolic, 146, 155, 300–301
sepsis-associated, 301
Endarterectomy, carotid, 273
Endocrine myopathies, 643
Index
860
Endolymphatic hydrops. See Ménière’s disease
Endometrial cancer, back pain in, 81
Endometriosis, back pain in, 81
Endophthalmitis, 182
Endovascular procedures
for carotid atherosclerosis, 273
for ischemic stroke, 259–260
Enophthalmos, 190
Entacapone, for PD, 342, 343t
Enteroviruses, in meningitis, 505
Entrapment neuropathy, 665
Entropion, 180
Enuresis, sleep, 170
Environmental factors, in neuropathy, 588t,  
589–591
Enzyme(s), in myopathy, 622–623
Ependymoma, 429
Epidermoid cyst, 432
Epidural abscess
cranial, 524–525, 524f
spinal, 78, 405–406, 406f
weakness in, 107
Epidural hematoma
clinical features of, 418–419, 837
neuroimaging in, 418f, 699f
spinal, 406
treatment of, 419
weakness in, 107
Epidural metastases, 436, 436f
Epidural spinal hemorrhage, 290
Epidural tumor, 107
Epigenetics, 219
Epilepsia partialis continua, 232, 561
Epilepsy, 231. See also Seizure(s)
adverse effects of, 253
autonomic, 96
catamenial, 254
coma in, 135
deﬁnition of, 231
EEG in, 8f, 26–28
employment and, 254
etiology of, 236–237
age-related, 237–238, 238t
drug-related, 239, 239t
genetic, 235t, 240
incidence of, 231
insomnia in, 165
ion channel defects causing, 220t
loss of driving privileges in, 254
mortality of, 253–254
pregnancy and, 254–255
prevalence of, 231
psychiatric disorders associated with, 253
psychosocial issues in, 254
refractory, 251–252
taste disorders in, 204
treatment of, 245, 807, 831
antiepileptic drugs, 245–251, 247–249t
avoidance of precipitating factors in,  
245
surgical, 251–252
underlying conditions–related, 245
in women, 254–255
Epilepsy syndromes, 231, 234
genetic, 235t
juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, 234, 236
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, 236
mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, 236, 236f, 236t, 
807, 830
Epileptic spasms, 234
Epileptiform activity, 26, 243
Epileptogenesis, 240
Epiretinal membrane, 190
Episcleritis, 181
Episodic ataxia, 220t, 362–363t, 367
Epley maneuver, 100, 823
EPM2A gene, 235t
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infections
meningitis, 506
neuropathy in, 583
Erectile dysfunction (ED)
autonomic dysfunction and, 381
cocaine and, 768
Ergotamine
for cluster headache prevention, 64–123
for exertional headache, 69
for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
for sex headache prevention, 70
Ergotism, 64
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, in temporal arteritis, 
53
Erythromycin, for blepharitis, 180
Erythropoietin therapy, for orthostatic hypotension, 
95, 390
Escitalopram, for depression, 321, 331, 723t
Esophageal cancer, alcohol effects on, 755
Esophagus, alcohol effects on, 755
Essential tremor, 347
Estrogen therapy
for AD prevention, 321
for migraine prevention, 59t
Eszopiclone, 164, 204
Ethacrynic acid, 209
Ethambutol
adverse effects of, 185, 587t
for tuberculous meningitis, 515
Ethanol. See Alcohol
Ethchlorvynol, 185
Ethosuximide, 247t, 250
Ethylene glycol poisoning
delirium in, 129t
optic neuropathy in, 185
Ethylene oxide, 588t
Etomidate, for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
Etoposide, 585t
Euphoria, 716
Eustachian tube dysfunction, 209
Eustachian tube obstruction, 214
Evoked potentials, 29–31
cognitive, 30
motor, 30
in MS, 480t, 482
somatosensory, 30
Excitotoxicity, 226
Executive functions, 154
Exercise
for back pain, 82, 83
in PD, 345
for prevention of falls, 115
for spinal stenosis, 78
Exertional headache, primary, 51t, 69
Exophthalmos, 190
Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS), 484t
Experimental allergic neuritis, 600
Extensor plantar response, 8
Extinction (sensory phenomenon), 122, 150
Extracranial-to-intracranial bypass surgery, 273
Extramedullary syndromes, 403
Eye(s). See also Ocular disorders
alignment of, 177
dry (keratoconjunctivitis sicca), 180
melanoma of, 190, 190f
movements of, 174
in coma, 137–138, 137f
in dizziness evaluation, 99
video library, 198
painful or red, 179–182, 806, 829
physiology of, 174
tumors of, 190
Eye ﬁelds, frontal, 149, 149f
Eyelids, disorders of, 180, 191–192
Ezetimibe, 645t, 646
Fabry disease, 575, 575t
Face recognition, 152
Facet fracture, 698f
Facet joint, 71, 79
Facial hemiatrophy, 397
Facial myokymia, 397, 479
Facial nerve
anatomy of, 201f, 395f
examination of, 6
injury to, 210
in taste sensation, 201
Facial numbness, 392
Facial pain, 392
Facial weakness, 394
anatomic considerations in, 394–395, 395f
facial hemiatrophy, 397
facial myokymia, 397
hemifacial spasm, 397
in MS, 478
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, 620f, 625t, 
632
Factitious illness
characteristics of, 736
visual loss, 187
Factor V, screening assays, 776t
Factor VII, screening assays, 776t
Factor VIII, screening assays, 776t
Fall(s), 114
collapsing, 115
drop attacks, 115
in elderly, 110, 114
epidemiology of, 110, 114
gait freezing and, 115
mechanical, 115
prevention of, 115
recurrent, 114
reducing injury risk in, 115
risk factors for, 114, 114t
sensory deﬁcits and, 115
slipping and tripping, 115
toppling, 115
weakness and frailty and, 115
Famciclovir, for viral meningitis, 507
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy, 575t, 577
Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 372, 374t
Familial spastic paraplegia, 374–376t, 378–379, 412
Fasciculations, 104, 104t
Fatal familial insomnia, 165
Fatigue
deﬁnition of, 620
increased fatigability, 103
in MS, 477, 490
myasthenic, 610
vs. sleepiness, 166–167
Fazio-Londe syndrome, 378
Felbamate, 249t
Femoral neuropathy, 594
Fenoprofen, for pain, 46t
Fentanyl
for pain, 46t, 47
transdermal, 47, 50
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, 756
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 756
Fetal nigral dopamine cells, for PD, 344
Fetal posterior cerebral artery, 277
Fever
central, 135
in coma, 135
quadriplegic, 413
Fibric acid derivatives, adverse effects of, 645t, 844
Fibrillation potential, 104
Fibromuscular dysplasia, 267
Fibromyalgia, 621
Fila, 199
Finger anomia, 147
Fingolimod
action of, 487
for MS, 486t, 487
Fisher’s syndrome, 194–195
Fistula(s), dural arteriovenous, 293
Flaccidity, 103
Flavor enhancers, 205
Floaters, 186
Fludarabine, 438, 438t
Fludrocortisone
for orthostatic hypotension, 95, 345, 390
for syncope, 92
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), 18, 
821
in brain tumors, 424, 427f
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 556f
in diffuse white matter disease, 322f
in Huntington’s disease, 351f
in hyperperfusion syndrome, 817, 817f, 845
in limbic encephalitis, 560f, 668–669f
in MS, 481f
Index
861
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (Cont.):
in seizures, 243
in viral encephalitis, 500, 510, 510f, 511t
Flumazenil, in opiate overdose management, 764
Flunarizine
adverse effects of, 61t
for chronic daily headache, 66
for hypnic headache, 70
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
Flunitrazepam, abuse of, 772
Fluoride, for otosclerosis, 209
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), 438t
Fluoxetine
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t, 732
dosage of, 723t
for narcolepsy, 169
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 728
for pain, 49
for panic disorder, 722, 847
pharmacology of, 732
Fluphenazine, 739t
Flurazepam
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
pharmacology of, 725t
Fluvoxamine
for depression, 723t
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 728
Focal seizures. See Seizure(s), focal
Folate
deﬁciency of, 185
reference values, 788t
Folinic acid, for megaloblastic anemia prophylaxis, 
522
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 469
action of, 470
deﬁciency of, 446t
reference values, 781t
secretion of, 469–470
synthesis of, 469–470
Foramen magnum syndrome, 403
Forearm exercise test, 623–624
Foreign body, in eye, 179
Fortiﬁcation spectra, 4, 187
Foscarnet, for viral encephalitis, 513
Foster Kennedy syndrome, 205
Fovea, 174
Foveation, 174
Foville’s syndrome, 194
Fragile X pre-mutation, 112
Fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome, 363t
Frataxin gene, 368
Freezing episodes, in PD, 345
Frenzel eyeglasses, 100
Friedreich’s ataxia, 367
clinical features of, 361t, 367
genetic factors in, 228, 361t, 368
imaging of, 367f
locus and phenotype of, 361t
treatment of, 368–369
Frontal abulic syndrome, 154, 155
Frontal bone fractures, 417
Frontal disinhibition syndrome, 154, 155
Frontal eye ﬁeld, 195
Frontal gait disorder, 112, 113t
Frontal network syndrome, 155
Frontotemporal degenerations, 149
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 323
behavioral variant, 155
clinical features of, 155, 312, 314t, 323
functional anatomy of, 310, 323
genetic factors in, 219, 228, 323
imaging in, 323–324, 324f
molecular basis of, 312t
olfactory dysfunction in, 202–203
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), 229, 324
Frovatriptan, for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
FTD. See Frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
Fukitin-related protein deﬁciency, 630, 631t
Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy, 630, 631t
Functional Status (FS) Score, 484t
Fundus examination, 182
Fungal infections, chronic meningitis in, 530t
Furosemide, 209
FUS gene, 228, 312t, 323
FUS/TLS gene, 373, 374t
F-wave studies, 33
GABA. See γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Gabapentin
adverse effects of, 61t, 248t, 578t
for chronic daily headache, 66
for cluster headache prevention, 64t
for epilepsy, 248t
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 50, 489–490
pharmacology of, 248t
for posttraumatic headache, 68
for restless legs syndrome, 166
for SUNCT/SUNA prevention, 65
GAD1 gene, 712
Gadolinium contrast, 18–21, 801, 821–822. See also 
Contrast agents
Gag reﬂex, 7
Gait
anatomy and physiology of, 110–111
disorders, 111, 111t
approach to the patient, 113, 802, 824
cautious gait, 111
cerebellar gait ataxia, 112, 113t
freezing gait, 112, 115. See also Parkinson’s 
disease (PD)
frontal, 112, 113t, 802, 824
in neuromuscular disease, 113
psychogenic, 113
sensory ataxia, 112, 113t
slowly progressive, 113
spastic, 111
spastic-ataxic, 111
stiff-legged, 111
in toxic and metabolic disorders, 113
video library, 116
examination of, 9
Gait apraxia, 112
Gait cycle, 110
Galactorrhea, 455
Galactosemia, ocular involvement in, 188
Galantamine, for AD, 321
Gallium nitrate, 438t
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
alcohol effects on, 753
anatomic and clinical aspects of, 222t
structure of, 222t
γ-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)
abuse of, 128, 129t, 772
for narcolepsy, 169
Gamma knife surgery, for trigeminal neuralgia, 393
γ motor neurons, 106f
Ganciclovir, for viral encephalitis, 513
Gangliocytomas, 448
Gangliogliomas, 429
Ganglion cells, of retina, 174
Ganglionopathy, dorsal root, 564
Gap junctions, 221
Gardner’s syndrome, brain tumors and, 425t
Gas exchange, reference values, 797t
Gastric juice, 798t
Gaze disorders
horizontal, 195, 196f
in MS, 478
supranuclear, 195
vertical gaze, 195
Gaze stabilization reﬂex, 174
GBA gene, 338
GBS. See Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)
Gegenhalten, 103
Generalized anxiety disorder, 722
clinical features of, 722
diagnosis of, 725t
etiology of, 724
pathophysiology of, 724
treatment of, 724–726
Generalized convulsive status epilepticus, 252
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures, 235t
Generalized tonic-clonic status epilepticus, 252, 253f
Gene therapy, for PD, 344
Genome-wide association studies, 218
Gentamicin
intratympanic, for Ménière’s disease, 210
for meningitis, 499t, 502
German measles (rubella), congenital, 518
Germinoma, parasellar, 448
Gerstmann’s syndrome, 147
Gerstmann-Straüssler-Scheinker (GSS) disease, 550, 
550t, 554, 842
GHB. See γ-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)
Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis)
clinical features of, 53
erythrocyte sedimentation rate in, 53
headache in, 53
ocular involvement in, 183, 184, 184f, 194
stroke due to, 267
Gingivitis, taste disorders in, 204
Gingko biloba, 321
Glasgow Coma Scale, 421, 421t
Glatiramer acetate
adverse effects of, 486
for MS, 486, 486t
Glaucoma, 188, 188f
acute angle-closure, 182, 188
headache in, 53
low-tension, 188
treatment of, 188
visual ﬁeld assessment in, 178–179
Glioblastoma(s), 425–426, 426f, 427–428, 427f, 428f
Glioma
cerebral, 21f
hypothalamic, 448
ocular signs in, 179
optic, 448
Gliomatosis cerebri, 129t, 428
Gliosarcoma(s), 429
Glossodynia (burning mouth syndrome), 206
Glossopharyngeal nerve
anatomy of, 201f
examination of, 7
in taste sensation, 201
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 397, 398t, 479
Glucocorticoid(s)
for ACTH deﬁciency, 466
adverse effects of
cataracts, 188
myopathy, 645t, 646, 658
for allergic conjunctivitis, 180
for anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, 184
for brain abscess, 521
for CIDP, 606
for cluster headache prevention, 64–123
for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
epidural
for back pain, 82, 83, 84
for neck pain, 88
for episcleritis and scleritis, 181
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
intranasal, for sinusitis, 206
for MS, 485
for muscular dystrophy, 628
for myasthenia gravis, 615
for neck pain, 88
for neuromyelitis optica, 491
for optic neuritis, 185
for orbital pseudotumor, 191
systemic
for Ménière’s disease, 210
for sinusitis, 202
topical
for herpes simplex keratitis, 181
for uveitis, 181
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deﬁciency, 776t
Glue sniffer’s neuropathy, 589–590
Glutamate
anatomic and clinical aspects of, 222t
as neurotransmitter, 42
structure of, 222t
Gluten-free diet, for ataxic disorders, 369
Glycine, 222t
Index
862
Glycine receptor, 559t
Glycogen storage diseases, 636
with exercise intolerance, 637
with skeletal myopathy/progressive weakness, 
636–637
type II (acid maltase deﬁciency), 636–637
type III (debranching enzyme deﬁciency), 637
type IV (branching enzyme deﬁciency), 637
type V (myophosphorylase deﬁciency), 637
type VII (phosphofructokinase deﬁciency), 637
Glycolysis, abnormalities of, 637
Glycopyrrolate, for primary hyperhidrosis, 388
Gnathostoma spinigerum/gnathostomiasis, chronic 
meningitis in, 530t
Gold therapy, adverse effects of, 588t
Gonadotrope, 439t, 446t
Gonadotropin(s), 469
action of, 470
deﬁciency of, 470–471
synthesis of, 469–470
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 441f
Go-no-go test, 155
Gorlin’s syndrome (nevoid basal cell carcinoma 
syndrome), 425t
Gottron’s sign, 649
Gowers’ sign, 618, 621f
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), in taste 
sensation, 201
Graded exercise therapy, for chronic fatigue 
syndrome, 706–707, 846
Gradenigo’s syndrome, 194, 526
Granisetron, for nausea and vomiting, 66
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
chronic meningitis in, 533t
ocular disease in, 181
Graphesthesia, 122
Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 191, 644
Gray (radiation unit), 799t
Greater petrosal nerve, 202
GRN gene, 323
Growth
disorders of, 459–460
somatic, skeletal maturation and, 459
Growth hormone (GH), 458
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease after treatment with, 
553
insensitivity, 460
laboratory evaluation of, 445t
recombinant
for adult growth hormone deﬁciency, 461–
462, 462f
adverse effects of, 462
for growth hormone deﬁciency in children, 460
secretion of, 458
synthesis of, 458
Growth hormone (GH) deﬁciency
in adults. See Adult growth hormone deﬁciency
in children, 446t, 459–460
idiopathic, 460
Growth hormone (GH) receptor antagonists, for 
acromegaly, 465
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) 
receptor mutations, 460
Guanfacine, for Tourette’s syndrome, 353
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), 599
antecedent events, 600, 816, 843
autonomic dysfunction in, 387
vs. CIDP, 605
clinical features of, 599–600, 600t
cranial nerve palsies in, 399
diagnosis of, 603, 604t
facial nerve disorders in, 397
immunopathogenesis of, 62t, 600–603, 601f
laboratory evaluation of, 603
paraneoplastic, 565
pathophysiology of, 603
prevalence of, 599
prognosis of, 604–605
recovery from, 605
subtypes of, 599–600, 600t
treatment of, 603–604
weakness in, 108, 109
Gynecomastia, cocaine and, 768
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae infections, 495, 496. See also 
Meningitis
Hallucinations
alcohol and, 755
chemosensory, 205
hypnagogic, 163t, 168, 168t
hypnopompic, 168
in PD, 344–345
Hallucinosis, peduncular, 278
Haloperidol
for acute alcohol intoxication, 758
adverse effects of, 739t
for delirium, 301
Hamartin, 433
Hamartoma, hypothalamic, 448
Hand, mechanic’s, 649
Hand-Schüller-Christian disease, 448
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, 555, 696f
Hashish, 769
Haw River syndrome, 367
Headache, 51
acute, new-onset, 52, 52t, 305
anatomy and physiology of, 51–52
with autonomic symptoms, 52
in brain abscess, 519
in brain tumor, 51t, 53
chronic daily, 65
classiﬁcation of, 65, 66t
diagnosis of, 65–66
from medication overuse, 60, 66
cluster. See Cluster headache
depression and, 52
in glaucoma, 53
in head injury, 51t, 68
hemicrania continua, 66t, 68–69
hypnic, 70
in intracranial hemorrhage, 52–53
medication-overuse, 60, 66
in meningitis, 52
migraine. See Migraine
new daily persistent, 66
clinical features of, 66–67
diagnosis of, 67t
low CSF volume headache, 67–68, 67f
posttraumatic, 51t, 68
raised CSF pressure headache, 68
in papilledema, 185
paroxysmal hemicrania, 64–65, 66t
post–lumbar puncture, 37–38, 37t
primary, 51, 51t, 53
primary cough, 69
primary exertional, 51t, 69
primary sex, 70
primary stabbing, 51t, 69
primary thunderclap, 70
secondary, 51, 51t, 52
in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 51t, 52, 305
SUNCT/SUNA, 65, 66t
symptoms of serious underlying disorder, 52t
tension-type. See Tension-type headache
Head drop, 648
Head impulse test, 99
Head injury, 415. See also speciﬁc types
amnesia in, 153
aphasia in, 145
autonomic storm following, 389
brain hemorrhage in, 416, 416f, 812, 837
clinical syndromes of, 419
concussion in. See Concussion
contusion in, 416, 416f
convulsions after, 417
cranial nerve injuries, 417
diffuse axonal injury in, 416, 416f
emergency care of, 415
grading of, 421, 421t
headache in, 51t, 68
of intermediate severity, 420–421
intracerebral hemorrhage due to, 289
minor injury, 419–420
olfactory dysfunction in, 202
postconcussion syndrome, 421–422, 837
prevalence of, 415
prognosis of, 421
Head injury (Cont.):
recurrent, dementia due to, 329
seizures and, 237, 417–418
severe injury, 421
skull fractures in, 417
types of, 415
in war veterans, 744–745, 745t, 749
Head tilt test, 194
Head-up tilt test, 385, 385t
Health care workers, shift-work disorder in, 171
Hearing, 207
Hearing aid, 210, 215
Hearing loss, 208, 806, 829–830
approach to the patient, 207f, 212–213
audiologic assessment of, 213–214
conductive, 208–209
drug-induced, 209
evoked responses in, 214–215
genetic causes of, 211–212, 211t, 212t
imaging studies in, 215
ion channel defects causing, 220t
mixed, 210
noise-induced, 213, 216
prevention of, 216
sensorineural, 209–210
treatment of, 215–216
Heart, normal pressures in, 793t
Heart failure (HF), cerebral symptoms of, 129, 129t
Heart rate
response to deep breathing, 384, 385t
during sleep, 161
Heat sensitivity, in MS, 478–479
Hematocrit, normal, 777t
Hematologic disease, reference values, 775–778t
Hematoma
epidural. See Epidural hematoma
spinal, 406
subdural. See Subdural hematoma
Hematomyelia, 406
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, 
complications of, 583
Hemianopia, 178f
bitemporal, 179
homonymous, 178f, 179
Hemiatrophy, facial, 397
Hemiballismus, 165, 352
Hemicrania continua, 66t, 68
Hemifacial spasm, 394, 397, 479
Hemilaminectomy, in lumbar disk disease, 85
Hemineglect, 804, 826
Hemiparesis, 106
acute or episodic, 106
cerebral artery occlusion and, 16f
chronic, 107
subacute, 106–107
Hemispherectomy, for refractory epilepsy, 151
Hemoglobin, normal, 777t
Hemorrhage
brain, traumatic, 416, 416f
epidural spinal, 290
intracranial. See Intracranial hemorrhage
subconjunctival, 179
Heparin, monitoring treatment with, 776t
Hepatic encephalopathy
coma in, 134–135
delirium in, 129t
Hepatitis, neuropathy in, 583
Hereditary endotheliopathy, retinopathy, 
nephropathy, and stroke (HERNs), 268
Hereditary myopathies, 624, 625t. See also Muscular 
dystrophy
Hereditary neuropathy(ies)
approach to, 568, 568t
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. See Charcot-
Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease
Fabry disease, 575, 575t
familial amyloid polyneuropathy, 575t, 577
hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy, 573t, 574–575,  
842
hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure 
palsies, 572t, 574
porphyria, 575t, 576–577
Tangier disease, 575t, 576
Index
863
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 
(HSAN)
autonomic dysfunction in, 388
clinical features of, 575, 842
genetic factors in, 388, 573t
orthostatic hypotension in, 95
Herniation, cerebral, 133–134, 133f, 804, 826
HERNS (hereditary endotheliopathy, retinopathy, 
nephropathy, and stroke), 268
Heroin
adverse effects of, 177, 645t, 646
systems effects of, 763
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections
encephalitis
memory loss in, 153
vs. meningitis, 500
MRI in, 19f
keratitis, 181
meningitis, 506, 531t
uveitis, 181
Herpes zoster (shingles)
clinical features of
glossopharyngeal neuropathy, 397
neck pain, 86
neuropathy, 582–583
ocular, 181
postherpetic neuralgia, 583
pathogenesis of, 44
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus, 181
Hertel exophthalmometer, 191
HESX1 gene, 442
Heterotropia, 177
Hexacarbons, neuropathies due to, 588t, 589–590
High-altitude illness, sleep impairment in, 164
Hip pain, 74
Hippocampus, in mood disorders, 715
Histamine, pain and, 42f
Histiocytosis, neuroimaging in, 683f
Histiocytosis X, 443, 448
Histoplasma spp. infections
chronic meningitis in, 530t
ocular involvement in, 182
of pons, MRI in, 673f
subacute meningitis in, 514–515
HIV
replication cycle of, 538–540
structure of, 538, 538f
HIV-1, 536–538
HIV-2, 538
HIV infection
classiﬁcation of, 536, 537t
depression in, 729
hearing loss in, 210
lymphoma in, 544–545
neurologic manifestations of, 536t, 541
Chagas’ disease, 547–548
chronic meningitis, 531t, 534–535
CNS lymphoma, 545, 545f
cognitive impairment, 541
cryptococcosis, 545–546
HIV-associated dementia, 541–543, 542f, 542t
meningitis, 506, 543
myelopathy, 543
myopathy, 544
neuropathy, 582
pathogenesis of, 540–541
peripheral neuropathy, 543–544
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, 
517, 547
seizures, 548
stroke, 548
toxoplasmosis, 546–547, 547f
olfactory dysfunction in, 202
opportunistic/disseminated infections in, 545, 546f
orthostatic hypotension in, 95
pathophysiology of, 540
weakness in, 107
HNPP (hereditary neuropathy with liability to 
pressure palsies), 572t, 574
Hodgkin’s disease, paraneoplastic syndromes in, 563
Hollenhorst plaque, 183, 183f
Homeless, mental health problems in, 741
Homer-Wright rosettes, 430
Hordeolum, 180
Horizontal cells, of retina, 174
Hormone(s), alcohol effects on, 756
Hormone replacement therapy, for hypopituitarism, 
444, 446t
Horner’s syndrome
in cervical cord lesions, 401
ocular manifestations of, 176, 192
“Hot cross buns sign,” 386, 386f
H-reﬂex studies, 33
HSAN. See Hereditary sensory and autonomic 
neuropathy (HSAN)
HSV infections. See Herpes simplex virus (HSV) 
infections
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), reference 
values, 782t
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus-I (HTLV-I) 
infections, myelopathy and, 410
Humoral autoimmunity, in MS, 476–477
Hunt-Hess scale, for subarachnoid hemorrhage, 305, 
306t
huntingtin gene, 350–351
Huntington’s disease, 350
clinical features of, 350
dementia in, 310, 326–327
etiology of, 350–351
frontal lobe syndrome in, 155
functional anatomy of, 310
gait disorders in, 112
insomnia in, 165
neuroimaging in, 351f, 690f
neuropathology of, 228, 350
ocular involvement in, 195
olfactory dysfunction in, 202
prevalence of, 350
treatment of, 351
Huntington’s disease–like 1, 351
Huntington’s disease–like 2, 351
Hutchinson’s sign, 181
Hydrocephalus
balance disorders in, 114
coma in, 139
gait disorders in, 111t, 112
normal-pressure, dementia due to, 327–328,  
327f
obstructive, ocular involvement in, 176, 195
after subarachnoid hemorrhage, 306
weakness in, 107
Hydrocortisone, for ACTH deﬁciency, 466
Hydromorphone, for pain, 46t
Hydrophobia, in rabies, 512
Hydroxychloroquine, adverse effects of
myopathy, 645t, 647
neuropathy, 585, 586t
ocular, 190
Hypalgesia, 117
Hyperaldosteronism, weakness in, 644
Hyperalgesia, 41, 117
Hyperarousal, 163
Hypercalcemia, neurologic consultation for, 665
Hypercarbia, delirium in, 129, 129t
Hypercoagulable state, stroke due to, 267
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, 580
Hyperesthesia, 117
Hyperglycemia, myopia in, 175
Hyperhidrosis, primary, 388
Hyperkalemia, neurologic consultation for, 664–665
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HyperKPP), 220t, 
641t, 642
Hyperkinetic movement disorders, 346, 347t, 355
Hyperkyphosis, 73
Hyperlordosis, 73
Hypermagnesemia, neurologic consultation for,  
665
Hypernatremia, neurologic consultation for,  
663–664
Hyperopia, 175
Hyperosmolality, neurologic consultation for, 
663–664
Hyperparathyroidism
delirium in, 129t
muscle weakness in, 644
Hyperpathia, 44, 118, 389
Hyperperfusion states
diagnosis of, 661, 661f, 817, 817f, 845
etiology of, 660, 661t
neurologic consultation for, 660–662
treatment of, 661–662
Hyperprolactinemia, 453, 813, 839
clinical features of, 454–455
diagnosis of, 454–455
etiology of, 453–454, 454t
galactorrhea and, 455
laboratory studies of, 455
treatment of, 455
Hyperprolactinemia, cocaine and, 768
Hypersensitivity reactions, chronic meningitis due 
to, 532t
Hypertension
optic neuropathy in, 184
retinopathy in, 183, 183f
stroke risk in, 265t
supine, 94
Hypertensive encephalopathy, 129t, 289
Hyperthermia, delirium in, 129t
Hyperthyroidism
delirium in, 129, 129t
muscle involvement in, 644
Hypertonic saline, for increased intracranial pressure, 
298t
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, syncope in, 96
Hypesthesia, 117
Hypnic headache, 70
Hypnosis, 57
Hypocalcemia, neurologic consultation for, 665
Hypoceruloplasminemia, 364t
Hypochondriasis, 736
Hypocupric myelopathy, 412
Hypoesthesia, 117
Hypoglossal nerve, 7
Hypoglycemia
Bálint’s syndrome in, 151
syncope and, 96
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
clinical features of, 470
diagnosis of, 470
isolated, 470
treatment of, 470–471
Hypokalemia, neurologic consultation for, 664
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoKPP), 220t, 
640–642, 642f
Hypomagnesemia, neurologic consultation for, 665
Hypomania, 165
Hyponatremia
neurologic consultation for, 664
after subarachnoid hemorrhage, 306
Hypoparathyroidism, muscle weakness in, 644
Hypophysitis, 443
Hypopituitarism, 441
anterior pituitary insufﬁciency and, 441
clinical features of, 444
diagnosis of, 444, 445t
etiology of, 441t
acquired, 443–444, 838, 839
developmental and genetic, 442–443
treatment of, 444, 446t
Hypotension, in coma, 136
Hypothalamic disease
hypopituitarism due to, 443
metabolic effects of, 449
Hypothalamic gliomas, 448
Hypothalamic hamartomas, 448
Hypothalamic-pituitary vasculature, 440f
Hypothalamus
developmental dysfunction of, 442–443
in sleep onset, 159
Hypothermia
coma and, 136
delirium in, 129t
for hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 300
Hypothyroidism
depression in, 729
muscle disorders in, 644
neuropathy in, 579
Hypoxia, delirium in, 129, 129t
Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 256, 299–300, 300f
Index
864
IBD. See Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD)
IBPN (immune-mediated brachial plexus 
neuropathy), 595
Ibuprofen
for migraine, 58t
for pain, 46t
ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1), 540
ICP. See Intracranial pressure (ICP)
Ideational apraxia, 147
Ideomotor apraxia, 147
Idiopathic growth hormone deﬁciency (IGHD), 460
Idiopathic torsion dystonia, 348
Ifosfamide, 438, 438t
IKBKAP gene, 388
Ileus, postoperative, 48
Iloperidone, 739t
Imipramine
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t, 732
dosage of, 723t, 732
for pain, 46t
for sleep enuresis, 170
Immune-mediated brachial plexus neuropathy 
(IBPN), 595
Immune myelopathies, 407–409
Immune neuropathies, 601–602, 602f
Immune response/immune system, reference values, 
778–785t
Immunocompromised patient, primary CNS 
lymphoma in, 429–430
Immunodeﬁciency viruses, 536
Immunoglobulin(s), reference values, 782t
Immunomodulators, for inﬂammatory myopathies, 
658
Immunosuppressive therapy
chronic meningitis associated with, 534–535
for myasthenia gravis, 615
Implicit memory, 153
Imprinting, 219
Inclusion body myositis, 648
clinical features of, 648, 649–650, 649t
diagnosis of, 655–657, 656t, 657f
differential diagnosis of, 653–655
drug-induced, 655
genetic factors in, 650
muscle damage in, 652, 652f
nonimmune factors in, 653
prognosis of, 659
treatment of, 657–659
viral infections and, 653
Indomethacin
for cough headache, 69
for exertional headache, 69
for hemicrania continua, 69
for pain, 46t
for paroxysmal hemicrania, 65
for sex headache, 70
for stabbing headache, 69
Infants, seizures in, 238t
Infective endocarditis
retinal hemorrhage in, 182
stroke and, 263
Inferior petrosal venous sampling, in Cushing’s 
syndrome, 468
Inferior pontine syndrome, lateral/medial, 281f
Inﬂammation, nociceptor-induced, 41
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD)
neuropathy in, 580
ocular involvement in, 181, 182, 182f
Inﬂammatory mediators, in sensitization, 40–41
Inﬂammatory myelopathies, 407–409
Inﬂammatory myopathies
autoantibodies in, 651, 816–817, 845
clinical features of, 648–650, 649t
diagnosis of, 655–657, 656f, 656t, 657f
differential diagnosis of, 653–655
drug-induced, 655
immunogenetics in, 651
immunopathologic mechanisms in, 651–652, 652f
malignancies associated with, 650
overlap syndrome, 650
pathogenesis of, 650–653
prevalence of, 648
prognosis of, 659
Inﬂammatory myopathies (Cont.):
treatment of, 657–659
viral infections associated with, 653
Inﬂuenza, 202
Inﬂuenza vaccine, Guillain-Barré syndrome and, 600
Insomnia
adjustment (acute), 164
altitude, 164
drug-induced, 165–166
evaluation of, 162–163, 163t
fatal familial, 165
long-term (chronic), 162
in medical disorders, 165
in mental disorders, 164–165
in neurologic disease, 165
paradoxical, 163
primary, 163–164
psychophysiologic, 164
rebound, 164, 166
short-term, 162
sleep maintenance, 162
sleep offset, 162
sleep onset, 162
transient, 162
treatment of, 163–164, 163t
Insomnia phobia, 164
Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), 459
Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), 540
Interferon-β (IFN-β), for MS, 485–486, 486t
Interferon-β1a (IFN-β1a)
for MS, 485–486, 486t
for optic neuritis, 185
Interferon-β1b (IFN-β1b), for MS, 485–486, 486t
Internal carotid artery, occlusion of, 276–277, 276f, 277f
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, 195, 196f
Interventional neuroradiology, 25
Intervertebral disk
anatomy of, 71, 72f
herniation of
diagnosis of, 76–77
imaging in, 77, 77f
nerve compression in, 73f
pain mechanism in, 75t, 76–77
physical examination in, 74t, 76–77
weakness in, 107
replacement, 84
Intracranial atherosclerosis, 273
Intracranial hemorrhage, 286
anticoagulant therapy and, 289
aphasia in, 145
brain tumor and, 289
in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, 289
clinical outcomes of, 291t
in cocaine users, 289
etiology of, 256, 287t, 289–290
headache in, 52–53
head injury and, 289
hypertensive encephalopathy and, 289–290
intraparenchymal, 288–289, 288f
laboratory/imaging evaluation of, 290
lobar, 289
prevention of, 291
primary intraventricular, 290
prognosis of, 291t
treatment of, 287, 290–291
Intracranial meningitis, 527–528
Intracranial pressure (ICP)
increased
in bacterial meningitis, 498, 503
headache with, 68
in intracranial hemorrhage, 291
monitoring of, 297, 297f
ocular manifestations of, 185–186, 186f, 194
pathophysiology of, 295, 296f
signs of, 298
treatment of, 297–298, 298t
low, ocular manifestations of, 194
Intramedullary syndromes, 403
Intraocular pressure, increased, 182, 188
Intraparenchymal hemorrhage, hypertensive, 288–
289, 288f
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)
for CIDP, 606
for dermatomyositis, 658
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) (Cont.):
for GBS, 604
for MS, 489
for myasthenia gravis, 616
for stiff-person syndrome, 563
Ion channels, disorders of, 220, 220t
Ionotropic receptors, 221
Iridectomy, laser, 182
Iritis. See Uveitis
Iron, brain accumulation of, 352
Isaacs’ syndrome, 564, 622
Ischemia
bilateral brainstem, 281
cerebral, 256, 258f
Ischemic cascade, 294–295
Ischemic heart disease
insomnia in, 165
neck pain in, 87
Ischemic penumbra, 257
Ischemic stroke, 257
etiology of, 261, 263t, 808, 832
artery-to-artery embolic, 263–265
cardioembolic, 261–263, 262f
pathophysiology of, 257–258, 258f, 262f
risk factors for, 808, 832
treatment of, 258
anticoagulants in, 261
antiplatelet agents in, 260–261
approach to, 257, 257f, 258
endovascular techniques in, 259–260
intravenous thrombolysis in, 259, 260t
medical support in, 258–259
neuroprotective agents in, 261
rehabilitation in, 261
rtPA in, 259, 260t
stroke centers in, 261
Ishihara color plates, 177
Isocarboxazid, for depression, 723t
Isometheptene, for migraine, 58t, 60
Isoniazid
adverse effects of
neuropathy, 587t, 589, 842
optic neuropathy, 185
for tuberculous meningitis, 515
Isoprinosine, for subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 518
IVIg. See Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)
“Jacksonian march,” 232, 830
Jactatio capitis nocturna, 170
JC virus infection, in HIV infection, 517, 547
Jefferson fracture, 699f
Jerk nystagmus, 196
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, 212, 212t, 220t
Jet lag disorder, 170
Joint(s), position testing of, 118, 120t
Joubert syndrome, 363t
Juvenile myotonic epilepsy, 234, 236
KAL gene, 442
Kallmann syndrome, 205, 442
Kayser-Fleischer ring, in Wilson disease, 356
KCNQ2 gene, 235t
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
clinical features of, 362t, 639
diagnosis of, 639
genetic factors in, 362t, 639
mitochondrial DNA mutation in, 639
ocular manifestations of, 190, 192
treatment of, 639
Kennedy’s disease, 374t, 377
Keratic precipitates, 181
Keratitis, 180–181
Keratoconjunctivitis, 180
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 180
Keratoconus, 192
Kernig’s sign, 493, 841
Kernohan-Woltman sign, 134
Ketamine, abuse of, 128, 129t, 772
Ketoconazole
adverse effects of, 469
for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
Ketorolac
for conjunctivitis, 180
for pain, 45, 46t
Index
865
Korsakoff ‘s psychosis, 302
Korsakoff’s syndrome, 328, 754
Kugelberg-Welander disease, 377
Kuru, 550, 550t
Kussmaul respiration, 138
Labyrinthectomy, for Ménière’s disease, 210
Labyrinthine infarction, 210
Lacosamide, 249t
Lacrimal system, obstruction of, 180
Lacrimation, with headache, 51–52
Lactotrope, 439t, 446t
Lacunar infarction, 265, 684f
Lacunar syndromes, 266
LaFora’s disease, 235t
Laforin, 235t
Laing’s distal myopathy, 633, 634t
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS)
cranial nerve palsy in, 194, 612
diagnosis of, 612–613
in lung cancer, 561
muscle response to repetitive nerve stimulation 
in, 34
paraneoplastic, 561
reﬂex responses in, 104
treatment of, 613
weakness in, 108t
Laminectomy, for neck pain, 88
Lamotrigine
adverse effects of, 246, 247t, 735t
dosage of, 247t, 735t
for epilepsy, 247t
for focal seizures, 246
for generalized seizures, 250
pharmacology of, 247t, 735t
for SUNCT/SUNA prevention, 65
for trigeminal neuralgia, 393
Lancinations, 117
Language
assessment of, 5, 143–144
perisylvian network for, 142
Lanreotide, for acromegaly, 464
Laser iridectomy, 182
Laser therapy, for neck pain, 88
LASIK, 175
Lateral femoral cutaneous neuropathy, 67, 594, 666f
Lateral geniculate body, 174, 179
Lateral medullary syndrome, 279, 280f
Lateral sclerosis, 370, 412
Latex agglutination assay, 499
LCM (lymphocytic choriomeningitis), 507, 531t
Lead poisoning
clinical features of, 329
diagnosis of, 788t
neuropathy in, 588t, 590
optic neuropathy in, 185
treatment of, 329
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (congenital 
amaurosis)
clinical features of, 185
genetic factors in, 185
visual ﬁelds in, 179
Leﬂunomide, 587t
Leg cramps, nocturnal, 170
LEMS. See Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
(LEMS)
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, 236
Lenticulostriate arteries, 274
Lentiviruses, 536
Leprosy
complications of, 181
neuropathy in, 581
ocular involvement in, 181
Leptin
deﬁciency of, 442
mutations, hypopituitarism due to, 442
Leptomeningeal metastases, 435–436, 435f
Leptospira/leptospirosis, 529t
Leukemia, ocular invasion by, 190
Leukoaraiosis, 268
Leukodystrophy(ies), 330
Leukoencephalopathy, reversible posterior, 268, 290
Leukotrienes, pain and, 41
Levetiracetam, 249t
Levodopa
action of, 338–339
adverse effects of, 339–341, 340f, 345
for dystonia, 349
for PD, 338–341, 340f, 343t, 346, 346f
Levorphanol, for pain, 46t, 50
Lewis-Sumner syndrome, 605
Lewy body disease, diffuse, 326
Lewy body variant of AD, 326
LGI1 gene, 235t
LGMD. See Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 
(LGMD)
LH. See Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Lhermitte’s sign/symptom, 4, 85, 123, 479,  
821
Lidocaine
for neuropathy, 50, 578t
for SUNCT/SUNA, 65
Lidoderm patch, 578t
Li-Fraumeni syndrome, brain tumors and,  
425t
Ligament(s), injury to, 700f
Light-headedness, 98
Limb(s)
alien, 147, 325
apraxia, 147
dystonias of, 349
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD)
autosomal dominant, 625t
autosomal recessive, 626t
classiﬁcation of, 628–629
Limbic encephalitis
clinical features of, 329, 561
neuroimaging of, 560f, 668–669f
pathogenesis of, 559t
Limbic network, for memory, 152–153
Limulus amebocyte lysate assay, 499
LINGO1 gene, 347
Lingual nerve, 202
Lipid(s)
defects in metabolism of, 637–638
as energy source, 637–638
Lipoprotein disorders, laboratory evaluation of,  
789t
Lip reading, 216
Lissencephaly, classic, 235t
Listeria monocytogenes infections, 495, 496, 501t, 502, 
841. See also Meningitis
Lithium
action of, 716
adverse effects of
common, 735, 735t
nystagmus, 196
rare, 735t
for bipolar disorder, 734–735, 735t, 736t
clinical pharmacology of, 735t
for cluster headache prevention, 64, 64t
dosage of, 735, 735t
for hypnic headache, 70
Liver, alcohol effects on, 755
Liver disease/failure
delirium in, 129, 129t
neuropathy in, 581
Lobar hemorrhage, 289
Lobectomy, temporal, 151
Locked-in state, 133, 279
Locus coeruleus, opiate action in, 718, 719f
Long QT syndrome, 95
Loop diuretics, 209
Lorazepam
for acute alcohol intoxication, 758
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
for insomnia, 164
pharmacology of, 725t
Lordotic posture, 620, 621f
Lower motor neuron diseases, 374t, 377–378. See also 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Lower motor neuron pathways, 106f
Lower motor neuron (neuropathic) weakness, 104, 
104t
Loxapine, 739t
LRRK2 gene, 334, 338
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), 771
Lumbar fusion, 84
Lumbar puncture, 35
analgesia for, 35
in coma, 138–139
headache following, 37–38, 37t, 67
imaging and laboratory studies prior to, 35
in meningitis, 498
needles for, 37–38, 38f
in neurologic critical illness, 297
normal values, 38, 38t
patient positioning for, 35–36, 36f
technique, 36–37
Lumbar spinal stenosis, 78, 78f
Lumbosacral plexopathy, 597, 597t
Lumbosacral plexus, 596f, 597f
Lumbosacral radiculopathy, 74t
Lung cancer
metastatic, 190, 433t, 434f
small cell, 561, 608
Lung volume(s), reference values, 797t
Lupus erythematosus
delirium in, 129t
ocular involvement in, 181, 183
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 469
action of, 470
deﬁciency of, 446t
laboratory evaluation of, 445t
reference values, 783t
secretion of, 469–470
synthesis of, 469–470
Lyme borreliosis (Lyme disease)
chronic meningitis in, 529t
neuropathy in, 581
ocular involvement in, 181
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM), 507, 531t
Lymphocytic hypophysitis, 443
Lymphocytic meningitis, 532t
Lymphoid malignancies
CNS, primary, 429–430, 429f, 545, 545f, 838
in HIV infection, 544–545, 838
metastatic, 190
neuropathy in, 583–584
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 564
weakness in, 107
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 771
Machado-Joseph disease, 359t, 365–366
Macula, 174, 177
Macular degeneration, 188, 189f, 806, 829
dry (nonexudative), 189
treatment of, 189
wet (exudative), 189
Macular hole, 190
Magnesium supplements, for migraine, 206
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
in neurologic disease, 22, 683f
phase-contrast, 22
TOF imaging, 22
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 17, 821
in acute transverse myelitis, 692f
in AD, 318f
in ADEM, 693f
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 372f
in arteriovenous malformation in spine, 410f
in astrocytoma, 427f
in Behçet’s syndrome, 678f
in Bell’s palsy, 396f, 691f
in brachial plexopathy, 697–698f
in brain abscess, 520, 520f
in brain metastases, 434f
in brain tumors, 424, 427f, 428f
in CADASIL, 685f
in candidiasis, 675f
in central pontine myelinolysis, 301, 302f
in cerebral abscess, 18f
in cerebral artery stenosis, 683f
in CNS aspergillosis, 676–678f
in CNS tuberculosis, 669–670f
in CNS vasculitis, 686f
complications of, 21–22
contraindications to, 22, 22t
contrast agents, 18–21
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 556f
in diffuse white matter disease, 322f
diffusion tensor, 23
Index
866
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Cont.):
in epidural metastases, 436f
in epidural spinal compression, 404f
in FTD, 324f
functional, 23, 96, 149f, 229–230, 229f
in glioblastoma, 427f, 428f
guidelines for, 14t
in Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, 696f
in hearing loss, 215
in histiocytosis, 683f
in histoplasmosis of the pons, 673f
in Huntington’s disease, 351f, 690f
in hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, 300f
in intramedullary astrocytoma, 405f
in lacunar infarction, 684f
in leptomeningeal metastases, 435f
in limbic encephalitis, 668–669f
in low CSF volume headache, 67f
in meningioma, 431f
in meningitis, 499–500, 674f
in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, 236f
in MS, 480t, 481–482, 481f, 694–695f
in multiple system atrophy, 386f, 689f
in neurosarcoid, 678–682f
in neurosyphilis, 670–672f
in paraneoplastic encephalitis, 561f
perfusion, 23
in pituitary tumors, 450, 450f
in primary central nervous system lymphoma, 429, 
429f, 533f, 545, 545f
in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, 517
relaxation times, 17t
in SCA1, 365f
in seizures, 243
in spinal cord infarction, 692f
in spinal epidural abscess, 406f
in stroke, 286, 286f
in subdural empyema, 523, 523f
in subdural hematoma, 701f
in superior sagittal sinus thrombosis, 687–688f
in syringomyelia associated with Chiari 
malformation, 411f
T1 and T2 relaxation times, 17–18, 17t, 821
technique, 17–21, 17t, 18–21f
in thoracic meningioma, 405f
in vestibular schwannoma, 431f
in viral encephalitis, 18f, 510, 510f, 511t
in Wernicke’s disease, 302f
Magnetic resonance neurography, 23
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 29, 243
Major depression, 730, 730t, 732f, 819, 847
Malabsorption syndromes, ataxia due to, 369
Malingering, 187, 737
Mania
acute, treatment of, 736t
insomnia in, 165
mixed, 734
Mannitol, for increased intracranial pressure, 298t
MAO-B inhibitors. See Monoamine oxidase type B 
(MAO-B) inhibitors
MAOIs. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
MAPT gene, 323
Marburg’s variant, MS, 491
Marchiafava-Bignami disease, 328
Marcus Gunn pupil, 176, 176f
Marijuana, 769, 850
dependence on, 770
initial actions of, 718t
physical effects of, 769–770
THC in, 221, 769
therapeutic applications, 770
tolerance to, 770
Marijuana use/abuse, 769
acute and chronic intoxication, 769
adverse effects of, 770, 850
prevalence of, 769
withdrawal signs, 770
Marinesco–Sjögren syndrome, 362t
Markesbery-Griggs distal myopathy, 633, 634t
“Master gland,” 439
Mastoiditis, 194, 518–519
MBP (myelin basic protein), 223f
McArdle disease (myophosphorylase deﬁciency),  
637
McCune-Albright syndrome, 447
MCI (mild cognitive impairment), 311
MCTD (mixed connective tissue disease), 580
MDCT (multidetector computed tomography), 
13–14, 15f
MDMA (ecstasy), 128, 129t, 770
Measles (rubeola), complications of, 491, 518
Mechanical ventilation, in coma, 140
Mechanic’s hands, 649
Mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard), 438t
Medial medullary syndrome, 279, 280f
Median neuropathy, 593
Median preoptic nucleus, of hypothalamus, 159
Medication-overuse headache, 60, 66
Medulloblastoma, 430
MEG (magnetoencephalography), 29, 243
Meibomian gland carcinoma, 180
Meibomitis, 180
Melanoma
of eye, 190, 190f
metastatic to CNS, 433t
retinopathy in, 559t, 565
Melanopsin, 174
MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, 
lactic acidosis, and stroke) syndrome
clinical features of, 362t, 640
genetic factors in, 362t
hearing loss in, 212
mitochondrial DNA mutation in, 640
Melatonin
for circadian sleep disorders, 173
for cluster headache prevention, 64t
secretion of, 161
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome, 396
Melodic intonation therapy, 145
Memantine, for AD, 321, 331
Memory
assessment of, 5, 154–155, 229–230
implicit, 153
limbic network for, 152–153
retentive, 155
working, 155
MEN 1. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 
(MEN 1)
Ménière’s disease
clinical features of, 101, 210
diagnosis of, 101, 214–215
dizziness in, 98
epidemiology of, 210
hearing loss in, 210, 213, 214
nystagmus in, 196
pathophysiology of, 101, 210
treatment of, 101, 210
Meningeal biopsy, in chronic meningitis, 534
Meningioma, 812, 838
clinical features of, 430–431
imaging in, 215, 431, 431f, 812, 812f, 838
ocular signs in, 179
parasagittal, 108
pathophysiology of, 430–431
sellar, 448
thoracic, 405, 405f
treatment of, 431
Meningitis
approach to the patient, 493–494, 494–495f, 807, 
831
bacterial, 494, 814, 840–841
chronic, 529t
clinical features of, 498
deﬁnition of, 494–495
diagnosis of, 498–500, 499t
differential diagnosis of, 500
epidemiology of, 495
etiology of, 495–496
gram-negative, 501t, 502
H. inﬂuenzae, 495, 496
incidence of, 495–496
increased ICP in, 503
L. monocytogenes, 495, 496, 501t, 502, 841
M. tuberculosis, 514–515
meningococcal, 495–496, 501, 501t
mortality data, 503
pathophysiology of, 496–498, 497f
pneumococcal, 495, 501–502, 501t
Meningitis (Cont.):
prognosis of, 503
staphylococcal, 496, 501t, 502
treatment of, 841
adjunctive therapy in, 502–503
algorithm for, 494–495f
antimicrobial therapy based on pathogen, 
501–502, 501t
dexamethasone, 502–503
empirical antimicrobial therapy, 499t, 
500–501
ICP-related, 503
basal, 528
chronic, 527, 814, 841
approach to the patient, 528, 531
clinical features of, 527–528, 527t
CSF analysis in, 533–534
epidemiology of, 528
in HIV infection, 534–535
imaging in, 533, 533f
in immunosuppressed patients, 534–535
infectious causes of, 528, 529–531t
laboratory studies in, 534
meningeal biopsy in, 534
noninfectious causes of, 532–533t
pathophysiology of, 527–528
systemic manifestations of, 528
treatment of, 534
Coccidioides, 530t, 674f
Cryptococcus, 514–515, 530t, 545–546
delirium in, 129, 129t
fungal, 515
headache in, 52
hearing loss in, 209
intracranial, 527–528
Mollaret’s, 532t
in neurosyphilis, 516
spinal, 528
subacute, 514
viral, 503
arborvirus, 505–506
clinical features of, 503
differential diagnosis of, 505
EBV, 506
enteroviral, 505
epidemiology of, 504
etiology of, 503, 504t, 505–507
in HIV infection, 506, 543
HSV, 506, 531t, 841
laboratory evaluation of, 504–505
lymphocytic choriomeningitis, 507
in mumps infection, 506–507
prevention of, 507
prognosis of, 507
treatment of, 507
VZV, 506
weakness in, 107
Menstrual disorders, 81
Mental status assessment, 5–6
Meperidine
adverse effects of, 646
for migraine, 60
for pain, 46t
Meralgia paresthetica, 594
Mercury exposure/poisoning
clinical features of, 329
neuropathy due to, 588t, 590
reference range for, 788t
Meropenem, for meningitis, 499t, 501
Merosin deﬁciency, 630, 631t
MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red ﬁber) 
syndrome
clinical features of, 362t, 639–640
diagnosis of, 640
genetic factors in, 362t
hearing loss in, 212
mitochondrial DNA mutation in, 640
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, 236, 236f, 236t, 807, 830
Metabolic disease, coma due to, 134–135
Metabolic encephalopathy, 146, 155, 300–301
Metabolic myopathies, 643
Metabotropic receptors, 221
Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), 330
Metamorphopsia, 189, 190
Index
867
Metastatic disease
to brain. See Brain tumors, metastatic
to eye, 190, 191
to spine, 79, 810–811, 811f, 836
epidural, 436, 436f
leptomeningeal, 435–436, 435f
Methadone
as maintenance drug, 765
for opiate detoxiﬁcation, 764
for pain, 46t, 50
Methamphetamine
abuse of, 770
actions of, 718t
intracerebral hemorrhage due to, 289
Methanol poisoning, 185
Methocarbamol, for back pain, 82
Methotrexate
adverse effects of, 438t
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
for MS, 489
for primary central nervous system lymphoma, 
430
therapeutic monitoring of, 787t
Methylnaltrexone, 48, 50
Methylphenidate
for fatigue in MS, 490
for narcolepsy, 163t, 169
Methylprednisolone
for MS, 485, 489
for optic neuritis, 184
for vertigo, 102t
Methysergide
adverse effects of, 61t, 62
for chronic daily headache, 66
for cluster headache, 64
for cluster headache prevention, 64t
for exertional headache, 69
for hypnic headache, 70
for migraine prevention, 61t, 62
Metoclopramide, for migraine, 58t, 60
Metronidazole
adverse effects of, 586t
for meningitis, 499t, 501
Metyrapone
adverse effects of, 469
for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
Mexiletine
adverse effects of, 578t
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 50, 490
Meyer’s loop, 179
Midbrain syndrome, lateral/medial, 284f
Middle cerebral artery
lesion in territory of, 145, 146
occlusion of, 16f, 262, 274–275, 275f, 285f
stenosis of, 683f
Midodrine, for orthostatic hypotension, 95, 390
Midpontine syndrome, lateral/medial, 282f
Migraine, 51t, 53
acephalic, 56, 257
autonomic symptoms in, 51–52
chronic, 56
clinical features of, 54–56, 54t
diagnosis of, 54–56, 56t
familial hemiplegic, 54
insomnia in, 165
ion channel defects causing, 220t
memory loss in, 154
neuroimaging in, 54, 55f
ocular manifestations of, 187
pathogenesis and pathophysiology of, 44, 54, 54f
prevention of, 59t, 60, 61t, 62
retinal, 183
taste disorders in, 204
treatment of, 56–62
5-HT1 agonists, 58t, 59–60
acute attack therapies, 57, 58t, 59t
dopamine antagonists, 58t, 60
nonpharmacologic, 56–57
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, 57, 58t, 
59
triggers, 53
vertigo in, 98, 100–101
Migraine aura, 54
Migraine Disability Assessment Score, 56, 57f
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 311, 316f
Millard-Gubler syndrome, 194
Miller Fisher syndrome, 599–600, 602t
Mineral(s), reference ranges, 788t
Minimally conscious state, 132
Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
in delirium evaluation, 128
in dementia, 314, 315t
in neurologic examination, 5–6
Minor depression, 730–731
Mirror neuron systems, 229–230, 229f
Mirtazapine, 517, 723t, 733
Misonidazole, 586t
Mitochondria
in apoptosis, 226–227, 227f
dysfunction, in neurodegenerative disease, 228
Mitochondrial ataxias, 368
Mitochondrial DNA diseases, 640
Mitochondrial DNA skeletal muscle–central nervous 
system syndromes, 639
Mitochondrial myopathy(ies), 638
drug-induced, 646
genetic factors in, 638
pathogenesis of, 638
progressive external ophthalmoplegia syndromes, 
185, 639. See also Kearns-Sayre syndrome
pure myopathy syndromes, 640
skeletal muscle-CNS syndromes
MELAS syndrome. See MELAS (mitochondrial 
myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic 
acidosis, and stroke) syndrome
MERRF syndrome. See MERRF (myoclonic 
epilepsy and ragged red ﬁber) syndrome
Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic 
acidosis, and stroke (MELAS) syndrome. 
See MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and 
stroke) syndrome
Mitotane
adverse effects of, 469
for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
Mitoxantrone
action of, 487
adverse effects of, 487
for MS, 486t, 487
Mitral cells, 199
Mitral regurgitation, 264t, 796t
Mitral stenosis, 264t, 796t
Mitral valve prolapse, 264t
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), 580
Mixed mania, 734
Miyoshi’s myopathy, 633, 634t
MLD (metachromatic leukodystrophy), 330
MMSE. See Mini-Mental Status Examination 
(MMSE)
Modaﬁnil
for fatigue in MS, 490
for narcolepsy, 163t, 169
for shift-work disorder, 172
Moffett’s position, 206
MOG (myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein), 223f
Molindone, 739t
Mollaret’s meningitis, 532t
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
adverse effects of, 723t, 733
for depression, 733
drug interactions of, 733
for panic disorder, 722
Monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors
action of, 341
adverse effects of, 341–342
for PD, 341–342, 343t, 346, 346f
Monoclonal antibodies, anti-CD3, 185
Monoclonal antibodies, anti-CD20
for MS, 490
for neuromyelitis optica, 491
Monoclonal antibodies, anti-CD52, 490
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
signiﬁcance (MGUS), 584, 607
Mononeuropathy
diabetic, 579
multiple, HIV–related, 544, 582
Monoparesis, 108–109
Monosodium glutamate, 205
Mood disorders, 714, 729. See also speciﬁc disorders
bipolar disorder. See Bipolar disorder
epidemiology of, 714
genetic factors in, 714
in the homeless, 741
neuroimaging of, 714
neuropathology of, 714, 715f
pathogenesis of, 714–716, 715f
personality disorders, 737
schizophrenia. See Schizophrenia
somatoform disorders, 736
Mood stabilizers, 735t
Morphine
adverse effects of, 177
for pain, 46t, 47
sustained-release, 46t, 50
Morvan’s syndrome, 562
Motivational dependence, 716
Motor cortex, 142, 143f
Motor evoked potentials, 30
Motor examination, 7–9
Motor neuron disorders
differential diagnosis of, 371t
etiology of, 371t
genetic, 374–376t
lower, 374t, 377–378
sporadic, 372t
upper, 374–376t, 378–379
Motor neuropathy
multifocal, 606
subacute, paraneoplastic, 563
Motor tic, 353
Motor vehicle accidents, 167
Movement disorders
drug-induced, 354
acute, 354
subacute, 354
tardive syndromes, 354–355
Huntington’s disease. See Huntington’s disease
hyperkinetic, 346, 347t. See also speciﬁc disorders
PD. See Parkinson’s disease (PD)
psychogenic, 356
tics, 347t, 352–353
Tourette’s syndrome. See Tourette’s syndrome
Moyamoya disease, 268, 290
MPTP, 336–337
MRA. See Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
MRF (myelin gene regulatory factor), 224
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MS. See Multiple sclerosis (MS)
MSA. See Multiple system atrophy (MSA)
Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT), 
13–14, 15f
Multifocal motor neuropathy, 602t, 606
Multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block, 
373, 378, 835
Multi-infarct dementia, 322
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), 425t
clinical features of, 447t
pituitary tumors in, 447
Multiple hamartoma syndrome (Cowden syndrome), 
425t
Multiple myeloma
neuropathy in, 584, 606
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 564
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 474, 814, 840
acute, 491
acute myelitis in, 408
anatomy of, 474
chronic cerebrospinal insufﬁciency in, 489
chronic myelopathy in, 411
clinical features of, 477–479, 477t
clinical variants of, 490–491
course of, 479, 479f
diagnosis of, 86, 480, 480t
CSF analysis in, 482
evoked potentials in, 482
neuroimaging in, 481–482, 481f, 694–695f
differential diagnosis of, 482–483, 482t
epidemiology of, 475–476
frontal lobe syndrome in, 155
gait disorders in, 111
genetic factors in, 219, 476–477, 476t
Index
868
Multiple sclerosis (MS) (Cont.):
hearing loss in, 210
immunology of, 476–477
Marburg’s variant, 491
myelitis in, 408
neurodegeneration in, 477
ocular involvement in, 182, 184–185, 195, 196
olfactory dysfunction in, 203
pathogenesis of, 223f, 474–477, 475f
physiology of, 474–475, 475f
pregnancy and, 483
primary progressive, 479, 479f, 488f, 489
prognosis of, 483
progressive/relapsing, 479, 479f
relapsing/remitting, 479, 479f, 488f
risk factors for, 475, 476t
scoring systems for, 483, 484t
secondary progressive, 479, 479f, 488–489, 488f
taste disorders in, 204
treatment of
acute attacks, 483, 485
changing of, 488, 488f
cladribine in, 487–488
dietary therapies in, 489
disease-modifying therapies in, 484–488, 485, 
486t, 488f
experimental therapies in, 489
ﬁngolimod in, 487
glatiramer acetate in, 486
glucocorticoids in, 485
INF-β in, 485–486
initial demyelinating episodes, 483, 485
initiation of, 488, 488f
mitoxantrone hydrochloride in, 487
natalizumab in, 486–487
off-label options in, 489
symptomatic therapy in, 489–490
triggers of, 477
types of, 479, 479f, 840
weakness in, 107, 108t
Multiple sleep latency test, 168
Multiple system atrophy (MSA)
autonomic dysfunction in, 385–386, 386f
clinical features of, 386
gait disorders in, 112
neuroimaging in, 386f, 689f
olfactory dysfunction in, 203
orthostatic hypotension in, 94
parkinsonism in, 335–336, 337t
treatment of, 386
Mumps, meningitis in, 506–507, 531t
Munchausen syndrome, 737
Mu receptors, 761–762, 761t
Muscle(s)
atrophy of, 622
calcium channel disorders of, 640
contracture of, 622
electrophysiologic studies of. See 
Electromyography (EMG)
enlargement of, 622
response to repetitive nerve stimulation, 33–34
sodium channel disorders of, 642
Muscle biopsy
in dermatomyositis, 656t, 657f
in inclusion body myositis, 656t, 657f
in myopathy, 623
in polymyositis, 656t, 657f
Muscle bulk, 103
Muscle contracture, 622
Muscle cramps, 622
Muscle disorders
energy metabolism disorders, 636. See also 
Glycogen storage diseases
membrane excitability disorders, 640, 641t
muscle ﬁber disorders. See Myopathy(ies)
muscular dystrophy. See Muscular dystrophy
Muscle-eye-brain disease, 630, 631t
Muscle pain
drugs causing, 621, 621t
in myopathy, 620–622
weakness due to, 655
Muscle relaxants, for back pain, 82
Muscle-speciﬁc tyrosine kinase (MuSK), in 
myasthenia gravis, 610–611
Muscle spindle, 106f
Muscle stiffness, 622
Muscle stretch (tendon) reﬂexes, 8, 104, 104t, 106f
Muscle tone, 103, 104t
Muscle weakness
acute, differential diagnosis of, 654
diagnostic evaluation of, 618–620, 619f, 620f, 
620t
in parathyroid disorders, 644
subacute or chronic progressive, differential 
diagnosis of, 653–654
Muscular dystrophy, 618
Becker’s. See Becker’s muscular dystrophy
congenital, 625t, 630, 631t
congenital myopathies, 635
cramps in, 622
distal myopathies, 633, 634t
Duchenne’s. See Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy
Emery-Dreifuss. See Emery-Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy
facioscapulohumeral, 625t, 632
gait disorders in, 113
hereditary myopathies, 625t
laboratory evaluation of, 619f, 622
DNA analysis, 623
electrodiagnostic studies, 623
forearm exercise test, 623–624
muscle biopsy, 624
serum enzymes, 622–623
limb-girdle, 628–629
autosomal dominant, 626t
autosomal recessive, 627t
muscle pain in, 620–622, 621t
muscle weakness in, 618–620, 619f, 620f, 620t, 
621f
myotonic. See Myotonic dystrophy
oculopharyngeal, 192, 625t, 633
progressive, 625t
proteins associated with, 626, 628f, 629f
stiffness in, 622
MuSK (muscle-speciﬁc tyrosine kinase), in 
myasthenia gravis, 610–611
Mutism, 143, 147
Myalgia. See Muscle pain
Myasthenia gravis, 609, 816, 843
ACh test in, 611
antibodies to AChR or MuSK, 610–611
clinical features of, 610
diagnosis of, 610–612, 611t, 612t, 613t, 843
differential diagnosis of, 612–613
diplopia in, 193
disorders associated with, 63–614, 613t
drugs affecting, 616
drugs to avoid in, 616, 617t
electrodiagnostic studies in, 611
muscle response to repetitive nerve stimulation 
in, 33–34
nystagmus in, 196
ocular, 610
pathophysiology of, 609–6110, 609f
ptosis in, 192
reﬂex responses in, 104
treatment of, 614
algorithm for, 614f
azathioprine, 615–616
cyclosporine, 616
glucocorticoids, 615
immunosuppression, 615–616
IVIg, 616
mycophenolate mofetil, 615–616
patient assessment in, 616–617, 617f
plasmapheresis, 616
pyridostigmine, 614
tacrolimus, 616
thymectomy, 614–615
weakness in, 107, 108t, 109
Myasthenic crisis, 616
Myasthenic fatigue, 610
Mycobacterium spp. infections, 514–515, 529t. See also 
Meningitis
Mycophenolate mofetil
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
for myasthenia gravis, 615–616
for neuromyelitis optica, 491
Mycotic aneurysm, circle of Willis, 305
Mydriasis, 176
Myelin basic protein (MBP), 223f
Myelin defects, in neurologic disease, 223–224, 223f, 
224f
Myelin gene regulatory factor (MRF), 224
Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), 223f
Myelin sheath, 223f
Myelitis, 407–409
acute infectious, 409
acute transverse
MRI in, 692f
weakness in, 107
neuromyelitis optica, 408, 490–491
paraneoplastic syndromes, 561, 563
postinfectious, 408–409
Myelography, 23–24
Myeloma
multiple. See Multiple myeloma
sclerotic, 565
Myelopathy
acute transverse, 407t
chemotherapy-induced, 438t
chronic, 409
adrenomyeloneuropathy, 412
familial spastic paraplegia, 378–379, 412
hypocupric, 412
in multiple sclerosis, 411
primary lateral sclerosis, 378, 412
spondylitic, 409
syringomyelia, 86, 410–411, 411f
in tabes dorsalis, 412
tethered cord syndrome, 76, 412
toxic causes of, 413
in vascular malformations of cord and dura, 
409–410, 410f
in vitamin B12 deﬁciency, 411–412, 591
compressive. See Spinal cord compression
evaluation of, 811, 837
gait disorders in, 111t
HIV-associated, 543
immune, 407–408
inﬂammatory, 408–409
noncompressive, 406
vs. compressive, 403
evaluation of, 407t
spinal cord infarction, 407, 692f
paraneoplastic, 563
Myoadenylate deaminase deﬁciency, 638
Myocardial infarction (MI), circadian variations in, 
173
Myoclonic dystonia, 348
Myoclonic epilepsy, juvenile, 234, 236
Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red ﬁber syndrome. 
See MERRF
Myoclonic seizures, 234
Myoclonus, 347t, 353
Baltic, 362t
clinical features of, 353
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 554–555
nocturnal (periodic limb movement disorder), 166
posthypoxic, 300
startle, 815, 842
treatment of, 353
Myofascial pain syndrome, 48
Myofasciitis, 654
Myoﬁbrillar myopathies, 633, 634t
Myogenic ptosis, 192
Myokymia, 397, 622
Myopathy(ies)
acute quadriplegic, 304
alcoholic, 646, 756
autoimmune, 647
centronuclear (myotubular), 636
congenital, 635
in critical/systemic illness, 304, 645
distal, 633, 634t
drug-induced, 645, 645t, 655
drugs of abuse and, 645t, 646
endocrine, 643, 816, 844
gait disorders in, 113
glucocorticoid-related, 645t, 646, 658
hereditary, 624, 625t. See also Muscular dystrophy
HIV-related, 544
Index
869
Myopathy(ies) (Cont.):
inﬂammatory. See Inﬂammatory myopathies
laboratory evaluation of, 619f, 622
DNA analysis, 623
electrodiagnostic studies, 623
forearm exercise test, 623–624
muscle biopsy, 624
serum enzymes, 622–623
metabolic, 643
mitochondrial. See Mitochondrial myopathy(ies)
muscle enlargement and atrophy in, 622
muscle pain in, 620–622, 621t
muscle weakness in, 105–106, 109, 618–620, 
619f, 620f, 620t
nemaline, 635
paraneoplastic, 563
proximal myotonic, 622
Myophosphorylase deﬁciency (type V glycogenosis), 637
Myopia, 175
Myositis, necrotizing, 654
Myotonia
conditions associated with, 622
deﬁnition of, 622
ion channel defects causing, 220t
nondystrophic, 641t
potassium-aggravated, 642
Myotonia congenita, 220t, 622
Myotonic disorders, 623t
Myotonic dystrophy, 630, 816, 844
clinical features of, 625t, 630–631
congenital, 631
laboratory features of, 631–632
ocular involvement in, 188, 192
treatment of, 632
Myotubular myopathy, 636
Myxoma, syncope in, 96
Naegleria infection, in encephalitis, 511
Nafcillin, for meningitis, 499t, 502
Naloxone
as opiate antagonist, 47
for opioid overdose, 764
Naltrexone, in alcoholism management, 760, 849
Naming deﬁcit, 143
Naproxen
for migraine, 58t, 59
for pain, 46t
Naratriptan, for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
Narcolepsy, 168
clinical features of, 159, 168t, 827–828
diagnosis of, 168–169, 828
genetic factors in, 168
olfactory dysfunction in, 204
treatment of, 169
Narcolepsy-cataplexy syndrome, 163t
NARP (neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa) 
syndrome, 362t
Nasal congestion, with headache, 51–52
Natalizumab
adverse effects of, 487
for MS, 486t, 487–488
Neck pain, 85
in ankylosing spondylitis, 86
in brachial plexus injury, 87
in cancer, 86–87
in carpal tunnel syndrome, 87
in cervical disk disease, 85–86, 86t
in cervical spine trauma, 85
in cervical spondylosis, 86
in herpes zoster, 86
in orthostatic hypotension, 94
in peripheral nerve disorders, 87
physical examination in, 86t
in rheumatoid arthritis, 86
in thoracic outlet syndrome, 87
treatment of, 87–88
Neck weakness, 398, 398t
Necrotizing arteritis, 267
Necrotizing fasciitis, 654
Necrotizing myositis, 654
Nefazodone, for depression, 723t
Neglect (sensory phenomenon), 122, 150
caring for patient with, 155–156
hemispatial, 149–150, 149f, 151f, 804, 826
Neisseria meningitidis infections
meningitis. See Meningitis
Nelson syndrome, 469
Nemaline myopathy, 635, 844
Neonate(s)
Candida infections in, 675f
seizures in, 238t
Nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis, 19–21, 821–822
Nephrolithiasis, back pain in, 81
Nephropathy, contrast-induced, 15
Nerve biopsy, in peripheral neuropathy, 571
Nerve conduction studies
in back pain, 75
in peripheral neuropathy, 570, 570t
principles of, 32–33, 32f
Nerve growth factor, 41
Neural foraminal narrowing with radiculopathy, 
78–79, 79f
Neuralgia(s)
glossopharyngeal, 397, 398t
trigeminal. See Trigeminal neuralgia
Neural network, large-scale, 142
Neurasthenia, 613
Neuritic plaque, in AD, 318–319, 319f
Neuroacanthocytosis, 352
Neuroblastoma, paraneoplastic syndromes in, 563
Neurocutaneous syndromes, 432
Neurocysticercosis. See Cysticercosis
Neurodegeneration
in MS, 477
protein aggregation and, 227–229
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1)
brain tumors and, 425t
clinical features of, 433
genetic factors in, 433
skin manifestations of, 433
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2)
brain tumors and, 425t
clinical features of, 433
genetic factors in, 433
hearing loss in, 212
ocular involvement in, 188
Neuroﬁbromin, 432
Neurogenetics, 218
Neurogenic ptosis, 192
Neuroimaging, 13. See also speciﬁc disorders
atlas of, 668–701f
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
echo-planar MR imaging, 23
interventional neuroradiology, 25
magnetic resonance neurography, 23
MRA. See Magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA)
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
myelography, 23–24
PET. See Positron emission tomography (PET)
spine interventions, 24–25
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS)
clinical features of, 355, 389
treatment of, 355
Neuroleptics. See also Antipsychotics
adverse effects of, 355
for dystonia, 349
for Tourette’s syndrome, 353
Neurologic disease, 218. See also speciﬁc diseases
angiography in, 25
apoptosis in, 226–227
approach to the patient. See Neurologic 
examination/consultation
cell death in, 226–227
channelopathies, 220, 220t
in critically ill patient. See Critically ill patient, 
neurologic disorders in
depression in, 729
gene transcription disorders, 223
genome-wide association studies of, 218–219
imaging studies. See Neuroimaging
insomnia in, 165
ion channel disorders, 220, 220t
localization of, 9–10, 10t
mechanisms of, 218
myelin disorders, 223–224, 223f, 224f
neurotransmitter/neurotransmitter receptor 
disorders, 221, 222t
Neurologic disease (Cont.):
neurotrophic factors in, 224–225, 224t
prevalence of, 2, 2t
protein aggregation in, 227–229
signaling pathway defects, 223
stem cell therapy for, 225–226
Neurologic examination/consultation, 4, 11, 12
in back pain, 74
after cardiac bypass, 662–663, 662f
in CNS dysfunction, 660–663, 661t, 662f
in coma, 136–139
coordination examination, 9
cranial nerve examination, 6–7
in delirium, 127–128
in dizziness and vertigo, 99–100
in electrolyte disturbances, 663–665
gait examination, 9
in headache, 52
imaging studies. See Neuroimaging
localization of ﬁndings in nervous system, 9–10, 10t
mental status examination, 5–6
motor examination, 7–9, 801, 820
neurologic history in, 3
neurologic method in, 2
in olfactory/taste dysfunction, 204–205
in peripheral nervous system dysfunction, 665–667
sensory examination, 8–9
after solid organ transplantation, 663
video library, 11, 12
Neuromuscular blocking agents, 303–304, 645t
Neuromuscular jitter, 34
Neuromuscular junction disorders, 609
autonomic dysfunction in, 386–388
clinical features of, 10t
reﬂex responses in, 104
weakness in, 108t, 109
Neuromyelitis optica, 408, 490–491
Neuromyotonia, 564, 622
Neuropathic pain, 44, 50
Neuropathic (lower motor neuron) weakness, 104, 104t
Neuropathy(ies). See also speciﬁc types and disorders
alcoholic, 387
anti-Hu paraneoplastic, 607
approach to, 568t
autoimmune autonomic, 387
autonomic, 578–59
chemotherapy-related, 438, 438t
diabetic. See Diabetic neuropathy
diphtheritic, 581–582
entrapment, 665
femoral, 594
gastric surgery–related, 592–593
hereditary. See Hereditary neuropathy(ies)
in hypothyroidism, 579
immune, 601–602, 602f
lateral femoral cutaneous, 594, 666f, 667
median, 593
with monoclonal gammopathy, 606
multifocal motor, 606
obstetric, 667
optic. See Optic neuropathy
paraneoplastic syndromes, 564–565
peripheral. See Peripheral neuropathy
peroneal, 594–595, 666, 666f
proximal femoral, 666, 666f
radial, 594, 665, 666f
in rheumatoid arthritis, 579
sciatic, 594
sensory, 579
sensory deﬁcits in, 122–123
in systemic sclerosis, 580
trigeminal, 394, 394t
ulnar, 594–595, 665–666, 666f
uremic, 580
vasculitic, 607
Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) 
syndrome, 362t
Neuroprotective agents
for ischemic stroke, 261
for PD, 342
Neurosarcoid, 678–682f
Neurostimulation therapy
for cluster headache, 64
for SUNCT/SUNA, 65
Index
870
Neurosyphilis
clinical features of, 112
neuroimaging in, 670–672f
vs. viral meningitis, 505
Neurotransmitter(s)
clinical aspects, 221, 222t, 806, 830
functions, 221
inotropic, 221
metabotropic, 221
Neurotransmitter receptors, 221, 222t
Neurotrophic factors, in neurologic disease, 224–225, 
224t
NF1. See Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1)
NF1 gene, 425t, 432
NF2. See Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2)
NF2 gene, 433
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase 
(NADH) deﬁciency, 185
Nicotine, 221, 718t
Nicotinic acid, 645t, 646
deﬁciency of. See Pellagra
Nifurtimox, for Chagas’ disease, 548
Nightmares, 169
Night work, 171–172
Nimodipine
for primary thunderclap headache, 70
after subarachnoid hemorrhage, 308
Nitrates, 95
Nitrofurantoin, 587t
Nitroprusside, therapeutic monitoring of, 787t
NMDA receptors, 226, 560f
antibodies to. See Anti-NMDA receptor 
antibodies
Nocardia spp. infections, chronic meningitis in, 529t
Nocebo effect, 43
Nociceptor(s), primary afferent, 40, 41f3f, 42f
Nociceptor-induced inﬂammation, 41
Non-24 hour sleep-wake disorder, 172
Nonaka’s distal myopathy, 633, 634t
Noncompressive myelopathies, 403, 406
Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
for AD, 321
adverse effects of, 45
for back pain, 82
for episcleritis and scleritis, 181
for migraine, 58t
for neck pain, 88
for pain, 45, 46t
for spinal stenosis, 78
for tension-type headache, 122
topical, for conjunctivitis, 180
Norepinephrine, 222t, 380
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus, 327–328, 327f
Normeperidine, 47
Norrie disease, 212t
Nortriptyline
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t
dosage of, 723t
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
for pain, 46t, 49, 50, 490
Notch-3, 268
Nothnagel’s syndrome, 193
NREM sleep, 158, 159f
NRG1, 713
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
Nucleus accumbens, 715–716
Nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), 201f, 202
Numbness, 117. See also Sensation
Nutritional diseases, neuropathies in, 591–592
Nutritional short stature, 460
Nutritional support/therapy, for MS, 489
Nystagmus, 99, 99t, 195, 823
Object recognition, 152
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 728
Obstetric neuropathies, 667
Obstructive sleep apnea, 169, 828
daytime sleepiness in, 166
diagnosis of, 163t
polysomnography in, 167f
treatment of, 163t
Occipital lobe stroke, 187
Occipital nerve stimulation
for cluster headache, 64
for hemicrania continua, 69
for SUNCT/SUNA prevention, 65
Occipitotemporal network, 152
Occupational illness
hearing loss, 216
shift-work disorder, 171–172, 804–805,  
827
Octreotide
for acromegaly, 464
adverse effects of, 464
for postprandial orthostatic hypotension, 391
Ocular alignment, 177
“Ocular bobbing,” 137
“Ocular dipping,” 137
Ocular disorders, 179. See also Visual loss
in myasthenia gravis, 610
painful or red eye, 179–182, 806, 829
video library, 198
Ocular ﬂutter, 197
Ocular lubricants, 180
Oculocephalic reﬂexes, 137
Oculomotor nerve, 6
Oculomotor nerve palsy, 176, 193
Oculomotor nerve paresis, 176
Oculopharyngeal dystrophy, 192, 625t, 633
Odontoid fracture, 700f
Olanzapine
for acute alcohol intoxication, 758
adverse effects of, 739t
for schizophrenia, 739t, 740
Olfactory bulb, 199, 200f
Olfactory disorders, 202
diseases and conditions associated with, 202–204, 
203t, 806, 829
epidemiology of, 202, 202f
etiology of, 202, 203t
evaluation of, 204–205
taste disorders and, 204
treatment of, 205–206
Olfactory nerve, 6
Olfactory system, 199–200, 200f
Olig 2 gene, 224
Oligodendroglioma, 428–429
Oligomer(s), 228
Olivopontocerebellar degeneration, 190,  
195
Onchocerca volvulus/onchocerciasis, 181, 182
Ondansetron
for ataxia/tremor in MS, 489
for nausea, 66
One-and-a-half syndrome, 195
Opa1, 228
Ophthalmopathy, Graves’, 191, 644
Ophthalmoplegia
internuclear, 195, 196f
neuromuscular causes of, 618, 620t
Opioid(s)
action of, 47, 221, 718t, 719f
administration of
intrathecal, 48
intravenous, 47
patient-controlled, 47
adverse effects of, 761
delirium, 128, 129t
management of, 48
respiratory depression, 47
for back pain, 82
COX inhibitor combinations, 48
endogenous, 44
for migraine, 58t, 60
most commonly abused, 761
neurobiology of, 761–762, 761t
overdosage/poisoning with, 763–765, 764, 820, 
850
for pain, 46t, 47–48, 50
pharmacology of, 762–763
for restless legs syndrome, 166
systems effects of, 763
toxicity of, 763
withdrawal from, 764, 849–850
Opioid abuse/dependence, 761, 849–850
diagnosis of, 761
prevention of, 766
treatment of, 764
agonist medications in, 764–765
antagonist medications in, 764–765
medication-free, 766
residential program in, 766
withdrawal management in, 764
Opioid receptors, 47, 761–762, 761t
Oppenheim’s dystonia, 348
Opsoclonus, 197, 563
Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome, paraneoplastic, 563
Optic atrophy, 185, 185f, 205
Optic chiasm, 174, 828
Optic cup, 188, 188f
Optic disc
drusen, 179, 186, 186f
edema, 185–186, 186f
Optic gliomas, 448
Optic nerve, 174
disorders of, visual ﬁeld defects in, 178–179
examination of, 6
Optic neuritis, 176, 184
color desaturation in, 177
in MS, 184–185, 478
paraneoplastic, 565
retrobulbar, 176, 184, 185f
visual ﬁeld defects in, 179
Optic neuropathy
anterior ischemic, 184, 184f
compressive, 179
drug-induced, 185
Leber, 179, 185
nutritional, 179
posterior ischemic, 184
toxic, 179, 185
Optokinetic reﬂex, 174
Oral cancer, alcohol effects on, 755
Oral contraceptives, drug interactions of, 255
Orbit, 191
Orexin, 160, 168, 204
Organic Brain Syndrome Scale, 127
Organ of Corti, 207, 207f
Organophosphates, 588t
Orgasm, headaches associated with, 70
Oromandibular dystonia, 349
Orthostatic hypotension
approach to the patient, 383–385
in autonomic dysfunction, 383, 383t
causes of, 93t, 383t
clinical features of, 94, 383t
dizziness in, 98
falls and, 115
neurogenic, 94–95
nonneurogenic, 383t
pathophysiology of, 90, 93–94, 94f
in PD, 345
prevalence of, 383t
treatment of, 95, 390–391, 390t
Oscillopsia, 98, 196
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome (hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia), 292
Osteoarthritis
back pain in, 79
neck pain in, 86
Osteogenesis imperfecta, otosclerosis in, 209
Osteomyelitis, vertebral, 80
Osteoporosis
back pain in, 80
treatment of, 80
vertebral fracture in, 80
Osteosclerosis, 80
Otitis media
brain abscess associated with, 518–519
hearing loss in, 209
Otoacoustic emissions, 214
Otoconia, 100
Otosclerosis, 209, 213
Otoscopy, 209
Ovarian cancer, paraneoplastic syndromes in, 564
Ovary, teratoma of, 560f, 563
Overlap syndrome, in inﬂammatory myopathy, 650
Index
871
Oxazepam, 725t
Oxcarbazepine
adverse effects of, 249t, 735t
for bipolar disorder, 735, 735t
for epilepsy, 249t
for focal seizures, 246
for pain, 46t
pharmacology of, 249t, 735t
for trigeminal neuralgia, 393
Oxidative phosphorylation, 638
Oxybutynin
for detrusor spasticity, 413, 490
for sleep enuresis, 170
Oxycodone, for pain, 46t
P1 syndromes, 276f, 277f, 278
P2 syndromes, 276f, 277f, 278
p53 gene, 425t
Paclitaxel, 584t
Paget’s disease of bone, back pain in, 80
Pain
acute, treatment of, 45
chronic, 48
treatment of, 49
anticonvulsants and antiarrhythmics for, 50
antidepressants for, 49–50, 49t
opioids for, 50
depression and, 48
modulation in different situations/individuals, 43–44
in MS, 489–490
neuropathic, 44, 50
pathophysiology of, 40
ascending pathways, 43, 43f
central mechanisms, 42–43, 42f
pain sensory system, 40–42
peripheral mechanisms, 41f, 42f
perception of, 51
psychological variables, 43–44
sympathetically maintained, 45
testing sense of, 119, 120t
Palinopsia, 278
Paliperidone, 739, 739t
Pallister-Hall syndrome, 448
Pancoast tumor, 87
Pancreas, alcohol effects on, 755
Pancreatic disease, back pain in, 81
Pancuronium, 303
Panencephalitis
progressive rubella, 518
subacute sclerosing, 517–518
Panic attack, 818, 846
Panic disorder, 721, 846–847
clinical features of, 721
diagnosis of, 721–722, 721t
etiology of, 722
pathology of, 722
treatment of, 722
Panuveitis, 182
Papilledema, 185–186, 186f, 205
Paralysis, 103
periodic. See Periodic paralysis
sleep, 163t, 168
Todd’s, 232
tongue, 398
Paramyotonia congenita, 220t, 622, 641t, 642–643
Paraneoplastic syndromes
ataxia in, 368–369
ion channel defects causing, 220t
limbic encephalitis, 329
neurologic, 558, 558t, 842
acute necrotizing myopathy, 565
approach to the patient, 559–561
cerebellar degeneration, 562
CNS and dorsal root ganglia, 559–560
incidence of, 558
nerve and muscle, 560–561
opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome, 563
pathogenesis of, 558–559, 559t, 560f
peripheral neuropathies, 564–565
sensory neuronopathy, 563–564
in spinal cord disease/injury, 563
stiff-person syndrome, 563
visual, 559t, 565
Paraparesis, 107–108
Paraphasia, 143
Paraplegia(s), spastic familial, 378–379, 412
Paraplegin gene, 379
Parasomnias, 169, 805, 828
Parathyroid disease, muscle weakness in, 644
Paratonia, 103
Parcopa, for PD, 343t
Paresis, 103
Paresthesia, 117
Parietal cortex, posterior, 149, 149f
Parietal lesions, 195
Parietofrontal network, 149, 149f
Parinaud’s syndrome, 195, 430
parkin gene, 334–335, 338
Parkinsonian dementia syndromes, 326
Parkinsonism
atypical, 335–336, 335t, 337t
disorders associated with, 355
drug-induced, 355
gait disorders in, 111t, 112
lower body, 112
secondary, 335–336, 335t, 337t
Parkinson’s disease (PD), 333
autonomic disturbances in, 345
clinical features of, 333, 334t
delirium in, 127
dementia in, 325, 344–345
depression in, 344
differential diagnosis of, 333–336, 335f, 335t, 
336f, 337t, 808–809, 833
etiology of, 336–338, 337f
falls in, 115
familial, 228
frontal lobe syndrome in, 155
gait disorders in, 112
genetic factors in, 228, 337t, 338
hallmark features of, 333, 334f
nondopaminergic features of, 344–345
nonmotor features of, 344–345
ocular involvement in, 195
olfactory dysfunction in, 199, 203–204
orthostatic hypotension in, 95
pathogenesis of, 336–338, 337f
pathophysiology of, 338, 339f
prevalence of, 333
vs. progressive supranuclear palsy, 325
psychoses in, 344
REM sleep behavior disorder in, 170, 345
sleep disorders in, 165, 345
treatment of, 338, 833–834
amantadine, 342
benztropine, 342
COMT inhibitors, 342, 343t
current methods, 345–346, 346f
deep brain stimulation, 343, 346
dopamine agonists, 341, 343t, 346
levodopa, 338–341, 340f, 343t, 346
MAO-B inhibitors, 341–342, 343t, 346
neuroprotective agents, 342
nonmotor and nondopaminergic features, 
344–345
nonpharmacologic, 345
surgical, 342–344
trihexyphenidyl, 342
tremor in, 347
Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD), 326, 344–345
Paroxetine, 722, 723t
Paroxysmal dyskinesias, 352
Paroxysmal hemicrania, 51, 63t, 64–65, 66t
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 165
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD), 352
Parsonage-Turner syndrome, 595
Pars planitis, 182
Patent foramen ovale, 264t
Patient-controlled analgesia, 47
Patient Health Questionnaire-2, in war veterans, 
746, 747t
Patrick sign, 74
Pavor nocturnus, 169
PD. See Parkinson’s disease (PD)
PDD (Parkinson’s disease dementia), 326, 344–345
Peduncular hallucinosis, 278
Pegvisomant, for acromegaly, 464
Pellagra
clinical features of, 328
global considerations, 592
treatment of, 592
Pendred syndrome, 212, 212t
D-Penicillamine, adverse effects of
myopathy, 645t, 647
optic neuropathy, 185
Penicillin G, for meningitis, 499t, 501
Pentazocine, 50
Penumbra, 294
Perfusion magnetic resonance imaging, 23
Perilymphatic ﬁstula, 210
Perimeter, computer-driven, 177, 178f
Periodic hypothermia syndrome, 449
Periodic limb movement disorder, 166
Periodic limb movements of sleep, 166, 167f, 834
Periodic paralysis
clinical features of, 641t
hyperkalemic, 642
hypokalemic, 640–642, 642f
ion channel defects causing, 220t
Peripheral nerve(s)
components, 41f
cutaneous ﬁelds of, 120f
pain mechanisms, 40–42
Peripheral neuropathy, 566, 843. See also speciﬁc 
disorders
alcohol and, 754
approach to, 566, 567f, 568t
distribution of weakness, 566–567
hereditary neuropathy, 568
medical conditions, 568
pattern recognition, 568, 569t
sensory involvement, 567–568
systems involved, 566
temporal evolution, 568
upper motor neuron involvement, 568
CSPN, 594
drug-induced, 438t, 584–585t, 585–590, 586–
587t
electrodiagnostic studies in, 568–570, 570t
EMG in, 570, 570t
gait disorders in, 113
hereditary. See Hereditary neuropathy(ies)
HIV-related, 543–544
laboratory evaluation of, 570–571, 570t
malignancy-related, 583–584
nerve biopsies in, 571
nerve conduction studies in, 570, 570t
nutritional, 591–592
painful sensory, 578t
paraneoplastic, 564–565
skin biopsies in, 571
toxic causes of, 585–591, 586–588t
weakness in, 106, 108, 566–567
Peripheral sensitization, 41
Perisylvian network, 142
Periventricular white matter disease, 268
Permeability transition pore, 227, 227f
Peroneal neuropathy, 594–595, 666, 666f, 818,  
846
PERRLA, 176
Persistent vegetative state, 132, 803–804, 825
Personality disorders, 737
PET. See Positron emission tomography (PET)
Petrous bone fractures, 417
PGC-1α, 228
Phakomatosis(es), 432
Phencyclidine (PCP)
abuse/overdose of, 771
actions of, 718t, 771
adverse effects of, 129t
Phenelzine
adverse effects of, 62, 723t
for depression, 723t
for migraine prevention, 62
for posttraumatic headache, 68
Phenobarbital, 248t
Phenothiazines, adverse effects of
ocular, 190
orthostatic hypotension, 95
Index
872
Phenytoin
adverse effects of, 246
hepatotoxicity, 578t
long-term, 246
neurologic, 247t, 578t, 587t
systemic, 247t
dosage of, 247t
drug interactions of, 247t
for epilepsy, 247t
for neuromyotonia, 565
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 50, 489
pharmacology of, 247t
therapeutic monitoring of, 787t
for trigeminal neuralgia, 393
Pheochromocytoma, headache in, 69
Phobic disorders, 726
Phosphofructokinase deﬁciency (type VII 
glycogenosis), 637
Photopigments, 177
Photoreceptors, 174
Phototherapy
for circadian rhythm sleep disorders, 172–173
for shift-work disorder, 172
Physical dependence, 716
Physical restraints, in delirium, 126, 131
Physical therapy
for back pain, 82
for vertigo, 102t
Physostigmine, for anticholinergic overdose, 140
Pick bodies, 149
Pick’s disease, 324, 325f
Pilizaeus-Merzbacher disease, 379
Pilocarpine
for acute angle-closure glaucoma, 182
adverse effects of, 177
in diagnosis of tonic pupil, 176
Pineal region tumors, 176, 195, 430
Pinguecula, 179–180
PINK1, 228, 338
Piracetam, for myoclonus, 353
Piroxicam, for paroxysmal hemicrania, 65
PIT-1, 441, 442
Pituitary apoplexy, 190, 443–444
Pituitary axes, 440f
Pituitary disorders, muscle weakness in, 644
Pituitary gland
anatomy of, 440–441, 440f
basic ﬁbroblast growth factor in, 447
development of, 439t, 441
dysplasia, 442
hormones produced by, 439–440
tests of function of, 445t
Pituitary hormones
expression and regulation of, 439t, 813, 838
secretion of, 439–440, 440f
Pituitary tumors (adenomas), 444, 813, 839
in Carney syndrome, 447, 447t
classiﬁcation of, 432, 444, 446t
diagnosis of, 449
histologic evaluation in, 451
laboratory studies in, 450, 451t
local mass effects, 449–450, 449t
MRI in, 450, 450f
ophthalmologic evaluation in, 450
etiology of, 446–447
in familial acromegaly, 447, 447t
gonadotropin-producing, 471–472
hormone-excess syndromes due to, 440
local mass effects of, 449–450, 449t
in McCune-Albright syndrome, 447
in MEN 1, 447, 447t
metabolic effects of, 449
metastatic, 448
nonfunctioning, 432, 471–472, 472f
ocular signs in, 179, 190
pathogenesis of, 446–447
sellar mass lesions, 448, 449t
treatment of, 432, 448, 451–453, 452f
TSH–secreting, 473
Pizotifen, for migraine prevention, 61t
Placebo effect, 43, 44f
Plaque, neuritic, 319, 319f
Plaques jaunes, 416
Plasmapheresis
for Guillain-Barré syndrome, 604
for myasthenia gravis, 616
Platelet(s), reference values for, 777t
Pleconaril, for viral meningitis, 507
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas, 429
Plexopathy
brachial, 595–596, 697–698f
evaluation and treatment of, 598
lumbosacral, 597, 597t
perioperative, 596
radiation-induced, 597
PML (progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy), 
516–517
Pneumococcal infections
meningitis. See Meningitis
Pneumonia
delirium in, 129, 129t
olfactory dysfunction and, 202
PNKD (paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia), 352
Podophyllin, adverse effects of, 586t
POEMS syndrome (Crow-Fukase syndrome), 564
Poisoning/drug overdose, laboratory evaluation in, 
786–788t
Poliovirus infection, weakness in, 108
Polyarteritis nodosa
neuropathy in, 607
ocular involvement in, 181
Polydrug abuse, 772
Polymyalgia rheumatica, 184, 621
Polymyositis, 648
clinical features of, 109, 648–649, 649t
diagnosis of, 655–657, 656f, 656t, 844–845
differential diagnosis of, 653–655
drug-induced, 655
muscle damage in, 652, 652f
prognosis of, 659
treatment of, 657–659, 817, 845
viral infections and, 653
Polymyxin-bacitracin, for conjunctivitis, 180
Polyneuropathy
acute inﬂammatory demyelinating, 600t, 601–602
acute toxic, 109
critical illness, 581
cryptogenic sensory and sensorimotor, 594
distal symmetric, HIV–related, 582
familial amyloid, 575t, 577
large-ﬁber, 122–123
sensory deﬁcits in, 122–123
small-ﬁber, 123
weakness in, 109
Polyradiculopathy, in HIV infection, 582
Polysomnography
deﬁnition, 158
in obstructive sleep apnea, 167f
in periodic limb movements of sleep, 166, 167f
in sleep disorder evaluation, 162–163, 163t
POMC gene, 466
Pompe disease (acid maltase deﬁciency; type II 
glycogenosis), 636–637
Pons
histoplasmosis of, 673f
inferior of, 281f
mid, 282f
superior, 283f
Porphyria(s)
autonomic dysfunction in, 387
clinical features of, 576
neuropathy in, 575t, 576–577
Positron emission tomography (PET)
in cluster headache, 56f
in migraine, 54, 55f
in mild cognitive impairment, 316f
in neurologic disease, 23
in PD, 334, 336f
in stroke, 286
Postconcussion syndrome, 421–422, 837
Posterior cerebral artery
fetal, 277
lesion in territory of, 147, 152, 154
occlusion of, 179, 277–2778, 277f
Posterior column-medial lemniscal pathway, 118, 119f
Posterior cortical atrophy syndrome, 151
Posterior fossa brain tumor, 53
Postictal state, 135
Postinfectious myelitis, 408–409
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
biological correlates of, 743–744
clinical features of, 743–744
deﬁnition of, 743
diagnosis of, 727t, 818, 847
etiology of, 727–728
pathophysiology of, 727–728
treatment of, 728
in war veterans, 743–744, 748–749
Postural control, 110, 114
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, 67, 388, 
810, 835
Potassium channels, disorders of, 643
Pott’s disease, 80
Prader-Willi syndrome, 219
genetic factors in, 443
hypopituitarism due to, 443
Pramipexole
adverse effects of, 341
for PD, 341, 343t
for restless legs syndrome, 163t, 166, 355
Praziquantel, for cysticercosis, 522
Prednisone
for ACTH deﬁciency, 466
adverse effects of, 646, 658
for Bell’s palsy, 396
for cluster headache prevention, 64, 64t
for Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, 628
for Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 191
for sinusitis with hyposmia, 206
for vasculitic neuropathy, 607
Prefrontal network, 154
Pregabalin
adverse effects of, 578t
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 50, 490
Pregnancy
alcohol use in, 756
epilepsy in, 254–255
in MS, 483
prolactinoma in, 457–458
retinal artery occlusion in, 183
Presbycusis, 209
Presbyopia, 175
Presbyosmia, 202
Presenilin, in AD, 319–320
Pressure ulcers, prevention of, 413
Presynaptic rundown, 610
Presyncope, 89
Primary afferent(s), 40, 41f
Primary afferent nociceptors, 40, 41f, 42f
Primary Care PTSD Screen, 746, 747t
Primary cough headache, 69
Primary exertional headache, 69
Primary intraventricular hemorrhage, 290
Primary lateral sclerosis, 378, 412
Primary olfactory cortex, 199–200, 200f
Primary progressive aphasia, 148–149, 156, 323
Primary sex headache, 70
Primary stabbing headache, 69
Primary taste cortex (PTC), 202
Primary thunderclap headache, 70
Primate immunodeﬁciency viruses, 53
Primidone
adverse effects of, 248t
for essential tremor, 348
for myoclonus, 353
pharmacology of, 248t
Primitive reﬂexes, 8
Prion(s)
decontamination of, 556
deﬁnition of, 549
terminology related to, 549t
transmissibility of, 550–551
Prion disease(s), 549, 841–842. See also Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease
clinical features of, 554–555
dementia due to, 326
diagnosis of, 555
Index
873
Prion disease(s) (Cont.):
differential diagnosis of, 555
epidemiology of, 550–551, 550t
human PRNP gene polymorphisms in, 553
infectious, 553, 556f
inherited, 552–553
laboratory evaluation of, 555–556, 556f
neuropathology of, 554
pathogenesis of, 551–552, 551f, 552t
prevention of, 557
prion strains in, 551–552, 552t
species barrier in, 552
spectrum of, 550
sporadic, 552–553
treatment of, 557
types of, 550, 550t
Prion-like proteins, 557
Prion proteins, 549, 549f
Prion strains, 551–552, 552t
PRNP gene, 549t, 553
Procarbazine, 438t
Prochlorperazine, for migraine, 58t, 120
Progranulin, in FTD, 323
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia, 639
clinical features of, 639
differential diagnosis of, 613
genetic factors in, 639
hearing loss in, 212
with ragged red ﬁbers, 639
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), 
516–517, 547
Progressive muscular atrophy, 370
Progressive muscular dystrophies, 625t
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy, 235t
Progressive polyradiculopathy, HIV–related, 582
Progressive rubella panencephalitis, 518
Progressive supranuclear palsy
balance disorders in, 114
clinical features of, 325
falls in, 114
gait disorders in, 112
parkinsonism in, 336
pathology of, 325, 337t
vs. PD, 325
Prolactin, 453
action of, 453
laboratory evaluation of, 445t
secretion of, 453
synthesis of, 453
Prolactinoma, 455
clinical features of, 455–456
diagnosis of, 455–456
etiology of, 455
during pregnancy, 457–458
prevalence of, 455
screening tests for, 451t
treatment of, 456–458, 456f
Promitochondrial agents, for Huntington’s disease, 351
PROMM (proximal myotonic myopathy), 622
Pronator drift, 7, 820, 821
PROP-1, 441, 442
Propranolol
adverse effects of, 61t
for ataxia/tremor in MS, 489
for essential tremor, 347–348
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
for phobic disorders, 726
for sex headache prevention, 70
Proprioception, 118
Proptosis, 190–191
Prosody, 148
Prosopagnosia, 152, 177
Prostaglandin(s), pain and, 41, 42f
Prostaglandin analogues
for acute angle-closure glaucoma, 182
for glaucoma, 188
Prostate cancer
back pain in, 81
CNS metastases in, 433t
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 565
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA), reference values,  
784t
Prostatitis, back pain in, 81
Prosthetic heart valve, antithrombotic prophylaxis 
for, 264t
Protein(s)
aggregation of, in neurologic disease, 227–229
muscular dystrophy–associated, 627, 628f, 629f
prion, 549, 549f
prion-like, 557
Protein C, reference values, 777t
Protein C deﬁciency, 183
Protein S
deﬁciency, 183
reference values, 777t
Protriptyline, for narcolepsy, 163t, 169
Proximal femoral neuropathy, 666, 666f
Proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM), 622
PrP amyloid, 549t
PS-1, 319
PS-2, 319–320
Pseudoathetosis, 118
Pseudobulbar palsy, 104
Pseudodementia(s), 330
Pseudoephedrine, for orthostatic hypotension, 95
Pseudopapilledema, 186
Pseudotumor, orbital, 191
Pseudotumor cerebri, 67, 68, 186, 186f
Psoriasis, ocular involvement in, 181
Psychiatric/psychological disorders, 720. See also 
speciﬁc disorders
back pain in, 81
biology of, 710
classiﬁcation of, 720
dementia due to, 330–331
gait disorders in, 113
in the homeless, 741
insomnia in, 164–165
prevalence of, 720
primary care physician’s responsibility in, 720
syncope in, 96, 97
in war veterans. See War veterans, 
neuropsychiatric illnesses in
Psychogenic amnesia, 330
Psychogenic movement disorders, 356
Psychogenic seizures, 244
Psychological (motivational) dependence, 716
Psychosis(es)
in epilepsy, 253
in PD, 344
Psychosocial short stature, 460
Psychostimulants, 718t
Psychotherapy
for depression, 731
for generalized anxiety disorder, 724
for panic disorder, 722
for phobic disorders, 727
referral for, 720
for stress disorders, 728
PTEN gene mutations, 425t
Pterygium, 180, 192
Ptosis, 191–192, 618, 620t
PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
“Puff of smoke” lesion, 268
Pulmonary embolism (PE), after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, 308–309
Pulmonary function tests, reference values, 797t
“Punch drunk” syndrome, 329
Pupil(s), 175–177
Argyll Robertson, 176
in coma, 136–137
inequality in size of, 176
Marcus Gunn, 176, 176f
tonic, 176
Pupillary defect, afferent, 176
Pure alexia without agraphia, 144t, 146–147
Pure autonomic failure
autonomic dysfunction in, 388
orthostatic hypotension in, 95
Pure motor hemiparesis, 266
Pure myopathy syndromes, 640
Pure sensory stroke, 266
Pure tone audiometry, 213
Pure word deafness, 144t
Pyramidal (corticospinal) system, 105f
Pyrazinamide, for tuberculous meningitis, 515
Pyridostigmine
for myasthenia gravis, 614
for orthostatic hypotension, 95, 390
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
deﬁciency of, 592
reference range for, 788t
toxicity of, 587t, 589
for tuberculous meningitis, 515
Pyrimethamine, for toxoplasmosis, 522
Quadrantanopia, 178f
Quadriparesis, 108
Quadriplegic fever, 413
Quantitative sudomotor axon reﬂex test, 384–385, 385t
Quetiapine
adverse effects of, 739t
for dementia, 331
for psychosis in Huntington’s disease, 351
for schizophrenia, 739t, 740
Quinine, 209
Rabies, 512
Rad, 799t
Radial neuropathy, 594, 665, 666f
Radiation-derived units, 799t
Radiation dose, 799t
Radiation therapy
for acromegaly, 464
adverse effects of
cataract, 188
neurologic, 437
pituitary, 443, 452, 812, 838
plexopathy, 597
for metastatic brain tumors, 434
for pituitary tumors, 452
Radiculopathy, 71, 595, 595t
Radiofrequency denervation, 83–84
Radiofrequency thermal rhizotomy, for trigeminal 
neuralgia, 393
Ragged-red ﬁbers, 192
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 100, 396
Ranibizumab, for macular degeneration, 189
RAS (reticular activating system), 133
Rasagiline, for PD, 341–342, 343t
Rathke’s cyst, 448
Reactive arthritis (Reiter’s syndrome), 181
Reading, assessment of, 144
Recoverin, 559t
Reelin, 713–714
Referred pain, 43
to back, 72, 80–81
convergence-projection hypothesis of, 42f
Reﬂex(es), testing of, 8. See also speciﬁc reﬂexes
Reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy, 45, 389–390
Reﬂex syncope, 89
Refractive state, 175
Refsum disease, 190, 575t, 576
Rehabilitation
of alcoholics, 759–760
in ischemic stroke management, 261
in opiate abusers, 766
of spinal cord disorders, 413, 413t
Relapsing polychondritis, 181
Relative afferent pupil defect, 176, 176f
Relaxation rate, 17
Rem, 799t
REM sleep, 158, 159f
REM sleep behavior disorder, 160, 170, 204, 312, 
345, 828
Repetition, assessment of, 144
Resistance strength training, 115
Respiratory function, during sleep, 161
Respiratory tract infections
mastoiditis, 194, 518–519
olfactory disorders in, 202
Restless legs syndrome, 163t, 166, 355, 805, 809, 
827, 834
Reticular activating system (RAS), 133
Reticulospinal pathway, 105f
Retina, 174
detached, 178, 187, 187f
infarction of, 183
lesions of, 178
Index
874
Retinal artery occlusion, 183, 183f
Retinal vein occlusion, 183–184, 184f
Retinitis pigmentosa, 19–190, 190f
Retinoids, for olfactory dysfunction, 206
Retinopathy
cancer-associated (paraneoplastic), 565
hypertensive, 183, 183f
Retrobulbar tumor, 190
Retrocollis, 349
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage, 81
Retropharyngeal soft tissue mass, 699f
Retrovirus(es), myopathies associated with, 409,  
653
Rett syndrome, 223
Reverse straight-leg raising sign, 74
Reverse transcriptase enzyme, HIV, 538
Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy, 268,  
290
Rheumatic fever, prophylaxis for cardiac 
complications of, 264t
Rheumatoid arthritis
juvenile, 181
neck pain in, 86
neuropathy in, 579
ocular involvement in, 181
Ribavirin, for viral encephalitis, 514
Riboﬂavin (vitamin B2)
reference range for, 788t
supplements, for migraine, 206
Rifampin
prophylactic, 501
for tuberculous meningitis, 515
Right-left confusion, 147
Rigidity, 103
Riley-Day syndrome, 388
Riluzole, for ALS, 377
Rinne test, 213
Risperidone
adverse effects of, 739t
for psychosis in Huntington’s disease, 351
for schizophrenia, 739t, 740
Rituximab
for cerebellar degeneration, 563
for inﬂammatory myopathies, 658
Rivastigmine
for AD, 321
for Parkinson’s disease dementia, 345
Rizatriptan, for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), 500
Rod(s), 174
Romberg maneuver, 9
Romberg’s sign, 114, 118, 821
Ropinirole
adverse effects of, 341
for PD, 341, 343t
for restless legs syndrome, 163t, 166, 355
Rosenbaum card, 175, 175f
Roth’s spots, 182
Rotigotine
adverse effects of, 341
for PD, 341, 343t
Rubella (German measles), congenital, 518
Rubeola (measles), complications of, 518
Rubrospinal pathway, 105f
Ruﬁnamide, 249t
Saccades, 177
Saccadomania, 197
Saccular aneurysm, 304–305
Sacral insufﬁciency fracture, 700f
Sacral pain, 81
Sagittal sinus thrombosis, Bálint’s syndrome in,  
151
St. Vitus’ dance, 352
Salicylates, 209
Saliva, artiﬁcial, 205
Salt therapy, for syncope, 92
Salty taste sensation, 201
SANDO (sensory ataxic neuropathy and 
ophthalmoparesis), 361t
Sandostatin-LAR, for acromegaly, 464
Sarcoidosis
clinical features of, 443
MRI in, 678–682f
Sarcoidosis (Cont.):
neurologic features of
chronic meningitis, 532t
myelopathy, 408
peripheral neuropathy, 580
ocular involvement in, 180, 181, 182
weakness in, 107
SCA. See Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA)
SCAN1 (spinocerebellar ataxia with neuropathy), 
364t
Schirmer strip, 180
Schistosomiasis, myelitis in, 409
Schizoaffective disorder, 738
Schizophrenia, 712, 738
catatonic-type, 738
CATIE study of, 740
chemosensory alterations in, 204
clinical features of, 712, 738
diabetes mellitus type 2 in, 740
differential diagnosis of, 738
disorganized-type, 738
epidemiology of, 712, 738
genetic factors in, 713
insomnia in, 165
neuroimaging of, 712
neuropathology of, 712
paranoid-type, 738
pathogenesis of, 713–714
pathophysiology of, 738
residual-type, 738
treatment of, 738–740, 739t
types of, 738
Schizophreniform disorder, 738
Schwannoma, 431–432, 431f
Schwannomatosis, familial, 425t
Sciatica, 84–85
Sciatic neuropathy, 594
Scleritis, 181
Scleroderma. See Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
SCN1B gene, 235t
Scopolamine
ocular effects, 177
for vertigo, 102t
Scotoma, 178f, 179, 187
Seasonal affective disorder, 731
Secondary taste cortex, 202
Second impact syndrome, 420
Segawa variant dystonia, 348
Seizure(s), 231. See also Epilepsy
absence, 233
approach to the patient, 241, 242f, 831–832
atonic, 234
in brain abscess, 519
in brain tumor, 424
chemotherapy-induced, 438t
classiﬁcation of, 231t, 232–233, 807–808, 830
coma in, 135
complex febrile, 238
deﬁnition of, 231
delirium and, 129, 129t, 329
differential diagnosis of, 243–244, 244t
EEG studies in, 241–243
electrographic, 8f, 26–27
electrophysiologic studies in, 241–243
etiology of, 236–239, 238t, 239t
focal, 232, 807, 830
AEDs for, 246, 250
with dyscognitive features, 232–233
evolution to generalized seizures, 233
without dyscognitive features, 232
focal sensory, 124
generalized, 233
absence, 233
AEDs for, 250
atonic, 234
evolution from focal seizures, 233
myoclonic, 234
tonic-clonic, 233–234
after head injury, 417–418
history and examination in, 241
in HIV infection, 548
interictal behavior related to, 53
laboratory evaluation of, 241
magnetoencephalography in, 29, 243
Seizure(s) (Cont.):
mechanisms of, 239
epileptogenesis in, 240
initiation phase, 239–240
propagation phase, 239–240
in meningitis, 498
neuroimaging in, 243
nocturnal, 170
psychogenic, 245
vs. syncope, 96, 243–244, 244t
temporal lobe, 154
treatment of, 245, 807, 831
avoidance of precipitating factors in, 245
underlying conditions–related, 245
unclassiﬁable, 234
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
adverse effects of, 723t, 732–733
serotonin syndrome, 732
sexual dysfunction, 732–733
for depression, 321, 331, 723t, 732–733, 732f
drug interactions of, 724t
for narcolepsy, 169
for neuropathic pain, 50
for panic disorder, 722
pharmacology of, 732–733
for PTSD, 748
for vertigo, 101, 102t
Selegiline
adverse effects of, 341–342
for depression, 723t
for PD, 341, 343t
Selenium, reference range for, 788t
Sella chordomas, 448
Sellar mass lesions, 448, 449t, 828
Semantic dementia, 152
Semantic paraphasia, 143
Sensation
abnormalities of, 116
in brainstem lesions, 123
in cortical lesions, 123
falls and, 115
focal seizures, 124
localization of, 121f, 122
in nerve and root lesions, 121f, 122
in spinal cord lesions, 123
in thalamic lesions, 123
anatomy of, 118, 119f
examination of, 118, 120t
cortical, 122
primary, 119–121
quantitative sensory, 122
positive and negative phenomena, 117
terminology in, 117–118
Sensorimotor neuropathy, paraneoplastic, 563–564
Sensory area, primary, 142
Sensory ataxia, 112, 113t, 118
Sensory ataxic neuropathy and ophthalmoparesis 
(SANDO), 361t
Sensory balance training, 115
Sensory dissociation, 123
Sensory examination, 8
Sensory neuropathy
autoimmune subacute, 114
HIV–related, 582
painful, 579
paraneoplastic, 563–564
Sentinel bleeds, in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 305
Sepsis/septic shock
delirium in, 129, 129t
encephalopathy in, 301
Septic cavernous sinus thrombosis, 526
Septic myopathy, 304
Septic thrombosis, of superior sagittal sinus, 526
Septo-optic dysplasia, 442
Serotonin (5-HT)
anatomic and clinical aspects of, 222t
in migraine, 54
pain and, 42f
structure of, 222t
Serotonin (5-HT1) agonists, for migraine, 57, 58t, 59–60
Serotonin (5-HT3) antagonists, for nausea and 
vomiting, 66
Serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, for 
PTSD, 748
Index
875
Serotonin syndrome, 355, 732
Sertraline
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t
dosage of, 723t
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 728
for panic disorder, 722
Setting sun sign, 195
Sex headache, primary, 70
Sexual dysfunction
alcohol and, 756
cocaine and, 768
in MS, 478, 490
Shawl sign, 649
Sheehan’s syndrome, 443–444, 813, 838–839
Shift-work disorder, 171, 804–805, 827
Shortened Fatigue Questionnaire, 706, 706f
Short stature
clinical features of, 460
etiology of, 459–460
laboratory evaluation of, 460
nutritional, 460
psychosocial, 460
treatment of, 460
Shoulder pain, 87
Sialadenitis, 204
Sickle cell anemia
ocular involvement in, 187
stroke due to, 267
Sideroblastic anemia, 364t
Sievert (Sv), 799t
Signal transduction pathway defects, 223
Silent nociceptors, 41
Simultanagnosia, 150, 151f, 195, 826
Simultaneous bilateral stimulation test, 150
Single-ﬁber electromyography, 34
Sinusitis
brain abscess and, 519
olfactory dysfunction in, 202, 206
subdural empyema and, 522–523
Sinus thrombosis
cavernous, 526
superior sagittal, 526, 687–689f
transverse, 526
Sirolimus, therapeutic monitoring of, 787t
Sjögren syndrome
neuropathy in, 579
ocular involvement in, 180
Skeletal maturation, somatic growth and, 459
Skew deviation, 195
Skin biopsy, 571
Skull fractures, 417
Sleep, 158
age-related changes in, 158, 159, 159f
behavioral changes in, 161
circadian rhythmicity in, 160–161, 160f
neuroanatomy of, 159–160
neurochemistry of, 160
nonrestorative, 162
NREM, 158
organization of, 158–159
physiology of, 158–162
REM, 158, 159f
states and stages of, 158, 161–162
Sleep apnea, 169
central, 169
daytime sleepiness and, 166
diagnosis of, 163t
mixed, 169
Sleep bruxism, 170
Sleep disorder(s), 162, 805, 828
approach to the patient, 162, 163t
circadian rhythm, 170
daytime sleepiness in, 166–168
driving rights and, 167
insomnia. See Insomnia
narcolepsy. See Narcolepsy
parasomnias, 169–170
in PD, 345
periodic limb movement disorder, 166
restless legs syndrome, 166
in war veterans, 749
Sleep enuresis, 170
Sleep hygiene, 163–164
Sleep paralysis, 163t, 169
Sleep-promoting substances, 160
Sleep terrors, 169–170
Sleep-wake cycle, 160–161, 160f
Sleepwalking, 169
Slipping clutch syndrome, 112
Slit-lamp examination, 177, 181
SMA (spinal muscle atrophy), 370, 374t, 377–378
Small-vessel stroke, 263t, 265
clinical features of, 266
deﬁnition of, 265
pathophysiology of, 265–266, 266f
Smoking
insomnia and, 166
stroke risk and, 265t
Snellen chart, 175, 175f
Snoring, 163t
Social jet lag, 71
SOD1, 373
Sodium channel disorders, of muscle, 642
Solid organ transplantation, brain injury after, 663
Solitary tract nucleus, 201f, 202
Somatization disorder, 736, 736t
Somatoform disorders, 736
Somatosensory cortex, 43, 43f, 143f
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), 30
Somatosensory pathways, 119f
Somatostatin, 458
Somatostatin analogues
for acromegaly, 464, 465f
adverse effects of, 464
for TSH-secreting adenomas, 473
Somatotrope, 439t, 446t
Somnambulation, 169
Sour taste sensation, 201
Spasmodic dystonia, 349
Spasms
hemifacial, 394, 397
in MS, 478, 489–490
muscle, 622
Spasticity, 103, 111, 115, 414
Spastic paraplegia, familial, 111, 378–379, 412
Spastin gene, 374t, 378
Spatial orientation, 149–152, 149f
Speech
assessment of, 5
spontaneous, 143
Speech audiometry, 214
Speech reception threshold, 214
Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor antagonists, 490
Spina biﬁda occulta, 76
Spinal accessory nerve, 7
Spinal angiography, 25
Spinal cord
disorders of. See Spinal cord disease/injury
pain mechanisms of, 42–43, 43f
transverse section through, 402f
vascular malformations of, 409–410, 410f
Spinal cord compression
in hematomyelia, 406
neoplastic, 810–811, 811f, 836
clinical features of, 403–404
diagnosis of, 404, 404f
intradural mass lesions, 404–405, 404f
pathogenesis of, 403–404
in primary intramedullary tumors, 405, 405f
treatment of, 404–405
in spinal epidural abscess, 80, 405–406, 406f, 836
in spinal epidural hematoma, 406
Spinal cord disease/injury, 400
acute, 403
anatomy related to, 400–401, 401t, 402f
approach to the patient, 400–403, 400t
autonomic dysfunction in, 386
bladder dysfunction in, 413
cervical cord, 85, 401
chronic myelopathies, 409
adrenomyeloneuropathy, 412
familial spastic paraplegia, 378–379, 412
hypocupric, 412
in multiple sclerosis, 411
primary lateral sclerosis, 378, 412
Spinal cord disease/injury, chronic myelopathies (Cont.):
retrovirus-associated, 410
spondylitic myelopathy, 409
syringomyelia, 86, 410–411, 411f
in tabes dorsalis, 412
tethered cord syndrome, 76, 412
toxic causes of, 413
in vascular malformations of cord and dura, 
409–410, 410f
in vitamin B12 deﬁciency, 411–412, 591
compressive vs. noncompressive myelopathy, 403
extramedullary syndromes, 403
infarction, 107, 692f
intramedullary syndromes, 403
level of lesion in, 10t, 401–402
lumbar cord, 401
meningitis, 528. See also Meningitis
noncompressive myelopathies, 406
evaluation of, 407t
spinal cord infarction, 407, 692f
paraneoplastic syndromes and, 563
patterns of, 402–403
rehabilitation of, 413, 413t
sacral cord/conus medullaris, 401–402
sensory abnormalities in, 123
subacute, 403
thoracic cord, 401
Spinal epidural abscess, 80, 405–406, 406f, 836
Spinal epidural hematoma, 406
Spinal fusion, 84
Spinal muscle atrophy (SMA), 370, 374t, 377–378
Spinal stenosis
acquired, 78
back pain in, 78
congenital, 78
lumbar, 78, 78f
treatment of, 78
Spine
anatomy of, 71, 72f
bamboo, 79
lumbar
congenital anomalies of, 75–76
pain sensitive structures in, 71
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 374t, 377
Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA)
classiﬁcation of, 358, 359–364t, 364
clinical features of, 359–364t, 364–366
genetic factors in, 220t, 359–364t, 364–366
infantile-onset, 364t
with neuropathy (SCAN1), 364t
SCA1, 359t, 364–365, 365f
SCA2, 359t, 365–366
SCA3, 359t, 365–366
SCA5, 359t
SCA6, 220t, 359t, 366
SCA7, 359t, 366
SCA8, 359t, 366
SCA10 through SCA12, 359t
SCA13 through SCA23, 360t
SCA25 through SCA31, 361t
treatment of, 369
Spinothalamic tract, 43, 43f, 118, 119f
Spirometry, reference values for, 797t
Spondylitic myelopathy, 409
Spondylolisthesis, back pain in, 6
Spondylolysis, vertebral, 75–76
Spondylosis
back pain in, 79
cervical, 86, 111
Spontaneous speech, 143
Sporothrix infections, chronic meningitis in, 530t
Sprain, low back, 76
Spurling’s sign, 85
SSEPs (somatosensory evoked potentials), 30
SSPE (subacute sclerosing panencephalitis),  
517–518
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
Stabbing headache, primary, 69
Stapedectomy, 209, 215
Stapes, 207, 207f
Staphylococcus aureus infections
meningitis. See Meningitis, bacterial
Index
876
Statins
for AD, 321
adverse effects of, 645–646, 645t, 816,  
844
for stroke prevention, 269–270
Status epilepticus, 252, 807–808, 831
complex partial, 329
in critically ill patient, 297, 300
deﬁnition of, 252
delirium in, 129, 129t
generalized convulsive, 252
generalized tonic-clonic, 252, 253f
nonconvulsive, 252
Stem cell(s), in neurologic disease, 225–226
Stem cell therapy
for Huntington’s disease, 225
for PD, 225, 344
sources of cells for, 228
Stereognosis, 122
Stereopsis, 177
Stiff-person syndrome
clinical features of, 622
gait disorders in, 111
paraneoplastic, 559t, 563
pathogenesis of, 622
Stokes-Adams attack, 95
Stomach, alcohol effects on, 755
Stool analysis, reference ranges, 790t
Strabismus, 192–193
Straight-leg raising sign, 74, 74t
Strain, low back, 76
Strength testing, 7–8
Streptococcal infections
meningitis. See Meningitis
Streptomycin, 185
Stress disorders, 727, 727t
Stroke, 257. See also Cerebrovascular disease; Stroke 
syndromes
aphasia in, 145, 148
in CADASIL, 268
cardioembolic, 261–263, 263t
circadian variations in, 173
clinical features of, 256
deﬁnition of, 256
delirium in, 129, 129t
drugs and, 268
embolic, artery-to-artery, 263–265
etiology of, 257f, 262f, 263t
ﬁbromuscular dysplasia and, 267
gait disorders in, 111
hearing loss in, 213
hypercoagulable disorders and, 267
imaging studies in, 282, 808, 832
cerebral angiography, 268f, 285
CT, 282–284, 285f
MRI, 286, 286f
PET, 286
ultrasound, 286
intracranial hemorrhage in. See Intracranial 
hemorrhage
ischemic. See Ischemic stroke
leukoaraiosis and, 268
in Moyamoya disease, 268
necrotizing arteritis and, 267
noncardiogenic, prevention of, 272
ocular manifestations of, 177, 187, 196
prevention of, 269–272
primary CNS vasculitis and, 267–268,  
268f
reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy and,  
268
with right hemiplegia but preserved language, 
285f
risk factors for, 265t, 808, 832
small-vessel, 263t, 265–266, 266f
taste disorders in, 204
temporal (giant cell) arteritis and, 267
after TIA, 269, 269t
treatment of, 257, 257f, 832–833
venous sinus thrombosis and, 267
weakness in, 106
Stroke centers
comprehensive, 285
in ischemic stroke management, 261
Stroke syndromes, 273
within anterior circulation, 274
anterior cerebral artery, 275–276, 276f
anterior choroidal artery, 276, 277f
common carotid artery, 277
internal carotid artery, 276–277, 276f, 277f
middle cerebral artery, 274–275, 275f
within posterior circulation, 277
basilar artery, 279–282, 281–284f
P1 syndrome, 278
P2 syndrome, 278
posterior cerebral artery, 276f, 277–278, 277f
vertebral artery, 278–279, 280f
Stupor, 132
Sty (hordeolum), 180
Subacute combined degeneration, 411–412
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), 517–518
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
clinical features of, 305, 821
in critically ill patient, 304
delayed neurologic deﬁcits after, 305–306
DVT prophylaxis after, 308–309
ECG in, 307
etiology of, 304–305
fundus examination in, 136
grading of, 305, 306t
headache in, 51t, 52, 305, 801
hyponatremia in, 306
imaging in, 306–307, 307f
laboratory evaluation of, 306–307
pathophysiology of, 305
saccular aneurysms in, 304–305
treatment of, 307–309
Subclavian artery, occlusion of, 279
Subconjunctival hemorrhage, 179
Subdural empyema, 522. See also Epidural abscess
approach to the patient, 493–494, 494–495f
clinical features of, 523
deﬁnition of, 522, 522f
diagnosis of, 523–524, 523f
differential diagnosis of, 524
epidemiology of, 522
etiology of, 523
pathophysiology of, 523
prognosis of, 524
treatment of, 524
Subdural hematoma
acute, 418, 418f, 837
chronic, 419, 419f, 811, 837
coma in, 134
neuroimaging in, 134f, 419f, 701f, 811f
weakness in, 107
Substance P, pain and, 41, 42f
Substance use disorders, 716. See also speciﬁc substances
delirium in, 128–129, 129t
epidemiology of, 717
genetic factors in, 717
neural circuitry of, 715f
neuroimaging of, 717
neuropathology of, 221
pathogenesis of, 717–718, 718t, 719f
vs. substance dependence, 716
Sudden cardiac death, circadian variations in, 173
Sudomotor function, in autonomic dysfunction, 
384–385, 385t
Sulfacetamide, for conjunctivitis, 180
Sulfadiazine, for CNS toxoplasmosis, 522
Sulfonamides, 185
Sumatriptan
for cluster headache, 64
for migraine, 58t, 59–60, 59t
nasal spray, 58t, 59–60
SUNCT/SUNA, 63t, 65
Sundowning, 127, 131, 165
Superior oblique muscle paresis, 109
Superior pontine syndrome, lateral/medial, 283f
Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
clinical features of, 526
neuroimaging in, 687–689f
Supine hypertension, 94
Suppurative thrombophlebitis, intracranial. See 
Venous thromboembolism (VTE), 
suppurative intracranial
Suprachiasmatic nucleus, 174
Suprascapular neuropathy, 87
Suramin, 438t, 585t
Swinging ﬂashlight test, 176, 176f
Sydenham’s chorea, 352
Sympathetic postganglionic neuron, 41f
Syncope, 89
approach to the patient, 96–97, 802, 822–823
in arrhythmias, 93t, 95–96
in cardiovascular disease, 93t, 95–96
in carotid sinus hypersensitivity, 97
deﬁnition of, 89
diagnosis of, 802, 822–823
ECG in, 97
epidemiology of, 89
vs. falls in neurologic disease, 96
high-risk features of, 90t
hypoglycemia and, 96
natural history of, 89
neurally mediated
causes of, 93t
classiﬁcation of, 90–91
clinical features of, 91–92, 822
pathophysiology of, 90, 92f
treatment of, 92
in orthostatic hypotension. See Orthostatic 
hypotension
pathophysiology of, 90
in psychiatric disorders, 96, 97
vs. seizure, 96, 243–244, 244t
tilt table testing for, 385
treatment of, 92
vasovagal
causes of, 90, 93t
Synkinesis, 394
Syntax, 142
Syphilis, secondary
neurologic manifestations of
chronic meningitis, 529t
subacute meningitis, 515, 516
ocular involvement in, 181
Syringomyelia
Chiari malformation and, 410, 411f
clinical features of, 410–411, 811, 837
diagnosis of, 86, 837
treatment of, 410–411
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), neurologic 
manifestations of, 352, 408/, 532t, 
579–580
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
facial hemiatrophy in, 397
neuropathy in, 580
Systems neuroscience, 229–230, 229f
Tabes dorsalis, 412
Tachyarrhythmias, syncope in, 95
Tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome, 95
Tacrine, for AD, 321
Tacrolimus
for myasthenia gravis, 616
therapeutic monitoring of, 787t
Tamoxifen, 438t
Tangier disease (ABCA1 deﬁciency), 575t,  
576
Tardive dyskinesia, 112, 354, 740
Tardive syndromes, 354–355
Tarui disease (phosphofructokinase deﬁciency),  
637
Taste buds, 200, 201f, 204
Taste disorders
diseases and conditions associated with,  
204
drug-related, 204
etiology of, 204
evaluation of, 204–205
olfactory dysfunction and, 204
treatment of, 205–206
Taste pore, 201, 201f
Taste system, 200–202
Tau protein, 312t, 316
Taxanes, 584t
Tay-Sachs disease, adult, 374t, 377
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
T cell(s), autoreactive, in MS, 476
TDP-43 gene, 228, 312t
Index
877
Teardrop fracture, 701f
Telangiectasia(s), capillary, 292
Telmisartan, for stroke/TIC prevention, 271
Temazepam
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
for insomnia, 164
pharmacology of, 725t
Temperature sense, testing of, 119, 120t
Temporal arteritis. See Giant cell arteritis (temporal 
arteritis)
Temporal bone
CT scan of, 215
fracture of, 210
Temporal lobectomy, for refractory epilepsy, 251
Tension-type headache, 51t, 62
clinical features of, 62
diagnosis of, 62
pathophysiology of, 62
treatment of, 62
Teratoma
ovarian, 560f, 563
parasellar, 448–449
Terazosin, for urinary dyssynergia, 413, 490
Terbinaﬁne, 204
Teriﬂunomide, for MS, 487
Terminally ill patient, delirium in, 129t, 130
Terminal restlessness, 130
Testosterone therapy, for hypogonadism, 470–471
Tethered cord syndrome, 76, 412
Tetrabenazine
adverse effects of, 354
for dystonia, 349
for tardive dyskinesia, 354
Tetracycline(s), for meibomitis, 180
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 769
Thalamic Déjérine-Roussy syndrome, 278, 288
Thalamus
lesions of, sensory disturbances in, 123
in olfaction, 199
Thalidomide, adverse effects of, 438, 586t, 589
Thallium poisoning, 185, 588t, 590
THAP1 gene, 348
Theophylline, 163t
adverse effects of, 165
therapeutic monitoring of, 788t
Thermoregulation, 162
Thiamine (vitamin B1)
deﬁciency of
delirium in, 129
dementia in, 328
neuropathies in, 591
optic neuropathy in, 185
Wernicke’s disease, 302–303, 302f
reference range for, 788t
Thioridazine, 739t
Thiotepa, 438t
Thiothixene, 739t
Third window, inner ear, 209
Thomsen disease, 643
Thoracic outlet, 87
Thoracic outlet syndrome, 87
Thrombolytic therapy, for ischemic stroke, 261–262
Thrombophlebitis. See Venous thromboembolism 
(VTE)
Thrombosis
dural sinus, 273
venous sinus, 267
Thunderclap headache, primary, 70
Thymectomy, for myasthenia gravis, 614–615
Thymoma, paraneoplastic syndromes in, 565
Thyroid disorders, muscle disorders and, 643–644
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 472
action of, 472
deﬁciency of, 446t, 472–473
laboratory evaluation of, 445t
secretion of, 472
synthesis of, 472
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)–secreting 
adenomas, 473
Thyrotrope, expression and regulation of, 439t
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 453, 
472–473
TIA. See Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
Tiagabine
for epilepsy, 248t
for stiff-person syndrome, 563
Tibial muscular dystrophy (Udd’s distal myopathy), 
633, 634t
Tic(s), 352
deﬁnition of, 347t
motor, 353
in Tourette’s syndrome, 352–353
vocal, 353
Ticlopidine, in stroke/TIA prevention, 270
Tilt table test, 97, 385, 385t
Time-of-ﬂight (TOF) imaging, 22
Timolol, for migraine prevention, 60
Tingling, 117. See also Sensation
Tinnitus, 210, 216
Tinnitus masker, 216
Tizanidine, for spasticity in neurologic disease,  
414, 489
Todd’s paralysis, 232, 807, 830
TOF (time-of-ﬂight) imaging, 22
Tolcapone, for PD, 342, 343t
Tolerance, deﬁnition of, 716
Tolfenamic acid, for migraine, 58t
Tolosa-Hunt syndrome, 191, 193, 194, 399
Tone, 103, 104t
Tongue paralysis, 398
Tonic-clonic seizures. See also Seizure(s)
characteristics of, 233–234
vs. syncope, 243–244, 244t
Tonic pupil, 176
Topiramate
adverse effects of, 61t, 246, 248t
for chronic daily headache, 66
for cluster headache prevention, 64t
for epilepsy, 248t
for hemicrania continua, 69
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
pharmacology of, 248t
for posttraumatic headache, 68
for raised CSF pressure headache, 68
for SUNCT/SUNA prevention, 65
“Top of the basilar” syndromes, 279
Torsades de pointes, 95
Torsin A, 348
Torticollis, 349
Touch localization test, 122
Touch sensation, testing of, 120t, 121
Tourette’s syndrome, 352–353
etiology of, 353
pathophysiology of, 353
prevalence of, 352–353
sleep disturbances in, 165
treatment of, 353
Toxins, neuropathies due to, 588t, 589–591
Toxoplasma gondii infection
cerebral/CNS, 521, 546–547, 547f, 812,  
838
chronic meningitis in, 530t
ocular, 182
treatment of, 522
weakness in, 107
Trachoma, 180
Tractography, diffusion, 21f
Tramadol
adverse effects of, 578t
for back pain, 82
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t
Transcendental meditation, for migraine,  
57
Transcranial magnetic stimulation, for depression, 
733
Transfalcial herniation, 133f, 134
Transient global amnesia, 329–330
Transient ischemic attack (TIA), 268
deﬁnition of, 256
pathophysiology of, 268–269
prevention of, 269
anticoagulants in, 271–272
antiplatelet agents in, 270–271
risk factors for, 269–270
stroke following, 269, 269t
Transient ischemic attack (TIA) (Cont.):
treatment of, 257f
visual symptoms of, 187
weakness in, 108t
Transsphenoidal surgery
for acromegaly, 464
for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
for pituitary tumors, 451–452, 452f, 473
Transtentorial herniation, 133
Transverse sinus thrombosis, 526
Tranylcypromine, for depression, 723t
Trauma
back pain following, 75t, 76
cervical spine, 85
Traumatic brain injury (TBI). See Head injury
Trazodone
adverse effects of, 723t
for depression, 723t
for insomnia, 164
for stress disorders, 728
Treacher Collins syndrome, 212t
Tremor(s), 347
clinical features of, 347
essential, 347
etiology of, 347
pathophysiology of, 347
in PD, 347
prevalence of, 347
treatment of, 347–348
in Wilson’s disease, 356
TRH (thyrotropin-releasing hormone), 453, 472–473
Triazolam
for generalized anxiety disorder, 725t
for insomnia, 164
pharmacology of, 725t
Trichinella/trichinellosis, chronic meningitis in, 531t
Trichromat, 177
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
adverse effects of, 49, 578t, 723t
orthostatic hypotension, 95
for chronic daily headache, 65–66
contraindications to, 732
for depression, 723t, 731–732, 732f
for migraine prevention, 61t
for narcolepsy, 169
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 49, 49t
pharmacology of, 732
for posttraumatic headache, 68
Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia, 51, 62, 63t
Trigeminal nerve
disorders of, 394t
examination of, 6
sensory divisions of, 392f
Trigeminal neuralgia, 392, 835–836
clinical features of, 392
diagnosis of, 65
differential diagnosis of, 393
incidence of, 392
laboratory evaluation of, 393
in MS, 479
with paroxysmal hemicrania, 65
pathophysiology of, 393
treatment of, 50, 393, 810, 836
Trigeminal neuropathy, 394, 394t, 836
Trigeminovascular system, 51
Trigger(s), migraine, 53
Trigger point injections, 83
Trihexyphenidyl
for dystonia, 349
for extrapyramidal symptoms, 740
for PD, 342
Trilostane, for Cushing’s syndrome, 469
Trimethoprim-polymyxin, for conjunctivitis, 180
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ), for 
meningitis, 502
Triptans, for migraine, 58t, 59
Trismus, 394
Trochlear nerve, 6
Trochlear nerve palsy, 194
Trypanosoma spp. infections
chronic meningitis in, 530t. See also Meningitis
in HIV infection, 547–548
Index
878
TSC1 gene, 425t, 433
TSC2 gene, 425t, 433
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Tuberculosis (TB), extrapulmonary
meningitis, 529t
ocular manifestations, 181
spinal/skeletal, 406, 406f, 669–670f
Tuberous sclerosis
brain tumors and, 425t, 433
clinical features of, 433
pathogenesis of, 433
seizures in, 433
Tufted cells, 199
Tullio phenomenon, 209
Turcot’s syndrome, 425t
Two-point discrimination test, 122
Tympanic membrane, 207, 207f
assessment of, 213
perforation of, 209, 215
Tympanogram, 214
Tympanometry, 214
Tympanoplasty, 209, 215
Tympanostomy tubes, 215
Tyramine, MAOIs and, 341
Udd’s distal myopathy (tibial muscular dystrophy), 
633, 634t
Ulnar nerve, motor conduction studies of, 32f
Ulnar neuropathy, 593–594, 665–666, 666f
Ultrasonography
in neurologic disease, 14t
in stroke, 286
Umami, 201
Uncal transtentorial herniation, 133, 133f
Unipolar depressive disorders, 731
University of Pennsylvania Smell Identiﬁcation Test, 
202f, 205
Unthoff’s symptom, 478
Unverricht-Lundborg disease, 235t, 362t
Upper motor neuron diseases, 374–376t, 378–379
Upper motor neuron pathways, 105f
Upper motor neuron weakness, 104, 104t
Uremia, delirium in, 129t
Urinalysis, reference ranges for, 791–792t
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
delirium in, 129, 129t
in MS, 490
Usher syndrome, 212, 212t
Uterosacral ligament, disorders involving, 81
Uveitis, 181, 182f, 188, 829
anterior, 181
intermediate, 182
paraneoplastic, 565
posterior, 182
Vagus nerve
anatomy of, 201f
diseases of, 397
examination of, 7
stimulation
for depression, 733
for epilepsy, 252
in taste sensation, 201
Valacyclovir
for Bell’s palsy, 396
for viral encephalitis, 513
for viral meningitis, 507
Valdecoxib, 46t
Valproate/valproic acid
action of, 716
adverse effects of, 61t, 735t
bone marrow suppression, 250
common, 735t
hepatotoxicity, 250
neurologic, 247t
rare, 735t
systemic, 247t
teratogenic, 254
for bipolar disorder, 735, 735t
for chronic daily headache, 66
dosage of, 247t, 735t
drug interactions of, 247t
for epilepsy, 247t, 250
Valproate/valproic acid (Cont.):
for focal seizures, 250
for generalized seizures, 250
for migraine prevention, 60, 61t
for myoclonus, 353
pharmacology of, 247t, 735t
for posthypoxic myoclonus, 300
for posttraumatic headache, 68
for stiff-person syndrome, 563
for tardive dyskinesia, 354
therapeutic monitoring of, 788t
Valsalva response, in autonomic dysfunction, 384, 
385t
Vancomycin
for meningitis, 499t, 501, 502
therapeutic monitoring of, 788t
Varicella (chickenpox), complications of, 491, 492
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infections
meningitis, 506
neuropathy in, 582–583
Vascular anomalies, 291–293
Vascular dementia, 310, 314t, 322, 322f
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors, 
189
Vasculitic neuropathy, 607
Vasculitis
CNS
angiography in, 686f
CT in, 686f
stroke due to, 267–268, 268f
isolated, dementia due to, 329
of nerve and muscle, 564
paraneoplastic, 564
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), 453
Vasogenic edema, 294
Vasospasm, after subarachnoid hemorrhage, 306, 
307–308
Vegetative state, 132
Venlafaxine
adverse effects of, 578t, 723t
for depression, 723t, 733
dosage of, 723t
for neuropathy, 578t
for pain, 46t, 49, 50, 490
for panic disorder, 722
pharmacology of, 733
Venous anomalies, 292
Venous sinus thrombosis, stroke due to, 267
Venous thromboembolism (VTE)
with brain tumor, 424
suppurative intracranial
anatomy of, 525–526, 525f
clinical features of, 526
deﬁnition of, 525
diagnosis of, 526
pathophysiology of, 525–526
treatment of, 526
Ventricular tachycardia, syncope in, 95
Ventriculostomy, for ICP and brain tissue 
monitoring, 297, 297f
Ventrolateral preoptic hypothalamus, 159
VEPs (visual evoked potentials), 29
Verapamil
adverse effects of, 64
for cluster headache prevention, 64, 64t
for hypnic headache, 70
Vertebrae, anatomy of, 71, 72f
Vertebral artery, occlusion of, 278–279
Vertebral fractures
neuroimaging in, 700f, 701f
in osteoporosis, 80
pain in, 76, 80
Vertebrobasilar insufﬁciency, 69
Vertigo, 98
acute prolonged, 100
approach to the patient, 98–100, 823
benign paroxysmal positional, 99t, 100
central, 99t
evoked by loud sounds, 209
in migraine, 98, 100–101
in MS, 478
peripheral, 99t
prevention of, 102
Vertigo (Cont.):
psychosomatic, 101–102
treatment of, 102, 102t
in vestibular dysfunction, 99t, 100
Vestibular dysfunction
balance disorders in, 101, 114
clinical features of, 101
evaluation of, 100
vertigo in, 99t, 100
Vestibular-evoked myogenic potential test, 215
Vestibular nerve section, for Ménière’s disease, 210
Vestibular neuritis, 99t, 100
Vestibular nystagmus, 196
Vestibular rehabilitation therapy, 101–102
Vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma)
diagnosis of, 101, 214–215, 431–432, 431f
facial nerve involvement in, 396
hearing loss in, 101, 210, 213, 214
imaging in, 215, 431, 431f
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 7
Vestibuloocular reﬂex, 99
Vestibulospinal pathway, 105f
Vibration sense, 120t, 121
Vigabatrin, for stiff-person syndrome, 563
Vincristine, adverse effects of, 438, 438t
Violence, assessment of, 741
Visual acuity, 100, 175, 175f
Visual aura, 187
Visual blurring, in MS, 478
Visual cortex, 143f
Visual evoked potentials (VEPs), 29
Visual ﬁelds, assessment of, 177–179, 178f
Visual function, assessment of
color vision, 177
eye movements and alignment, 177
pupils, 175–177, 176f
refractive state, 175
stereopsis, 177
visual acuity, 175, 175f
visual ﬁelds, 177–179, 178f
Visual loss
chemotherapy-induced, 438t
chronic, 187–190
factitious, 187
in pituitary tumors, 449
transient or sudden, 182–187
Visual object agnosia, 152
Visual target cancellation test, 150
Visual vertigo, 101
Vitamin(s), reference ranges for, 788t
Vitamin A
deﬁciency of, 181
reference range for, 788t
for retinitis pigmentosa, 190
supplements, for olfactory dysfunction, 206
Vitamin B1. See Thiamine
Vitamin B2. See Riboﬂavin
Vitamin B6. See Pyridoxine
Vitamin B12. See Cobalamin
Vitamin C
for macular degeneration, 189
reference range for, 788t
Vitamin D
deﬁciency of, 645
reference range for, 788t
Vitamin E
deﬁciency of
ataxic disorders in, 368, 369
neuropathies in, 591–592
for macular degeneration, 189
reference range for, 788t
Vitamin K
reference range for, 788t
Vitreous degeneration, 186–187
Vitreous detachment, 186
Vitreous hemorrhage, 187
Vocal tic, 353
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, 182, 532t
von Hippel-Lindau disease
brain tumors in, 425t
clinical features of, 362t
genetic factors in, 362t
V sign, 649
Index
879
VTE. See Venous thromboembolism (VTE)
VZV infections. See Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) 
infections
Waardenburg syndrome, hearing loss in, 212, 212t
Wakefulness, 158
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, paraneoplastic 
syndromes in, 564
Walker-Warburg syndrome, 630, 631t
Wallenberg’s syndrome, 279, 280f
War veterans
concussion in, 744–745, 745t
neuropsychiatric illnesses in, 742
clinical features of, 742–743
epidemiology of, 742
evaluation of, 746, 746t, 747t
stigma and barriers to care, 745–746
treatment of, 747–749
postwar symptoms in, 742–743
PTSD in, 743–744, 748–749
sleep disturbance in, 749
Weakness, 103
approach to the patient, 107f, 618–620, 619f, 
620t, 802, 823–824
deﬁnition of, 103
distal, 109
facial, 394, 478
falls and, 115
generalized (quadriparesis), 108, 108t
hemiparesis, 106–107
lower motor neuron (neuropathic), 104,  
104t
monoparesis, 108–109
in MS, 477, 489
myopathic, 103, 104t, 105–106
paraparesis, 107–108
in peripheral neuropathy, 566–567
Weakness (Cont.):
proximal, 109
in restricted distribution, 109
upper motor neuron, 104, 104t
Weber’s syndrome, 193, 277f, 278
Weber test, 213
Wegener’s syndrome. See Granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
Welander’s distal myopathy, 633, 634t
Werdnig-Hoffmann disease, 226, 377
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 153
Wernicke’s aphasia, 144–145, 144t
Wernicke’s area, 142, 148, 149f
Wernicke’s disease/encephalopathy
clinical features of, 195, 302, 328
in critically ill patient, 302, 302f
pathology of, 302
treatment of, 303, 328
West Nile virus infections
encephalitis, 511t, 514
meningoencephalitis, 506
weakness in, 108
Westphal variant, Huntington’s disease, 350
Wet beriberi, 591
Whiplash injury, 85
Whipple’s disease
chronic meningitis in, 529t
ocular involvement in, 182, 195
White matter disease
diffuse, 322, 322f
periventricular, stroke due to, 268
Wilson disease
movement disorders in, 356
parkinsonism in, 336, 337t
prevalence of, 355
treatment of, 356
“Work hardening” regimes, 83
World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies scale, 
for subarachnoid hemorrhage, 306t
Writing, assessment of, 144
“Wrong-way” eyes, 137
Xanthoastrocytoma(s), pleomorphic, 429
Xenon techniques, in stroke, 286
X-linked disorders
color blindness, 177
mental retardation, 223
spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 374t, 377
Xylohypha infections, chronic meningitis in, 
530t
Yin Yang 1 gene, 224
Yoga, for migraine, 57
Yohimbine, for orthostatic hypotension, 95
Zalcitabine (ddC), adverse effects of, 589
Zaleplon, for insomnia, 164
Zidovudine (AZT), 645t, 646
Zinc
for macular degeneration, 189
supplements
adverse effects of, 204
for olfactory dysfunction, 206
Ziprasidone
adverse effects of, 739t
for schizophrenia, 739t, 740
Zolmitriptan
for cluster headache, 64
for migraine, 58t, 59, 59t
nasal spray, 58t, 59–60
Zolpidem, for insomnia, 163t, 164
Zonisamide, 249t
