3rd Edition
Endocrinology
HARRISON’S
TM
Editors
Dan L. Longo, md
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;
Senior Physician, Brigham and Women’s Hospital;
Deputy Editor, New England Journal of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts
Dennis L. Kasper, md
William Ellery Channing Professor of Medicine,
Professor of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
Harvard Medical School; Director, Channing Laboratory,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts
J. Larry Jameson, md, phd
Robert G. Dunlop Professor of Medicine;
Dean, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine;
Executive Vice-President of the University of Pennsylvania for the  
Health System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Anthony S. Fauci, md
Chief, Laboratory of Immunoregulation; Director,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
Stephen L. Hauser, md
Robert A. Fishman Distinguished Professor and Chairman,
Department of Neurology,
University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California
Joseph Loscalzo, md, phd
Hersey Professor of the Theory and Practice of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School;
Chairman, Department of Medicine; 
Physician-in-Chief, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts
Derived from Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th Edition
Editor
J. Larry Jameson, MD, PhD
Robert G. Dunlop Professor of Medicine;
Dean, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine;
Executive Vice-President of the University of Pennsylvania for the  
Health System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
New York    Chicago    San Francisco    Lisbon    London    Madrid    Mexico City
Milan    New Delhi    San Juan    Seoul    Singapore    Sydney    Toronto
3rd Edition
HARRISON’S
TM
Endocrinology
harrsion  © 2013 by McGraw-Hill Education, LLC. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States harrsion  Act of 1976, no part of this publication 
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-181487-4
MHID: 0-07-181487-6
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-181486-7,    
MHID: 0-07-181486-8.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial 
fashion only, and to the beneﬁ t of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been 
printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To contact 
a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
Dr. Fauci’s work as an editor and author was performed outside the scope of his employment as a U.S. government employee. This work represents his personal and 
professional views and not necessarily those of the U.S. government. 
This book was set in Bembo by Cenveo® Publisher Services. The editors were James F. Shanahan and Kim J. Davis. The production supervisor was Catherine H. Saggese.
Project management was provided by Sapna Rastogi of Cenveo® Publisher Services. The cover design was by Thomas DePierro. Cover illustration, side view of blue x-ray 
brain with enlarged highlighted view of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, faded brain in background, © Hank Grebe/Purestock/SuperStock/Corbis.
TERMS OF USE 
This is a harrsion ed work and McGraw-Hill Education, LLC. and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as 
permitted under the harrsion  Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s 
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be 
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION 
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill 
Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or 
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or 
for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances 
shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or 
inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever 
whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
  1	 Principles of Endocrinology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
J. Larry Jameson
section I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and  
Adrenal Disorders
  2	 Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and 
Hypothalamus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Shlomo Melmed, J. Larry Jameson
  3	 Disorders of the Neurohypophysis. . . . . . . . . . . 50
Gary L. Robertson
  4	 Disorders of the Thyroid Gland. . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
J. Larry Jameson, Anthony P. Weetman
  5	 Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex. . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Wiebke Arlt
  6	 Pheochromocytoma. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Hartmut P. H. Neumann
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
  7	 Disorders of Sex Development. . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
John C. Achermann, J. Larry Jameson
  8	 Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive 
System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Shalender Bhasin, J. Larry Jameson
  9	 Testicular Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Robert J. Motzer, George J. Bosl
10	 The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, 
and Contraception. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Janet E. Hall
11	 Menstrual Disorders and Pelvic Pain. . . . . . . . . 194
Janet E. Hall
12	 The Menopause Transition and 
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy. . . . . . . . . 200
JoAnn E. Manson, Shari S. Bassuk
13	 Hirsutism and Virilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
David A. Ehrmann
14	 Gynecologic Malignancies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
Michael V. Seiden
15	 Sexual Dysfunction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
Kevin T. McVary
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity,  
Lipoprotein Metabolism
16	 Biology of Obesity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
Jeffrey S. Flier, Eleftheria Maratos-Flier
17	 Evaluation and Management of Obesity. . . . . . 244
Robert F. Kushner
18	 The Metabolic Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
Robert H. Eckel
19	 Diabetes Mellitus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
Alvin C. Powers
20	 Hypoglycemia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
Philip E. Cryer, Stephen N. Davis
21	 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism. . . . . . . . 317
Daniel J. Rader, Helen H. Hobbs
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple  
Endocrine Systems
22	 Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal 
Tract and Pancreas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
Robert T. Jensen
23	 Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine 
Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363
Camilo Jimenez Vasquez, Robert F. Gagel
24	 Endocrine Paraneoplastic Syndromes. . . . . . . . 375
J. Larry Jameson
Contents
v
Contents
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and  
Calcium Metabolism
25	 Bone and Mineral Metabolism in 
Health and Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
F. Richard Bringhurst, Marie B. Demay,  
Stephen M. Krane, Henry M. Kronenberg
26	 Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia. . . . . . . . . . 402
Sundeep Khosla
27	 Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and 
Calcium Homeostasis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406
John T. Potts, Jr., Harald Jüppner
28	 Osteoporosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 439
Robert Lindsay, Felicia Cosman
29	 Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias 
of Bone. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 459
Murray J. Favus, Tamara J. Vokes
Appendix 
	
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance. . . . . . . . 471
Alexander Kratz, Michael A. Pesce,  
Robert C. Basner, Andrew J. Einstein
Review and Self-Assessment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 487
Charles Wiener, Cynthia D. Brown,  
Anna R. Hemnes
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 527
vi
vii
John C. Achermann, MD, PhD
Wellcome Trust Senior Fellow, UCL Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom [7]
Wiebke Arlt, MD, DSc, FRCP, FMedSci
Professor of Medicine, Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Birmingham; Consultant Endocrinologist,
University Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom [5]
Robert C. Basner, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and 
Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, New York, New York [Appendix]
Shari S. Bassuk, ScD
Epidemiologist, Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [12]
Shalender Bhasin, MD
Professor of Medicine; Section Chief, Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes, and Nutrition, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts [8]
George J. Bosl, MD
Professor of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College; Chair, 
Department of Medicine; Patrick M. Byrne Chair in Clinical 
Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York [9]
F. Richard Bringhurst, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Physician, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [25]
Cynthia D. Brown, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
[Review and Self-Assessment]
Felicia Cosman, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, New York [28]
Philip E. Cryer, MD
Irene E. and Michael M. Karl Professor of Endocrinology and  
Metabolism in Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine; 
Physician, Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri [20]
Stephen N. Davis, MBBS, FRCP
Theodore E. Woodward Professor and Chairman, 
Department of Medicine, University of Maryland
School of Medicine; Physician-in-Chief, University of Maryland 
Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland [20]
Marie B. Demay, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Physician,  
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [25]
Robert H. Eckel, MD
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,  
Metabolism, and Diabetes and Division of Cardiology;  
Professor of Physiology and Biophysics, Charles A. Boettcher,  
II Chair in Atherosclerosis, University of Colorado  
School of Medicine; Director, Lipid Clinic,  
University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, Colorado [18]
David A. Ehrmann, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois [13]
Andrew J. Einstein, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine, Columbia University College 
of Physicians and Surgeons; Department of Medicine, Division of 
Cardiology, Department of Radiology, Columbia University Medical 
Center and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York 
[Appendix]
Murray J. Favus, MD
Professor, Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes, and Metabolism; Director, Bone Program, University of 
Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [29]
Jeffrey S. Flier, MD
Caroline Shields Walker Professor of Medicine and Dean, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts [16]
Robert F. Gagel, MD
Professor of Medicine and Head, Division of Internal Medicine,  
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas [23]
Janet E. Hall, MD, MSc
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate Physician, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [10, 11]
Anna R. Hemnes, MD
Assistant Professor, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical 
Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee [Review and Self-Assessment]
Helen H. Hobbs, MD
Professor of Internal Medicine and Molecular Genetics, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas; Investigator, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland [21]
J. Larry Jameson, MD, PhD
Robert G. Dunlop Professor of Medicine; Dean, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Executive Vice President of the 
University of Pennsylvania for the Health System, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania [1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 24]
Robert T. Jensen, MD
Digestive Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes; 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland [22]
CONTRIBUTORS
Numbers in brackets refer to the chapter(s) written or co-written by the contributor.
Contributors
viii
Harald Jüppner, MD
Professor of Pediatrics, Endocrine Unit and Pediatric Nephrology 
Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [27]
Sundeep Khosla, MD
Professor of Medicine and Physiology, College of Medicine,  
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [26]
Stephen M. Krane, MD
Persis, Cyrus, and Marlow B. Harrison Distinguished Professor of 
Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [25]
Alexander Kratz, MD, PhD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pathology and Cell Biology, 
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons;  
Director, Core Laboratory, Columbia University Medical Center,  
New York, New York [Appendix]
Henry M. Kronenberg, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Chief, Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,  
Boston, Massachusetts [25]
Robert F. Kushner, MD, MS
Professor of Medicine, Northwestern University  
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [17]
Robert Lindsay, MD, PhD
Chief, Internal Medicine; Professor of Clinical Medicine,  
Helen Hayes Hospital, West Haverstraw, New York [28]
JoAnn E. Manson, MD, DrPH
Professor of Medicine and the Michael and Lee Bell  
Professor of Women’s Health, Harvard Medical School;  
Chief, Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [12]
Eleftheria Maratos-Flier, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts [16]
Kevin T. McVary, MD, FACS
Professor of Urology, Department of Urology,  
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,  
Chicago, Illinois [15]
Shlomo Melmed, MD
Senior Vice President and Dean of the Medical Faculty,  
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California [2]
Robert J. Motzer, MD
Professor of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College;  
Attending Physician, Genitourinary Oncology Service,  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York [9]
Hartmut P. H. Neumann, MD
Head, Section of Preventative Medicine, Department of Nephrol-
ogy and General Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, 
Germany [6]
Michael A. Pesce, PhD
Professor Emeritus of Pathology and Cell Biology,  
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons;  
Columbia University Medical Center, New York,  
New York [Appendix]
John T. Potts, Jr., MD
Director of Research, Massachusetts General Hospital,  
Boston, Massachusetts [27]
Alvin C. Powers, MD
Joe C. Davis Chair in Biomedical Science; Professor of Medicine, 
Molecular Physiology, and Biophysics; Director, Vanderbilt Diabetes 
Center; Chief, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee [19]
Daniel J. Rader, MD
Cooper-McClure Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [21]
Gary L. Robertson, MD
Senior Research Scientist and Staff Physician, Henry Ford Hospital, 
Detroit, Michigan [3]
Michael V. Seiden, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine; President and CEO,  
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [14]
Camilo Jimenez Vasquez, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal 
Disorders, Division of Internal Medicine, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas [23]
Tamara J. Vokes, MD, FACP
Professor, Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois [29]
Anthony P. Weetman, MD
University of Sheffield School of Medicine, Sheffield,  
United Kingdom [4]
Charles M. Wiener, MD
Dean/CEO Perdana University Graduate School of Medicine,  
Selangor, Malaysia; Professor of Medicine and Physiology,  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,  
Baltimore, Maryland [Review and Self-Assessment]
ix
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine has been a respected 
information source for more than 60 years. Over time, 
the traditional textbook has evolved to meet the needs of 
internists, family physicians, nurses, and other health care 
providers. The growing list of Harrison’s products now 
includes Harrison’s for the iPad, Harrison’s Manual of Medi-
cine, and Harrison’s Online. This book, Harrison’s Endocrinol-
ogy, now in its third edition, is a compilation of chapters 
related to the specialty of endocrinology.
Our readers consistently note the sophistication of the 
material in the specialty sections of Harrison’s. Our goal 
was to bring this information to readers in a more com-
pact and usable form. Because the topic is more focused, 
it was possible to increase the presentation of the mate-
rial by enlarging the text and the tables. We have also 
included a Review and Self-Assessment section that in-
cludes questions and answers to provoke reflection and 
to provide additional teaching points.
The clinical manifestations of endocrine disorders 
can usually be explained by considering the physiologic 
role of hormones, which are either deficient or exces-
sive. Thus, a thorough understanding of hormone action 
and principles of hormone feedback arms the clinician 
with a logical diagnostic approach and a conceptual 
framework for treatment approaches. The first chapter 
of the book, Principles of Endocrinology, provides this 
type of “systems” overview. Using numerous examples 
of translational research, this introduction links genet-
ics, cell biology, and physiology with pathophysiology 
and treatment. The integration of pathophysiology with 
clinical management is a hallmark of Harrison’s, and can 
be found throughout each of the subsequent disease-
oriented chapters. The book is divided into five main 
sections that reflect the physiologic roots of endocri-
nology: (I) Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders; 
(II) Reproductive Endocrinology; (III) Diabetes Mellitus, 
Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism; (IV) Disorders Affect-
ing Multiple Endocrine Systems; and (V) Disorders of 
Bone and Calcium Metabolism.
While Harrison’s Endocrinology is classic in its organiza-
tion, readers will sense the impact of the scientific re-
naissance as they explore the individual chapters in each 
section. In addition to the dramatic advances emanating 
from genetics and molecular biology, the introduction of 
an unprecedented number of new drugs, particularly for 
the management of diabetes and osteoporosis, is trans-
forming the field of endocrinology. Numerous recent 
clinical studies involving common diseases like diabetes, 
obesity, hypothyroidism, and osteoporosis provide pow-
erful evidence for medical decision making and treat-
ment. These rapid changes in endocrinology are exciting 
for new students of medicine and underscore the need 
for practicing physicians to continuously update their 
knowledge base and clinical skills.
Our access to information through web-based journals 
and databases is remarkably efficient. While these sources 
of information are invaluable, the daunting body of data 
creates an even greater need for synthesis and for high-
lighting important facts. Thus, the preparation of these 
chapters is a special craft that requires the ability to distill 
core information from the ever-expanding knowledge 
base. The editors are therefore indebted to our authors, 
a group of internationally recognized authorities who are 
masters at providing a comprehensive overview while 
being able to distill a topic into a concise and interesting 
chapter. We are indebted to our colleagues at McGraw-
Hill. Jim Shanahan is a champion for Harrison’s, and these 
books were impeccably produced by Kim Davis.
We hope you find this book useful in your effort to 
achieve continuous learning on behalf of your patients.
J. Larry Jameson, MD, PhD
PREFACE
NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experi-
ence broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are 
required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with 
sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is 
complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of 
publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes 
in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other 
party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work 
warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate 
or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions 
or for the results obtained from use of the information contained in this 
work. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained herein 
with other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised to 
check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug 
they plan to administer to be certain that the information contained in this 
work is accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended 
dose or in the contraindications for administration. This recommendation is 
of particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
The global icons call greater attention to key epidemiologic and clinical differences in the practice of medicine 
throughout the world.
The genetic icons identify a clinical issue with an explicit genetic relationship.
Review and self-assessment questions and answers were taken from Wiener CM, 
Brown CD, Hemnes AR (eds). Harrison’s Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2012, ISBN 978-0-07-177195-5.
 PRINCIPLES OF ENDOCRINOLOGY 
 cHapter 1 
 J. Larry Jameson 
1
 The management of endocrine disorders requires a 
broad understanding of intermediary metabolism, repro-
ductive physiology, bone metabolism, and growth. 
Accordingly, the practice of endocrinology is intimately 
linked to a conceptual framework for understanding 
hormone secretion, hormone action, and principles of 
feedback control. The endocrine system is evaluated 
primarily by measuring hormone concentrations, arm-
ing the clinician with valuable diagnostic information. 
Most disorders of the endocrine system are amenable to 
effective treatment once the correct diagnosis is deter-
mined. Endocrine defi ciency disorders are treated with 
physiologic hormone replacement; hormone excess 
conditions, which usually are due to benign glandular 
adenomas, are managed by removing tumors surgically 
or reducing hormone levels medically. 
 scope of eNdocriNology 
 The specialty of endocrinology encompasses the study of 
glands and the hormones they produce. The term  endocrine
was coined by Starling to contrast the actions of hormones 
secreted internally ( endocrine ) with those secreted externally 
( exocrine ) or into a lumen, such as the gastrointestinal tract. 
The term  hormone , derived from a Greek phrase meaning 
“to set in motion,” aptly describes the dynamic actions 
of hormones as they elicit cellular responses and regulate 
physiologic processes through feedback mechanisms. 
 Unlike many other specialties in medicine, it is not 
possible to defi ne endocrinology strictly along anatomic 
lines. The classic endocrine glands—pituitary, thyroid, 
parathyroid, pancreatic islets, adrenals, and gonads—
communicate broadly with other organs through the 
nervous system, hormones, cytokines, and growth fac-
tors. In addition to its traditional synaptic functions, 
the brain produces a vast array of peptide hormones, 
and this has led to the discipline of neuroendocrinol-
ogy. Through the production of hypothalamic releasing 
factors, the central nervous system (CNS) exerts a major 
regulatory infl uence over pituitary hormone secretion
( Chap. 2 ). The peripheral nervous system stimulates
the adrenal medulla. The immune and endocrine systems 
are also intimately intertwined. The adrenal hormone 
cortisol is a powerful immunosuppressant. Cytokines and 
interleukins (ILs) have profound effects on the functions 
of the pituitary, adrenal, thyroid, and gonads. Common 
endocrine diseases such as autoimmune thyroid disease 
and Type 1 diabetes mellitus are caused by dysregulation 
of immune surveillance and tolerance. Less common 
diseases such as polyglandular failure, Addison’s disease, 
and lymphocytic hypophysitis also have an immunologic 
basis. 
 The interdigitation of endocrinology with physi-
ologic processes in other specialties sometimes blurs 
the role of hormones. For example, hormones play 
an important role in maintenance of blood pressure, 
intravascular volume, and peripheral resistance in the 
cardiovascular system. Vasoactive substances such as cat-
echolamines, angiotensin II, endothelin, and nitric oxide 
are involved in dynamic changes of vascular tone in 
addition to their multiple roles in other tissues. The 
heart is the principal source of atrial natriuretic peptide,
which acts in classic endocrine fashion to induce natri-
uresis at a distant target organ (the kidney). Erythropoi-
etin, a traditional circulating hormone, is made in the 
kidney and stimulates erythropoiesis in bone marrow .
The kidney is also integrally involved in the renin-
angiotensin axis ( Chap. 5 ) and is a primary target of sev-
eral hormones, including parathyroid hormone (PTH), 
mineralocorticoids, and vasopressin. The gastrointesti-
nal tract produces a surprising number of peptide hor-
mones, such as cholecystokinin, ghrelin, gastrin, secretin, 
and vasoactive intestinal peptide, among many others.
Adipose tissue produces leptin, which acts centrally to
control appetite. Carcinoid and islet tumors can secrete 
excessive amounts of these hormones, leading to specifi c
clinical syndromes ( Chap. 22 ). Many of these gastrointestinal 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
2
hormones are also produced in the CNS, where their 
functions are poorly understood. As hormones such as 
inhibin, ghrelin, and leptin are discovered, they become 
integrated into the science and practice of medicine on 
the basis of their functional roles rather than their tissues 
of origin.
Characterization of hormone receptors frequently 
reveals unexpected relationships to factors in nonen-
docrine disciplines. The growth hormone (GH) and 
leptin receptors, for example, are members of the cyto-
kine receptor family. The G protein–coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), which mediate the actions of many peptide 
hormones, are used in numerous physiologic processes, 
including vision, smell, and neurotransmission.
Nature of Hormones
Hormones can be divided into five major classes: 
(1) amino acid derivatives such as dopamine, catechol-
amine, and thyroid hormone; (2) small neuropeptides 
such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), somatostatin, and 
vasopressin; (3) large proteins such as insulin, luteinizing 
hormone (LH), and PTH produced by classic endocrine 
glands; (4) steroid hormones such as cortisol and estrogen 
that are synthesized from cholesterol-based precursors; 
and (5) vitamin derivatives such as retinoids (vitamin A) 
and vitamin D. A variety of peptide growth factors, most of 
which act locally, share actions with hormones. As a rule, 
amino acid derivatives and peptide hormones interact 
with cell-surface membrane receptors. Steroids, thyroid 
hormones, vitamin D, and retinoids are lipid soluble and 
interact with intracellular nuclear receptors.
Hormone and Receptor Families
Many hormones and receptors can be grouped into fami-
lies, reflecting their structural similarities (Table 1-1). 
The evolution of these families generates diverse but 
highly selective pathways of hormone action. Recogni-
tion of these relationships allows extrapolation of infor-
mation gleaned from one hormone or receptor to other 
family members.
The glycoprotein hormone family, consisting of 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH), LH, and human chorionic gonado-
tropin (hCG), illustrates many features of related hor-
mones. The glycoprotein hormones are heterodimers 
that have the α subunit in common; the β subunits are 
distinct and confer specific biologic actions. The overall 
three-dimensional architecture of the β subunits is simi-
lar, reflecting the locations of conserved disulfide bonds 
that restrain protein conformation. The cloning of the 
β-subunit genes from multiple species suggests that 
Table 1-1
Membrane Receptor Families and Signaling 
Pathways
Receptors
Effectors
Signaling 
Pathways
G Protein–Coupled Seven-Transmembrane (GPCR)
b-Adrenergic LH, 
FSH, TSH
Gsa, adenylate 
cyclase
Stimulation of 
cyclic AMP pro-
duction, protein 
kinase A
Glucagon PTH, 
PTHrP ACTH, 
MSH GHRH, CRH
Ca2+ channels
Calmodulin, 
Ca2+-dependent 
kinases
a-Adrenergic 
Somatostatin
Giα
Inhibition of cyclic 
AMP production
Activation of K+, 
Ca2+ channels
TRH, GnRH
Gq, G11
Phospholipase C, 
diacylglycerol, IP3, 
protein kinase C, 
voltage-dependent 
Ca2+ channels
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
Insulin, IGF-I
Tyrosine  
kinases, IRS
MAP kinases, PI 
3-kinase; AKT, 
also known as 
protein kinase B, 
PKB
EGF, NGF
Tyrosine  
kinases, ras
Raf, MAP kinases, 
RSK
Cytokine Receptor–Linked Kinase
GH, PRL
JAK, tyrosine 
kinases
STAT, MAP kinase, 
PI 3-kinase, 
IRS-1
Serine Kinase
Activin, TGF-b, MIS
Serine kinase
Smads
Abbreviations: IP3, inositol triphosphate; IRS, insulin receptor sub-
strates; MAP, mitogen-activated protein; MSH, melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone; NGF, nerve growth factor; PI, phosphatidylinositol; RSK, 
ribosomal S6 kinase; TGF-b, transforming growth factor b. For all other 
abbreviations, see text.
this family arose from a common ancestral gene, prob-
ably by gene duplication and subsequent divergence to 
evolve new biologic functions.
As the hormone families enlarge and diverge, their 
receptors must co-evolve if new biologic functions 
are to be derived. Related GPCRs, for example, have 
evolved for each of the glycoprotein hormones. These 
receptors are structurally similar, and each is coupled to 
the Gsα signaling pathway. However, there is minimal 
overlap of hormone binding. For example, TSH binds 
with high specificity to the TSH receptor but interacts 
minimally with the LH or the FSH receptor. None-
theless, there can be subtle physiologic consequences 
 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
3
of hormone cross-reactivity with other receptors. Very 
high levels of hCG during pregnancy stimulate the TSH 
receptor and increase thyroid hormone levels, resulting 
in a compensatory decrease in TSH.
Insulin and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and 
IGF-II have structural similarities that are most appar-
ent when precursor forms of the proteins are compared. 
In contrast to the high degree of specificity seen with 
the glycoprotein hormones, there is moderate cross-talk 
among the members of the insulin/IGF family. High 
concentrations of an IGF-II precursor produced by cer-
tain tumors (e.g., sarcomas) can cause hypoglycemia, 
partly because of binding to insulin and IGF-I receptors 
(Chap. 24). High concentrations of insulin also bind to 
the IGF-I receptor, perhaps accounting for some of the 
clinical manifestations seen in severe insulin resistance.
Another important example of receptor cross-talk is 
seen with PTH and parathyroid hormone–related pep-
tide (PTHrP) (Chap. 27). PTH is produced by the 
parathyroid glands, whereas PTHrP is expressed at high 
levels during development and by a variety of tumors 
(Chap. 24). These hormones have amino acid sequence 
similarity, particularly in their amino-terminal regions. 
Both hormones bind to a single PTH receptor that is 
expressed in bone and kidney. Hypercalcemia and hypo-
phosphatemia therefore may result from excessive produc-
tion of either hormone, making it difficult to distinguish 
hyperparathyroidism from hypercalcemia of malignancy 
solely on the basis of serum chemistries. However, sensi-
tive and specific assays for PTH and PTHrP now allow 
these disorders to be distinguished more readily.
Based on their specificities for DNA binding sites, 
the nuclear receptor family can be subdivided into type 
1 receptors (GR, MR, AR, ER, PR) that bind ste-
roids and type 2 receptors (TR, VDR, RAR, PPAR) 
that bind thyroid hormone, vitamin D, retinoic acid, 
or lipid derivatives. Certain functional domains in 
nuclear receptors, such as the zinc finger DNA-binding 
domains, are highly conserved. However, selective amino 
acid differences within this domain confer DNA 
sequence specificity. The hormone-binding domains 
are more variable, providing great diversity in the array 
of small molecules that bind to different nuclear recep-
tors. With few exceptions, hormone binding is highly 
specific for a single type of nuclear receptor. One 
exception involves the glucocorticoid and mineralocor-
ticoid receptors. Because the mineralocorticoid recep-
tor also binds glucocorticoids with high affinity, an 
enzyme (11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase) in renal 
tubular cells inactivates glucocorticoids, allowing selec-
tive responses to mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone. 
However, when very high glucocorticoid concentra-
tions occur, as in Cushing’s syndrome, the glucocorti-
coid degradation pathway becomes saturated, allowing 
excessive cortisol levels to exert mineralocorticoid 
effects (sodium retention, potassium wasting). This 
phenomenon is particularly pronounced in ectopic 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) syndromes 
(Chap. 5). Another example of relaxed nuclear recep-
tor specificity involves the estrogen receptor, which can 
bind an array of compounds, some of which have little 
apparent structural similarity to the high-affinity ligand 
estradiol. This feature of the estrogen receptor makes 
it susceptible to activation by “environmental estro-
gens” such as resveratrol, octylphenol, and many other 
aromatic hydrocarbons. However, this lack of specific-
ity provides an opportunity to synthesize a remarkable 
series of clinically useful antagonists (e.g., tamoxifen) 
and selective estrogen response modulators (SERMs) 
such as raloxifene. These compounds generate distinct 
conformations that alter receptor interactions with com-
ponents of the transcription machinery (see below), 
thereby conferring their unique actions.
Hormone Synthesis and Processing
The synthesis of peptide hormones and their receptors 
occurs through a classic pathway of gene expression: 
transcription → mRNA → protein → posttranslational 
protein processing → intracellular sorting, followed by 
membrane integration or secretion.
Many hormones are embedded within larger precur-
sor polypeptides that are proteolytically processed to yield 
the biologically active hormone. Examples include pro­
opiomelanocortin (POMC) → ACTH; proglucagon → 
glucagon; proinsulin → insulin; and pro-PTH → PTH, 
among others. In many cases, such as POMC and pro-
glucagon, these precursors generate multiple biologically 
active peptides. It is provocative that hormone precursors 
are typically inactive, presumably adding an additional 
level of regulatory control. Prohormone conversion 
occurs not only for peptide hormones but also for certain 
steroids (testosterone → dihydrotestosterone) and thyroid 
hormone (T4 → T3).
Hormone precursor processing is intimately linked 
to intracellular sorting pathways that transport proteins 
to appropriate vesicles and enzymes, resulting in specific 
cleavage steps, followed by protein folding and trans-
location to secretory vesicles. Hormones destined for 
secretion are translocated across the endoplasmic retic-
ulum under the guidance of an amino-terminal signal 
sequence that subsequently is cleaved. Cell-surface recep-
tors are inserted into the membrane via short segments 
of hydrophobic amino acids that remain embedded 
within the lipid bilayer. During translocation through 
the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum, hormones and 
receptors are also subject to a variety of posttranslational 
modifications, such as glycosylation and phosphoryla-
tion, which can alter protein conformation, modify cir-
culating half-life, and alter biologic activity.
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
4
Synthesis of most steroid hormones is based on mod-
ifications of the precursor, cholesterol. Multiple regu-
lated enzymatic steps are required for the synthesis of 
testosterone (Chap. 8), estradiol (Chap. 10), cortisol 
(Chap. 5), and vitamin D (Chap. 25). This large num-
ber of synthetic steps predisposes to multiple genetic 
and acquired disorders of steroidogenesis.
Although endocrine genes contain regulatory DNA 
elements similar to those found in many other genes, 
their exquisite control by other hormones also neces-
sitates the presence of specific hormone response ele-
ments. For example, the TSH genes are repressed 
directly by thyroid hormones acting through the thy-
roid hormone receptor (TR), a member of the nuclear 
receptor family. Steroidogenic enzyme gene expression 
requires specific transcription factors, such as steroido-
genic factor-1 (SF-1), acting in conjunction with signals 
transmitted by trophic hormones (e.g., ACTH or LH). 
For some hormones, substantial regulation occurs at 
the level of translational efficiency. Insulin biosynthesis, 
although it requires ongoing gene transcription, is regu-
lated primarily at the translational level in response to 
elevated levels of glucose or amino acids.
Hormone Secretion, Transport, and 
Degradation
The circulating level of a hormone is determined by its 
rate of secretion and its circulating half-life. After protein 
processing, peptide hormones (GnRH, insulin, GH) are 
stored in secretory granules. As these granules mature, they 
are poised beneath the plasma membrane for imminent 
release into the circulation. In most instances, the stimulus 
for hormone secretion is a releasing factor or neural sig-
nal that induces rapid changes in intracellular calcium con-
centrations, leading to secretory granule fusion with the 
plasma membrane and release of its contents into the extra-
cellular environment and bloodstream. Steroid hormones, 
in contrast, diffuse into the circulation as they are synthe-
sized. Thus, their secretory rates are closely aligned with 
rates of synthesis. For example, ACTH and LH induce 
steroidogenesis by stimulating the activity of steroidogenic 
acute regulatory (StAR) protein (transports cholesterol into 
the mitochondrion) along with other rate-limiting steps 
(e.g., cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme, CYP11A1) 
in the steroidogenic pathway.
Hormone transport and degradation dictate the 
rapidity with which a hormonal signal decays. Some 
hormonal signals are evanescent (e.g., somatostatin), 
whereas others are longer-lived (e.g., TSH). Because 
somatostatin exerts effects in virtually every tissue, a 
short half-life allows its concentrations and actions to be 
controlled locally. Structural modifications that impair 
somatostatin degradation have been useful for generat-
ing long-acting therapeutic analogues such as octreo-
tide (Chap. 2). In contrast, the actions of TSH are 
highly specific for the thyroid gland. Its prolonged half-
life accounts for relatively constant serum levels even 
though TSH is secreted in discrete pulses.
An understanding of circulating hormone half-life is 
important for achieving physiologic hormone replace-
ment, as the frequency of dosing and the time required 
to reach steady state are intimately linked to rates of 
hormone decay. T4, for example, has a circulating half-
life of 7 days. Consequently, >1 month is required 
to reach a new steady state, and single daily doses are 
sufficient to achieve constant hormone levels. T3, in 
contrast, has a half-life of 1 day. Its administration is 
associated with more dynamic serum levels, and it must 
be administered two to three times per day. Similarly, 
synthetic glucocorticoids vary widely in their half-lives; 
those with longer half-lives (e.g., dexamethasone) are 
associated with greater suppression of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Most protein hormones 
[e.g., ACTH, GH, prolactin (PRL), PTH, LH] have 
relatively short half-lives (<20 min), leading to sharp 
peaks of secretion and decay. The only accurate way to 
profile the pulse frequency and amplitude of these hor-
mones is to measure levels in frequently sampled blood 
(every 10 min or less) over long durations (8–24 h). 
Because this is not practical in a clinical setting, an alter-
native strategy is to pool three to four samples drawn 
at about 30-min intervals or interpret the results in the 
context of a relatively wide normal range. Rapid hor-
mone decay is useful in certain clinical settings. For 
example, the short half-life of PTH allows the use of 
intraoperative PTH determinations to confirm success-
ful removal of an adenoma. This is particularly valuable 
diagnostically when there is a possibility of multicentric 
disease or parathyroid hyperplasia, as occurs with mul-
tiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) or renal insufficiency.
Many hormones circulate in association with serum-
binding proteins. Examples include (1) T4 and T3 bind-
ing to thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), albumin, 
and thyroxine-binding prealbumin (TBPA); (2) cortisol 
binding to cortisol-binding globulin (CBG); (3) andro-
gen and estrogen binding to sex hormone–binding 
globulin (SHBG) [also called testosterone-binding glob­
ulin (TeBG)]; (4) IGF-I and -II binding to multiple 
IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs); (5) GH interactions 
with GH-binding protein (GHBP), a circulating frag-
ment of the GH receptor extracellular domain; and 
(6) activin binding to follistatin. These interactions 
provide a hormonal reservoir, prevent otherwise rapid 
degradation of unbound hormones, restrict hormone 
access to certain sites (e.g., IGFBPs), and modulate the 
unbound, or “free,” hormone concentrations. Although 
a variety of binding protein abnormalities have been 
identified, most have few clinical consequences aside 
from creating diagnostic problems. For example, TBG 
deficiency can reduce total thyroid hormone levels 
greatly, but the free concentrations of T4 and T3 remain 
 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
5
normal. Liver disease and certain medications can also 
influence binding protein levels (e.g., estrogen increases 
TBG) or cause displacement of hormones from bind-
ing proteins (e.g., salsalate displaces T4 from TBG). In 
general, only unbound hormone is available to inter-
act with receptors and thus elicit a biologic response. 
Short-term perturbations in binding proteins change 
the free hormone concentration, which in turn induces 
compensatory adaptations through feedback loops. 
SHBG changes in women are an exception to this self-
correcting mechanism. When SHBG decreases because 
of insulin resistance or androgen excess, the unbound 
testosterone concentration is increased, potentially lead-
ing to hirsutism (Chap. 13). The increased unbound 
testosterone level does not result in an adequate com-
pensatory feedback correction because estrogen, not testos-
terone, is the primary regulator of the reproductive axis.
An additional exception to the unbound hormone 
hypothesis involves megalin, a member of the low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor family that serves as an 
endocytotic receptor for carrier-bound vitamins A and 
D and SHBG-bound androgens and estrogens. After 
internalization, the carrier proteins are degraded in lyso-
somes and release their bound ligands within the cells. 
Membrane transporters have also been identified for 
thyroid hormones.
Hormone degradation can be an important mecha-
nism for regulating concentrations locally. As noted 
above, 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inactivates 
glucocorticoids in renal tubular cells, preventing actions 
through the mineralocorticoid receptor. Thyroid hor-
mone deiodinases convert T4 to T3 and can inactivate 
T3. During development, degradation of retinoic acid 
by Cyp26b1 prevents primordial germ cells in the male 
from entering meiosis, as occurs in the female ovary.
Activin/MIS/BMP
TGF-β Serine kinase
Growth factor
Tyrosine kinase
Membrane
Nucleus
Target gene
Cytokine/GH/PRL
Insulin/IGF-I
Tyrosine kinase
G protein–coupled
Seven transmembrane
G protein
PKA, PKC
Ras/Raf
MAPK
JAK/STAT
Smads
Figure 1-1
Membrane receptor signaling. MAPK, 
mitogen-activated protein kinase; PKA, -C, 
protein kinase A, C; TGF, transforming 
growth factor. For other abbreviations, 
see text.
Hormone Action through 
Receptors
Receptors for hormones are divided into two major 
classes: membrane and nuclear. Membrane receptors primar-
ily bind peptide hormones and catecholamines. Nuclear 
receptors bind small molecules that can diffuse across the 
cell membrane, such as steroids and vitamin D. Certain 
general principles apply to hormone-receptor interac-
tions regardless of the class of receptor. Hormones bind 
to receptors with specificity and an affinity that generally 
coincides with the dynamic range of circulating hormone 
concentrations. Low concentrations of free hormone 
(usually 10−12 to 10−9 M) rapidly associate and dissoci-
ate from receptors in a bimolecular reaction such that 
the occupancy of the receptor at any given moment is 
a function of hormone concentration and the receptor’s 
affinity for the hormone. Receptor numbers vary greatly 
in different target tissues, providing one of the major 
determinants of specific cellular responses to circulating 
hormones. For example, ACTH receptors are located 
almost exclusively in the adrenal cortex, and FSH recep-
tors are found predominantly in the gonads. In contrast, 
insulin and TRs are widely distributed, reflecting the 
need for metabolic responses in all tissues.
Membrane Receptors
Membrane receptors for hormones can be divided into 
several major groups: (1) seven transmembrane GPCRs, 
(2) tyrosine kinase receptors, (3) cytokine receptors, 
and (4) serine kinase receptors (Fig. 1-1). The seven 
transmembrane GPCR family binds a remarkable array of 
hormones, including large proteins (e.g., LH, PTH), 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
6
small peptides (e.g., TRH, somatostatin), catechol-
amines (epinephrine, dopamine), and even minerals 
(e.g., calcium). The extracellular domains of GPCRs 
vary widely in size and are the major binding sites for 
large hormones. The transmembrane-spanning regions 
are composed of hydrophobic α-helical domains that 
traverse the lipid bilayer. Like some channels, these 
domains are thought to circularize and form a hydro-
phobic pocket into which certain small ligands fit. Hor-
mone binding induces conformational changes in these 
domains, transducing structural changes to the intracel-
lular domain, which is a docking site for G proteins.
The large family of G proteins, so named because 
they bind guanine nucleotides [guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP), guanosine diphosphate (GDP)], provides great 
diversity for coupling receptors to different signaling 
pathways. G proteins form a heterotrimeric complex 
that is composed of various α and βγ subunits. The α 
subunit contains the guanine nucleotide–binding site 
and hydrolyzes GTP → GDP. The βγ subunits are 
tightly associated and modulate the activity of the α 
subunit as well as mediating their own effector signal-
ing pathways. G protein activity is regulated by a cycle 
that involves GTP hydrolysis and dynamic interactions 
between the α and αβ subunits. Hormone binding to 
the receptor induces GDP dissociation, allowing Gα to 
bind GTP and dissociate from the αβ complex. Under 
these conditions, the Gα subunit is activated and medi-
ates signal transduction through various enzymes, such 
as adenylate cyclase and phospholipase C. GTP hydro-
lysis to GDP allows reassociation with the αβ subunits 
and restores the inactive state. As described below, a 
variety of endocrinopathies result from G protein muta-
tions or from mutations in receptors that modify their 
interactions with G proteins. G proteins interact with 
other cellular proteins, including kinases, channels, G 
protein–coupled receptor kinases (GRKs), and arrestins, 
that mediate signaling as well as receptor desensitization 
and recycling.
The tyrosine kinase receptors transduce signals for insulin 
and a variety of growth factors, such as IGF-I, epider-
mal growth factor (EGF), nerve growth factor, platelet-
derived growth factor, and fibroblast growth factor. The 
cysteine-rich extracellular ligand-binding domains con-
tain growth factor binding sites. After ligand binding, 
this class of receptors undergoes autophosphorylation, 
inducing interactions with intracellular adaptor proteins 
such as Shc and insulin receptor substrates. In the case 
of the insulin receptor, multiple kinases are activated, 
including the Raf-Ras-MAPK and the Akt/protein 
kinase B pathways. The tyrosine kinase receptors play a 
prominent role in cell growth and differentiation as well 
as in intermediary metabolism.
The GH and PRL receptors belong to the cytokine 
receptor family. Analogous to the tyrosine kinase recep-
tors, ligand binding induces receptor interaction with 
intracellular kinases—the Janus kinases (JAKs), which 
phosphorylate members of the signal transduction and 
activators of transcription (STAT) family—as well as 
with other signaling pathways (Ras, PI3-K, MAPK). 
The activated STAT proteins translocate to the nucleus 
and stimulate expression of target genes.
The serine kinase receptors mediate the actions of activ-
ins, transforming growth factor β, müllerian-inhibiting 
substance (MIS, also known as anti-müllerian hormone, 
AMH), and bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs). This 
family of receptors (consisting of type I and II subunits) 
signals through proteins termed smads (fusion of terms 
for Caenorhabditis elegans sma + mammalian mad). Like 
the STAT proteins, the smads serve a dual role of trans-
ducing the receptor signal and acting as transcription 
factors. The pleomorphic actions of these growth factors 
dictate that they act primarily in a local (paracrine or 
autocrine) manner. Binding proteins such as follistatin 
(which binds activin and other members of this fam-
ily) function to inactivate the growth factors and restrict 
their distribution.
Nuclear Receptors
The family of nuclear receptors has grown to nearly 
100 members, many of which are still classified as orphan 
receptors because their ligands, if they exist, have not 
been identified (Fig. 1-2). Otherwise, most nuclear 
receptors are classified on the basis of the nature of their 
ligands. Though all nuclear receptors ultimately act to 
increase or decrease gene transcription, some (e.g., glu-
cocorticoid receptor) reside primarily in the cytoplasm, 
whereas others (e.g., thyroid hormone receptor) are 
always located in the nucleus. After ligand binding, the 
cytoplasmically localized receptors translocate to the nu-
cleus. There is growing evidence that certain nuclear 
receptors (e.g., glucocorticoid, estrogen) can also act at 
the membrane or in the cytoplasm to activate or repress 
signal transduction pathways, providing a mechanism for 
cross-talk between membrane and nuclear receptors.
The structures of nuclear receptors have been studied 
extensively, including by x-ray crystallography. The DNA 
binding domain, consisting of two zinc fingers, contacts 
specific DNA recognition sequences in target genes. Most 
nuclear receptors bind to DNA as dimers. Consequently, 
each monomer recognizes an individual DNA motif, 
referred to as a “half-site.” The steroid receptors, including 
the glucocorticoid, estrogen, progesterone, and androgen 
receptors, bind to DNA as homodimers. Consistent with 
this twofold symmetry, their DNA recognition half-sites 
are palindromic. The thyroid, retinoid, peroxisome pro-
liferator activated, and vitamin D receptors bind to DNA 
preferentially as heterodimers in combination with retinoid 
X receptors (RXRs). Their DNA half-sites are arranged as 
direct repeats.
 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
7
The carboxy-terminal hormone-binding domain 
mediates transcriptional control. For type II recep-
tors such as thyroid hormone receptor (TR) and reti-
noic acid receptor (RAR), co-repressor proteins bind 
to the receptor in the absence of ligand and silence 
gene transcription. Hormone binding induces con-
formational changes, triggering the release of co-
repressors and inducing the recruitment of coactiva-
tors that stimulate transcription. Thus, these receptors 
are capable of mediating dramatic changes in the 
level of gene activity. Certain disease states are asso-
ciated with defective regulation of these events. For 
example, mutations in the TR prevent co-repressor 
dissociation, resulting in a dominant form of hor-
mone resistance (Chap. 4). In promyelocytic leu-
kemia, fusion of RARα to other nuclear proteins 
causes aberrant gene silencing and prevents normal 
cellular differentiation. Treatment with retinoic acid 
reverses this repression and allows cellular differen-
tiation and apoptosis to occur. Most type 1 steroid 
receptors interact weakly with co-repressors, but 
ligand binding still induces interactions with an array 
of coactivators. X-ray crystallography shows that var-
ious SERMs induce distinct estrogen receptor con-
formations. The tissue-specific responses caused by 
these agents in breast, bone, and uterus appear to 
reflect distinct interactions with coactivators. The 
receptor-coactivator complex stimulates gene tran-
scription by several pathways, including (1) recruit-
ment of enzymes (histone acetyl transferases) that 
modify chromatin structure, (2) interactions with 
additional transcription factors on the target gene, 
and (3) direct interactions with components of the 
general transcription apparatus to enhance the rate of 
RNA polymerase II–mediated transcription. Studies 
of nuclear receptor–mediated transcription show that 
these are dynamic events that involve relatively rapid 
(e.g., 30–60 min) cycling of transcription complexes 
on any specific target gene.
Functions of Hormones
The functions of individual hormones are described in 
detail in subsequent chapters. Nevertheless, it is useful 
to illustrate how most biologic responses require inte-
gration of several different hormone pathways. The 
physiologic functions of hormones can be divided into 
three general areas: (1) growth and differentiation, 
(2) maintenance of homeostasis, and (3) reproduction.
Growth
Multiple hormones and nutritional factors mediate the 
complex phenomenon of growth (Chap. 2). Short 
stature may be caused by GH deficiency, hypothyroid-
ism, Cushing’s syndrome, precocious puberty, mal-
nutrition, chronic illness, or genetic abnormalities that 
affect the epiphyseal growth plates (e.g., FGFR3 and 
SHOX mutations). Many factors (GH, IGF-I, thyroid 
hormones) stimulate growth, whereas others (sex ste-
roids) lead to epiphyseal closure. Understanding these 
hormonal interactions is important in the diagnosis and 
management of growth disorders. For example, delay-
ing exposure to high levels of sex steroids may enhance 
the efficacy of GH treatment.
Maintenance of Homeostasis
Though virtually all hormones affect homeostasis, the 
most important among them are the following:
1.	 Thyroid hormone—controls about 25% of basal 
metabolism in most tissues
Ligands
DNA response
elements
Hormone
Gene Expression
+
–
+
–
+
–
Basal
Hormone
Receptor
Homodimer Steroid
Receptors
ER, AR, PR, GR
Ligand induces
coactivator binding
Ligand dissociates corepressors
and induces coactivator binding
Constitutive activator
or repressor binding
Heterodimer Receptors
TR, VDR, RAR, PPAR
Orphan Receptors
SF-1, DAX-1, HNF4α
Activated
Activated
Silenced
Activated
Figure 1-2
Nuclear 
receptor 
signaling. 
ER, 
estrogen receptor; AR, androgen recep-
tor; PR, progesterone receptor; GR, 
glucocorticoid receptor; TR, thyroid 
hormone receptor; VDR, vitamin D 
receptor; RAR, retinoic acid receptor; 
PPAR, peroxisome proliferator acti-
vated receptor; SF-1, steroidogenic 
factor-1; DAX, dosage-sensitive sex-
reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congen-
ita, X-chromosome; HNF4α, hepatic 
nuclear factor 4α.
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
8
2.	 Cortisol—exerts a permissive action for many hor-
mones in addition to its own direct effects
3.	 PTH—regulates calcium and phosphorus levels
4.	 Vasopressin—regulates serum osmolality by control-
ling renal free-water clearance
5.	 Mineralocorticoids—control vascular volume and 
serum electrolyte (Na+, K+) concentrations
6.	 Insulin—maintains euglycemia in the fed and fasted 
states
The defense against hypoglycemia is an impressive 
example of integrated hormone action (Chap. 20). In 
response to the fasted state and falling blood glucose, 
insulin secretion is suppressed, resulting in decreased 
glucose uptake and enhanced glycogenolysis, lipoly-
sis, proteolysis, and gluconeogenesis to mobilize fuel 
sources. If hypoglycemia develops (usually from insulin 
administration or sulfonylureas), an orchestrated coun-
terregulatory response occurs—glucagon and epineph-
rine rapidly stimulate glycogenolysis and gluconeogen-
esis, whereas GH and cortisol act over several hours to 
raise glucose levels and antagonize insulin action.
Although free-water clearance is controlled primar-
ily by vasopressin, cortisol and thyroid hormone are 
also important for facilitating renal tubular responses 
to vasopressin (Chap. 3). PTH and vitamin D func-
tion in an interdependent manner to control calcium 
metabolism (Chap. 25). PTH stimulates renal synthe­
sis of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, which increases calcium 
absorption in the gastrointestinal tract and enhances 
PTH action in bone. Increased calcium, along with 
vitamin D, feeds back to suppress PTH, thus maintain-
ing calcium balance.
Depending on the severity of a specific stress and 
whether it is acute or chronic, multiple endocrine and 
cytokine pathways are activated to mount an appro-
priate physiologic response. In severe acute stress such 
as trauma or shock, the sympathetic nervous system is 
activated and catecholamines are released, leading to 
increased cardiac output and a primed musculoskeletal 
system. Catecholamines also increase mean blood pres-
sure and stimulate glucose production. Multiple stress-
induced pathways converge on the hypothalamus, 
stimulating several hormones, including vasopressin and 
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH). These hor-
mones, in addition to cytokines (tumor necrosis factor α, 
IL-2, IL-6), increase ACTH and GH production. 
ACTH stimulates the adrenal gland, increasing cortisol, 
which in turn helps sustain blood pressure and dampen 
the inflammatory response. Increased vasopressin acts to 
conserve free water.
Reproduction
The stages of reproduction include (1) sex determination 
during fetal development (Chap. 7); (2) sexual maturation 
during puberty (Chaps. 8 and 10); (3) conception, preg-
nancy, lactation, and child rearing (Chap. 10); and 
(4) cessation of reproductive capability at menopause 
(Chap. 12). Each of these stages involves an orchestrated 
interplay of multiple hormones, a phenomenon well 
illustrated by the dynamic hormonal changes that occur 
during each 28-day menstrual cycle. In the early follic-
ular phase, pulsatile secretion of LH and FSH stimulates 
the progressive maturation of the ovarian follicle. This 
results in gradually increasing estrogen and progesterone 
levels, leading to enhanced pituitary sensitivity to GnRH, 
which, when combined with accelerated GnRH secre-
tion, triggers the LH surge and rupture of the mature fol-
licle. Inhibin, a protein produced by the granulosa cells, 
enhances follicular growth and feeds back to the pitu-
itary to selectively suppress FSH without affecting LH. 
Growth factors such as EGF and IGF-I modulate follicu-
lar responsiveness to gonadotropins. Vascular endothelial 
growth factor and prostaglandins play a role in follicle 
vascularization and rupture.
During pregnancy, the increased production of pro-
lactin, in combination with placentally derived steroids 
(e.g., estrogen and progesterone), prepares the breast for 
lactation. Estrogens induce the production of progester-
one receptors, allowing for increased responsiveness to 
progesterone. In addition to these and other hormones 
involved in lactation, the nervous system and oxytocin 
mediate the suckling response and milk release.
Hormonal Feedback Regulatory 
Systems
Feedback control, both negative and positive, is a funda-
mental feature of endocrine systems. Each of the major 
hypothalamic-pituitary-hormone axes is governed by 
negative feedback, a process that maintains hormone 
levels within a relatively narrow range (Chap. 2). 
Examples of hypothalamic-pituitary negative feedback 
include (1) thyroid hormones on the TRH-TSH axis, 
(2) cortisol on the CRH-ACTH axis, (3) gonadal ste-
roids on the GnRH-LH/FSH axis, and (4) IGF-I on 
the growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH)-GH 
axis (Fig. 1-3). These regulatory loops include both 
positive (e.g., TRH, TSH) and negative (e.g., T4, T3) 
components, allowing for exquisite control of hormone 
levels. As an example, a small reduction of thyroid hor-
mone triggers a rapid increase of TRH and TSH secre-
tion, resulting in thyroid gland stimulation and increased 
thyroid hormone production. When thyroid hormone 
reaches a normal level, it feeds back to suppress TRH 
and TSH, and a new steady state is attained. Feedback 
regulation also occurs for endocrine systems that do not 
involve the pituitary gland, such as calcium feedback 
on PTH, glucose inhibition of insulin secretion, and 
leptin feedback on the hypothalamus. An understanding 
 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
9
of feedback regulation provides important insights into 
endocrine testing paradigms (see below).
Positive feedback control also occurs but is not well 
understood. The primary example is estrogen-mediated 
stimulation of the midcycle LH surge. Though chronic 
low levels of estrogen are inhibitory, gradually rising estro-
gen levels stimulate LH secretion. This effect, which is 
illustrative of an endocrine rhythm (see below), involves 
activation of the hypothalamic GnRH pulse generator. 
In addition, estrogen-primed gonadotropes are extraor-
dinarily sensitive to GnRH, leading to amplification of 
LH release.
Paracrine and Autocrine Control
The previously mentioned examples of feedback control 
involve classic endocrine pathways in which hormones 
are released by one gland and act on a distant target 
gland. However, local regulatory systems, often involv-
ing growth factors, are increasingly recognized. Paracrine 
regulation refers to factors released by one cell that act on 
an adjacent cell in the same tissue. For example, soma-
tostatin secretion by pancreatic islet δ cells inhibits insulin 
secretion from nearby β cells. Autocrine regulation describes 
the action of a factor on the same cell from which it is 
produced. IGF-I acts on many cells that produce it, 
including chondrocytes, breast epithelium, and gonadal 
cells. Unlike endocrine actions, paracrine and autocrine 
control are difficult to document because local growth 
factor concentrations cannot be measured readily.
Anatomic relationships of glandular systems also 
greatly influence hormonal exposure: the physical orga-
nization of islet cells enhances their intercellular commu-
nication; the portal vasculature of the hypothalamic-pitu-
itary system exposes the pituitary to high concentrations 
of hypothalamic releasing factors; testicular seminiferous 
tubules gain exposure to high testosterone levels pro-
duced by the interdigitated Leydig cells; the pancreas 
receives nutrient information and local exposure to pep-
tide hormones (incretins) from the gastrointestinal tract; 
and the liver is the proximal target of insulin action 
because of portal drainage from the pancreas.
Hormonal Rhythms
The feedback regulatory systems described above are 
superimposed on hormonal rhythms that are used for 
adaptation to the environment. Seasonal changes, the 
daily occurrence of the light-dark cycle, sleep, meals, 
and stress are examples of the many environmen-
tal events that affect hormonal rhythms. The menstrual 
cycle is repeated on average every 28 days, reflecting the 
time required to follicular maturation and ovulation 
(Chap. 10). Essentially all pituitary hormone rhythms 
are entrained to sleep and to the circadian cycle, gener-
ating reproducible patterns that are repeated approxi-
mately every 24 h. The HPA axis, for example, exhibits 
characteristic peaks of ACTH and cortisol production in 
the early morning, with a nadir during the night. Rec-
ognition of these rhythms is important for endocrine 
testing and treatment. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome 
characteristically exhibit increased midnight cortisol 
levels compared with normal individuals (Chap. 5). 
In contrast, morning cortisol levels are similar in these 
groups, as cortisol is normally high at this time of day in 
normal individuals. The HPA axis is more susceptible 
to suppression by glucocorticoids administered at night 
as they blunt the early-morning rise of ACTH. Under-
standing these rhythms allows glucocorticoid replace-
ment that mimics diurnal production by administer-
ing larger doses in the morning than in the afternoon. 
Disrupted sleep rhythms can alter hormonal regula-
tion. For example, sleep deprivation causes mild insu-
lin resistance, food craving, and hypertension, which are 
reversible, at least in the short term.
Other endocrine rhythms occur on a more rapid 
time scale. Many peptide hormones are secreted in dis-
crete bursts every few hours. LH and FSH secretion 
are exquisitely sensitive to GnRH pulse frequency. 
Intermittent pulses of GnRH are required to maintain 
pituitary sensitivity, whereas continuous exposure to 
GnRH causes pituitary gonadotrope desensitization. 
This feature of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadotrope 
+
+
Adrenal
Gonads
Thyroid
Hypothalamus
CNS
Releasing
 factors
Pituitary
Trophic
hormones
Target hormone
feedback
inhibition
–
–
Figure 1-3
Feedback regulation of endocrine axes. CNS, central ner-
vous system.
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
10
axis forms the basis for using long-acting GnRH ago-
nists to treat central precocious puberty or to decrease 
testosterone levels in the management of prostate can-
cer. It is important to be aware of the pulsatile nature 
of hormone secretion and the rhythmic patterns of hor-
mone production in relating serum hormone measure-
ments to normal values. For some hormones, integrated 
markers have been developed to circumvent hormonal 
fluctuations. Examples include 24-h urine collections 
for cortisol, IGF-I as a biologic marker of GH action, 
and HbA1c as an index of long-term (weeks to months) 
blood glucose control.
Often, one must interpret endocrine data only in the 
context of other hormones. For example, PTH levels 
typically are assessed in combination with serum calcium 
concentrations. A high serum calcium level in association 
with elevated PTH is suggestive of hyperparathyroidism, 
whereas a suppressed PTH in this situation is more likely 
to be caused by hypercalcemia of malignancy or other 
causes of hypercalcemia. Similarly, TSH should be ele-
vated when T4 and T3 concentrations are low, reflecting 
reduced feedback inhibition. When this is not the case, 
it is important to consider secondary hypothyroidism, 
which is caused by a defect at the level of the pituitary.
Pathologic Mechanisms of 
Endocrine Disease
Endocrine diseases can be divided into three major 
types of conditions: (1) hormone excess, (2) hormone 
deficiency, and (3) hormone resistance (Table 1-2).
Causes of Hormone Excess
Syndromes of hormone excess can be caused by neo-
plastic growth of endocrine cells, autoimmune disorders, 
and excess hormone administration. Benign endocrine 
tumors, including parathyroid, pituitary, and adrenal 
adenomas, often retain the capacity to produce hor-
mones, perhaps reflecting the fact that they are relatively 
well differentiated. Many endocrine tumors exhibit sub-
tle defects in their “set points” for feedback regulation. 
For example, in Cushing’s disease, impaired feedback 
inhibition of ACTH secretion is associated with autono-
mous function. However, the tumor cells are not com-
pletely resistant to feedback, as evidenced by ACTH 
suppression by higher doses of dexamethasone (e.g., 
high-dose dexamethasone test) (Chap. 5). Similar set 
point defects are also typical of parathyroid adenomas 
and autonomously functioning thyroid nodules.
The molecular basis of some endocrine tumors, 
such as the MEN syndromes (MEN 1, 2A, 2B), 
have provided important insights into tumorigen-
esis (Chap. 23). MEN 1 is characterized primarily by 
Table 1-2
Causes of Endocrine Dysfunction
Type of Endocrine 
Disorder
Examples
Hyperfunction
  Neoplastic
    Benign
Pituitary adenomas,  
hyperparathyroidism, 
autonomous thyroid or 
adrenal nodules,  
pheochromocytoma
    Malignant
Adrenal cancer, medullary 
thyroid cancer, carcinoid
    Ectopic
Ectopic ACTH, SIADH 
secretion
    Multiple endocrine  
        neoplasia
MEN 1, MEN 2
  Autoimmune
Graves’ disease
  Iatrogenic
Cushing’s syndrome,  
hypoglycemia
  Infectious/inflammatory
Subacute thyroiditis
Activating receptor  
mutations
LH, TSH, Ca2+ and PTH 
receptors, Gsa
Hypofunction
  Autoimmune
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus, 
Addison’s disease,  
polyglandular failure
  Iatrogenic
Radiation-induced  
hypopituitarism,  
hypothyroidism, surgical
  Infectious/inflammatory
Adrenal insufficiency,  
hypothalamic  
sarcoidosis
  Hormone mutations
GH, LHb, FSHb, vasopressin
  Enzyme defects
21-Hydroxylase deficiency
  Developmental defects
Kallmann syndrome, Turner 
syndrome, transcription 
factors
Nutritional/vitamin  
deficiency
Vitamin D deficiency, iodine 
deficiency
  Hemorrhage/infarction
Sheehan’s syndrome,  
adrenal insufficiency
Hormone resistance
  Receptor mutations
    Membrane
GH, vasopressin, LH, FSH, 
ACTH, GnRH, GHRH, 
PTH, leptin, Ca2+
    Nuclear
AR, TR, VDR, ER, GR, 
PPARg
Signaling pathway  
mutations
Albright’s hereditary  
osteodystrophy
  Postreceptor
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
leptin resistance
Abbreviations: AR, androgen receptor; ER, estrogen receptor; GR, 
glucocorticoid receptor; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator activated 
receptor; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone; 
TR, thyroid hormone receptor; VDR, vitamin D receptor. For all other 
abbreviations, see text.
 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
11
the triad of parathyroid, pancreatic islet, and pituitary 
tumors. MEN 2 predisposes to medullary thyroid car-
cinoma, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroid-
ism. The MEN1 gene, located on chromosome 11q13, 
encodes a putative tumor-suppressor gene, menin. 
Analogous to the paradigm first described for reti-
noblastoma, the affected individual inherits a mutant 
copy of the MEN1 gene, and tumorigenesis ensues 
after a somatic “second hit” leads to loss of function 
of the normal MEN1 gene (through deletion or point 
mutations).
In contrast to inactivation of a tumor-suppressor 
gene, as occurs in MEN 1 and most other inherited 
cancer syndromes, MEN 2 is caused by activating muta-
tions in a single allele. In this case, activating mutations 
of the RET protooncogene, which encodes a receptor 
tyrosine kinase, leads to thyroid C cell hyperplasia in 
childhood before the development of medullary thyroid 
carcinoma. Elucidation of this pathogenic mechanism 
has allowed early genetic screening for RET mutations 
in individuals at risk for MEN 2, permitting identifica-
tion of those who may benefit from prophylactic thy-
roidectomy and biochemical screening for pheochro-
mocytoma and hyperparathyroidism.
Mutations that activate hormone receptor signaling 
have been identified in several GPCRs. For example, 
activating mutations of the LH receptor cause a domi-
nantly transmitted form of male-limited precocious 
puberty, reflecting premature stimulation of testosterone 
synthesis in Leydig cells (Chap. 8). Activating muta-
tions in these GPCRs are located predominantly in the 
transmembrane domains and induce receptor coupling 
to Gsα even in the absence of hormone. Consequently, 
adenylate cyclase is activated, and cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP) levels increase in a manner 
that mimics hormone action. A similar phenomenon 
results from activating mutations in Gsα. When these 
mutations occur early in development, they cause 
McCune-Albright syndrome. When they occur only in 
somatotropes, the activating Gsα mutations cause GH-
secreting tumors and acromegaly (Chap. 2).
In autoimmune Graves’ disease, antibody interactions 
with the TSH receptor mimic TSH action, leading to 
hormone overproduction (Chap. 4). Analogous to the 
effects of activating mutations of the TSH receptor, 
these stimulating autoantibodies induce conformational 
changes that release the receptor from a constrained 
state, thereby triggering receptor coupling to G proteins.
Causes of Hormone Deficiency
Most examples of hormone deficiency states can be attrib-
uted to glandular destruction caused by autoimmunity, 
surgery, infection, inflammation, infarction, hemorrhage, 
or tumor infiltration (Table 1-2). Autoimmune damage 
to the thyroid gland (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) and 
pancreatic islet β cells (Type 1 diabetes mellitus) is a 
prevalent cause of endocrine disease. Mutations in a 
number of hormones, hormone receptors, transcrip-
tion factors, enzymes, and channels can also lead to 
hormone deficiencies.
Hormone Resistance
Most severe hormone resistance syndromes are due to 
inherited defects in membrane receptors, nuclear recep-
tors, or the pathways that transduce receptor signals. 
These disorders are characterized by defective hormone 
action despite the presence of increased hormone levels. 
In complete androgen resistance, for example, muta-
tions in the androgen receptor result in a female phe-
notypic appearance in genetic (XY) males, even though 
LH and testosterone levels are increased (Chap. 7). 
In addition to these relatively rare genetic disorders, 
more common acquired forms of functional hormone 
resistance include insulin resistance in Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, leptin resistance in obesity, and GH resistance 
in catabolic states. The pathogenesis of functional resis-
tance involves receptor downregulation and postrecep-
tor desensitization of signaling pathways; functional 
forms of resistance are generally reversible.
Approach to The
Patient	
Endocrine Disease
Because most glands are relatively inaccessible, the 
examination usually focuses on the manifestations of 
hormone excess or deficiency as well as direct exami-
nation of palpable glands, such as the thyroid and 
gonads. For these reasons, it is important to evaluate 
patients in the context of their presenting symptoms, 
review of systems, family and social history, and expo-
sure to medications that may affect the endocrine 
system. Astute clinical skills are required to detect 
subtle symptoms and signs suggestive of underlying 
endocrine disease. For example, a patient with Cush-
ing’s syndrome may manifest specific findings, such 
as central fat redistribution, striae, and proximal mus-
cle weakness, in addition to features seen commonly 
in the general population, such as obesity, plethora, 
hypertension, and glucose intolerance. Similarly, the 
insidious onset of hypothyroidism—with mental slow-
ing, fatigue, dry skin, and other features—can be dif-
ficult to distinguish from similar, nonspecific findings 
in the general population. Clinical judgment that is 
based on knowledge of disease prevalence and patho-
physiology is required to decide when to embark on 
more extensive evaluation of these disorders. Labora-
tory testing plays an essential role in endocrinology by 
allowing quantitative assessment of hormone levels 
and dynamics. Radiologic imaging tests such as CT scan, 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
12
MRI, thyroid scan, and ultrasound are also used for the 
diagnosis of endocrine disorders. However, these tests 
generally are employed only after a hormonal abnor-
mality has been established by biochemical testing.
Hormone Measurements and Endo-
crine 
Testing  Immunoassays are the most 
important diagnostic tool in endocrinology, as they 
allow sensitive, specific, and quantitative determina-
tion of steady-state and dynamic changes in hormone 
concentrations. Immunoassays use antibodies to detect 
specific hormones. For many peptide hormones, these 
measurements are now configured to use two differ-
ent antibodies to increase binding affinity and specific-
ity. There are many variations of these assays; a com-
mon format involves using one antibody to capture 
the antigen (hormone) onto an immobilized surface 
and a second antibody, coupled to a chemiluminescent 
[immunochemiluminescent assay (ICMA)] or radioac-
tive immunoradiometric assay (IRMA)] signal, to detect 
the antigen. These assays are sensitive enough to detect 
plasma hormone concentrations in the picomolar to 
nanomolar range, and they can readily distinguish struc-
turally related proteins, such as PTH from PTHrP. A vari-
ety of other techniques are used to measure specific 
hormones, including mass spectroscopy, various forms 
of chromatography, and enzymatic methods; bioassays 
are now rarely used.
Most hormone measurements are based on plasma 
or serum samples. However, urinary hormone determi-
nations remain useful for the evaluation of some condi-
tions. Urinary collections over 24 h provide an integrated 
assessment of the production of a hormone or metabo-
lite, many of which vary during the day. It is important 
to assure complete collections of 24-h urine samples; 
simultaneous measurement of creatinine provides an 
internal control for the adequacy of collection and can 
be used to normalize some hormone measurements. A 
24-h urine free cortisol measurement largely reflects the 
amount of unbound cortisol, thus providing a reason-
able index of biologically available hormone. Other com-
monly used urine determinations include 17-hydroxy-
corticosteroids, 17-ketosteroids, vanillylmandelic acid, 
metanephrine, catecholamines, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic 
acid, and calcium.
The value of quantitative hormone measurements 
lies in their correct interpretation in a clinical context. 
The normal range for most hormones is relatively broad, 
often varying by a factor of two- to tenfold. The normal 
ranges for many hormones are sex and age specific. 
Thus, using the correct normative database is an essen-
tial part of interpreting hormone tests. The pulsatile 
nature of hormones and factors that can affect their secre-
tion, such as sleep, meals, and medications, must also be 
considered. Cortisol values increase fivefold between
midnight and dawn; reproductive hormone levels vary 
dramatically during the female menstrual cycle.
For many endocrine systems, much information can 
be gained from basal hormone testing, particularly 
when different components of an endocrine axis are 
assessed simultaneously. For example, low testoster-
one and elevated LH levels suggest a primary gonadal 
problem, whereas a hypothalamic-pituitary disorder is 
likely if both LH and testosterone are low. Because TSH 
is a sensitive indicator of thyroid function, it is generally 
recommended as a first-line test for thyroid disorders. 
An elevated TSH level is almost always the result of pri-
mary hypothyroidism, whereas a low TSH is most often 
caused by thyrotoxicosis. These predictions can be con-
firmed by determining the free thyroxine level. Elevated 
calcium and PTH levels suggest hyperparathyroidism, 
whereas PTH is suppressed in hypercalcemia caused by 
malignancy or granulomatous diseases. A suppressed 
ACTH in the setting of hypercortisolemia, or increased 
urine free cortisol, is seen with hyperfunctioning adre-
nal adenomas.
It is not uncommon, however, for baseline hormone 
levels associated with pathologic endocrine conditions 
to overlap with the normal range. In this circumstance, 
dynamic testing is useful to separate the two groups 
further. There are a multitude of dynamic endocrine 
tests, but all are based on principles of feedback regula-
tion, and most responses can be remembered on the 
basis of the pathways that govern endocrine axes. Sup-
pression tests are used in the setting of suspected endo-
crine hyperfunction. An example is the dexamethasone 
suppression test used to evaluate Cushing’s syndrome 
(Chaps. 2 and 5). Stimulation tests generally are used to 
assess endocrine hypofunction. The ACTH stimulation 
test, for example, is used to assess the adrenal gland 
response in patients with suspected adrenal insufficiency. 
Other stimulation tests use hypothalamic-releasing 
factors such as CRH and GHRH to evaluate pituitary 
hormone reserve (Chap. 2). Insulin-induced hypogly-
cemia also evokes pituitary ACTH and GH responses. 
Stimulation tests based on reduction or inhibition of 
endogenous hormones are now used infrequently. Exam-
ples include metyrapone inhibition of cortisol synthesis 
and clomiphene inhibition of estrogen feedback.
Screening and Assessment of Com-
mon Endocrine Disorders  Many endo-
crine disorders are prevalent in the adult population 
(Table 1-3) and can be diagnosed and managed by 
general internists, family practitioners, or other primary 
health care providers. The high prevalence and clinical 
impact of certain endocrine diseases justifies vigilance 
for features of these disorders during routine physi-
cal examinations; laboratory screening is indicated in 
selected high-risk populations.
 
CHAPTER 1
Principles of Endocrinology
13
Table 1-3
Examples of Prevalent Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders in the Adult
Disorder
Approx. Prevalence in Adultsa
Screening/Testing Recommendationsb
Chapter
Obesity
31% BMI ≥30
65% BMI ≥25
Calculate BMI
Measure waist circumference
Exclude secondary causes
Consider comorbid complications
17
Type 2 diabetes  
mellitus
>7%
Beginning at age 45, screen every 3 years, or earlier  
in high-risk groups:
Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) >126 mg/dL
Random plasma glucose >200 mg/dL
An elevated HbA1c
Consider comorbid complications
19
Hyperlipidemia
20–25%
Cholesterol screening at least every 5 years; more 
often in high-risk groups
Lipoprotein analysis (LDL, HDL) for increased  
cholesterol, CAD, diabetes
Consider secondary causes
21
Hypothyroidism
5–10%, women
0.5–2%, men
TSH; confirm with free T4
Screen women after age 35 and every 5 years thereafter
4
Graves’ disease
1–3%, women
0.1%, men
TSH, free T4
4
Thyroid nodules and 
neoplasia
2–5% palpable
>25% by ultrasound
Physical examination of thyroid
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy
4
Osteoporosis
5–10%, women
2–5%, men
Bone mineral density measurements in women  
>65 years or in postmenopausal women or men at risk
Exclude secondary causes
28
Hyperparathyroidism
0.1–0.5%, women > men
Serum calcium
PTH, if calcium is elevated
Assess comorbid conditions
27
Infertility
10%, couples
Investigate both members of couple
Semen analysis in male
Assess ovulatory cycles in female
Specific tests as indicated
8, 10
Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
5–10%, women
Free testosterone, DHEAS
Consider comorbid conditions
10
Hirsutism
5–10%
Free testosterone, DHEAS
Exclude secondary causes
Additional tests as indicated
13
Menopause
Median age, 51
FSH
12
Hyperprolactinemia
15% in women with amenorrhea or 
galactorrhea
PRL level
MRI, if not medication related
2
Erectile dysfunction
20–30%
Careful history, PRL, testosterone
Consider secondary causes (e.g., diabetes)
15
Gynecomastia
15%
Often, no tests are indicated
Consider Klinefelter syndrome
Consider medications, hypogonadism, liver disease
8
Klinefelter syndrome
0.2%, men
Karyotype
Testosterone
7
Vitamin D deficiency
40–50%
Measure serum 25-OH vitamin D
Consider secondary causes
25
Turner syndrome
0.03%, women
Karyotype
Consider comorbid conditions
7
aThe prevalence of most disorders varies among ethnic groups and with aging. Data based primarily on U.S. population.
bSee individual chapters for additional information on evaluation and treatment. Early testing is indicated in patients with signs and symptoms of 
disease and in those at increased risk.
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CAD, coronary artery disease; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, 
low-density lipoprotein. For other abbreviations, see text.
This page intentionally left blank 
section I
Pituitary, Thyroid, 
and Adrenal  
Disorders
 shlomo Melmed  I   J. larry Jameson 
16
 The anterior pituitary often is referred to as the “mas-
ter gland” because, together with the hypothalamus, it 
orchestrates the complex regulatory functions of many 
other endocrine glands. The anterior pituitary gland 
produces six major hormones: (1) prolactin (PRL), 
(2) growth hormone (GH), (3) adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH), (4) luteinizing hormone (LH), 
(5) follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and (6) thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) ( Table 2-1 ). Pituitary 
hormones are secreted in a pulsatile manner, refl ect-
ing stimulation by an array of specifi c hypothalamic 
releasing factors. Each of these pituitary hormones 
 DISORDERS OF THE ANTERIOR PITUITARY 
AND HYPOTHALAMUS 
 cHApter 2 
Table 2-1 
 Anterior PituitAry Hormone eXPression AnD reGulAtion 
cell
corticotroPe
somAtotroPe
lActotroPe
tHyrotroPe
GonADotroPe
Tissue-specifi c 
transcription 
factor
T-Pit
Prop-1, Pit-1
Prop-1, Pit-1
Prop-1, Pit-1, TEF
SF-1, DAX-1
Fetal appearance
6 weeks
8 weeks
12 weeks
12 weeks
12 weeks
Hormone
POMC
GH
PRL
TSH
FSH LH
Protein
Polypeptide
Polypeptide
Polypeptide
Glycoprotein α, β 
subunits
Glycoprotein α, β 
subunits
Amino acids
266 (ACTH 1–39)
191
199
211
210 204
Stimulators
CRH, AVP, gp-130 
cytokines
GHRH, ghrelin
Estrogen, TRH, 
VIP
TRH
GnRH, activins, 
estrogen
Inhibitors
Glucocorticoids
Somatostatin, 
IGF-I
Dopamine
T 3 , T 4 , dopamine, 
somatostatin, 
glucocorticoids
Sex steroids, 
inhibin
Target gland
Adrenal
Liver, other 
tissues
Breast, other 
tissues
Thyroid
Ovary, testis
Trophic effect
Steroid production
IGF-I production, 
growth induc-
tion, insulin 
antagonism
Milk production
T 4 synthesis and 
secretion
Sex steroid pro-
duction, follicle 
growth, germ cell 
maturation
Normal range
ACTH, 4–22 pg/L
<0.5 μg/L a 
M <15; F <20 
μg/L
0.1–5 mU/L
M, 5–20 IU/L, F 
(basal), 5–20 
IU/L
 a Hormone secretion integrated over 24 h.
Abbreviations: M, male; F, female. For other abbreviations, see text.
Source: Adapted from I Shimon, S Melmed, in S Melmed, P Conn (eds):  Endocrinology: Basic and Clinical Principles . Totowa, NJ, Humana, 2005.
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
17
elicits specific responses in peripheral target tissues. 
The hormonal products of those peripheral glands, in 
turn, exert feedback control at the level of the hypo-
thalamus and pituitary to modulate pituitary function 
(Fig. 2-1). Pituitary tumors cause characteristic hor-
mone-excess syndromes. Hormone deficiency may be 
inherited or acquired. Fortunately, there are efficacious 
treatments for the various pituitary hormone–excess and 
–deficiency syndromes. Nonetheless, these diagnoses are 
often elusive; this emphasizes the importance of rec-
ognizing subtle clinical manifestations and performing 
the correct laboratory diagnostic tests. For discussion of 
disorders of the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis, 
see Chap. 3.
Anatomy and Development
Anatomy
The pituitary gland weighs ∼600 mg and is located 
within the sella turcica ventral to the diaphragma sella; 
it consists of anatomically and functionally distinct ante-
rior and posterior lobes. The bony sella is contiguous to 
vascular and neurologic structures, including the cav-
ernous sinuses, cranial nerves, and optic chiasm. Thus, 
expanding intrasellar pathologic processes may have sig-
nificant central mass effects in addition to their endocri-
nologic impact.
Hypothalamic neural cells synthesize specific releasing 
and inhibiting hormones that are secreted directly into 
the portal vessels of the pituitary stalk. Blood supply of 
the pituitary gland comes from the superior and infe-
rior hypophyseal arteries (Fig. 2-2). The hypothalamic-
pituitary portal plexus provides the major blood source 
for the anterior pituitary, allowing reliable transmission 
of hypothalamic peptide pulses without significant sys-
temic dilution; consequently, pituitary cells are exposed 
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Cortisol
ACTH
PRL
IGF-1
Target
organs
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
– – +
–
Adrenal
glands
Lactation
Liver
Chondrocytes
Linear and
organ growth
Thyroid
glands
Testes
Ovaries
Cell homeostasis
and function
T4/T3
Thermogenesis
metabolism
Testosterone
Inhibin
Spermatogenesis
Secondary sex
characteristics
Estradiol
Progesterone
Inhibin
Ovulation
Secondary sex
characteristics
GnRH
TRH
CRH
SRIF
+
TSH
LH
FSH
Dopamine
GHRH
GH
Figure 2-1
Diagram of pituitary axes. Hypothalamic hormones regulate 
anterior pituitary trophic hormones that in turn determine tar-
get gland secretion. Peripheral hormones feed back to regu-
late hypothalamic and pituitary hormones. For abbreviations, 
see text.
Neuroendocrine
cell nuclei
Third ventricle
Hypothalamus
Stalk
Superior
hypophyseal
artery
Long portal
vessels
Trophic
hormone
secreting
cells
Short portal
vessel
Inferior
hypophyseal
artery
Anterior
pituitary
Hormone
secretion
Posterior
pituitary
Figure 2-2
Diagram of hypothalamic-pituitary vasculature. The hypo-
thalamic nuclei produce hormones that traverse the portal 
system and impinge on anterior pituitary cells to regulate 
pituitary hormone secretion. Posterior pituitary hormones are 
derived from direct neural extensions.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
18
to releasing or inhibiting factors and in turn release their 
hormones as discrete pulses (Fig. 2-3).
The posterior pituitary is supplied by the infe-
rior hypophyseal arteries. In contrast to the anterior 
pituitary, the posterior lobe is directly innervated by 
hypothalamic neurons (supraopticohypophyseal and 
tuberohypophyseal nerve tracts) via the pituitary stalk 
(Chap. 3). Thus, posterior pituitary production of vaso-
pressin [antidiuretic hormone (ADH)] and oxytocin is 
particularly sensitive to neuronal damage by lesions that 
affect the pituitary stalk or hypothalamus.
Pituitary Development
The embryonic differentiation and maturation of anterior 
pituitary cells have been elucidated in considerable detail. 
Pituitary development from Rathke’s pouch involves a 
complex interplay of lineage-specific transcription fac-
tors expressed in pluripotent precursor cells and gradi-
ents of locally produced growth factors (Table 2-1). The 
transcription factor Prop-1 induces pituitary develop-
ment of Pit-1–specific lineages as well as gonadotropes. 
The transcription factor Pit-1 determines cell-specific 
expression of GH, PRL, and TSH in somatotropes, lac-
totropes, and thyrotropes. Expression of high levels of 
estrogen receptors in cells that contain Pit-1 favors PRL 
expression, whereas thyrotrope embryonic factor (TEF) 
induces TSH expression. Pit-1 binds to GH, PRL, and 
TSH gene regulatory elements as well as to recogni-
tion sites on its own promoter, providing a mechanism 
for maintaining specific pituitary phenotypic stability. 
Gonadotrope cell development is further defined by 
the cell-specific expression of the nuclear receptors ste-
roidogenic factor (SF-1) and dosage-sensitive sex rever-
sal, adrenal hypoplasia critical region, on chromosome 
X, gene 1 (DAX-1). Development of corticotrope cells, 
which express the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, 
requires the T-Pit transcription factor. Abnormalities 
of pituitary development caused by mutations of Pit-1, 
Prop-1, SF-1, DAX-1, and T-Pit result in a series of 
rare, selective or combined pituitary hormone deficits.
LH mlU/mL GnRH pg/mL
GnRH pulses
LH pulses
Figure 2-3
Hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
pulses induce secretory pulses of luteinizing hormone (LH).
Table 2-2
Etiology of Hypopituitarisma
Development/structural
  Transcription factor defect
  Pituitary dysplasia/aplasia
  Congenital CNS mass, encephalocele
  Primary empty sella
Congenital hypothalamic disorders (septo-optic dyspla-
sia, Prader-Willi syndrome, Laurence-Moon-Biedl syn-
drome, Kallmann syndrome)
Traumatic
  Surgical resection
  Radiation damage
  Head injuries
Neoplastic
  Pituitary adenoma
  Parasellar mass (germinoma, ependymoma, glioma)
  Rathke’s cyst
  Craniopharyngioma
  Hypothalamic hamartoma, gangliocytoma
  Pituitary metastases (breast, lung, colon carcinoma)
  Lymphoma and leukemia
  Meningioma
Infiltrative/inflammatory
  Lymphocytic hypophysitis
  Hemochromatosis
  Sarcoidosis
  Histiocytosis X
  Granulomatous hypophysitis
Vascular
  Pituitary apoplexy
Pregnancy related (infarction with diabetes; postpartum 
necrosis)
  Sickle cell disease
  Arteritis
Infections
  Fungal (histoplasmosis)
  Parasitic (toxoplasmosis)
  Tuberculosis
  Pneumocystis carinii
aTrophic hormone failure associated with pituitary compression or 
destruction usually occurs sequentially: GH > FSH > LH > TSH > 
ACTH. During childhood, growth retardation is often the presenting 
feature, and in adults, hypogonadism is the earliest symptom.
Hypothalamic and Anterior 
Pituitary Insufficiency
Hypopituitarism results from impaired production of 
one or more of the anterior pituitary trophic hormones. 
Reduced pituitary function can result from inherited 
disorders; more commonly, hypopituitarism is acquired 
and reflects the compressive mass effects of tumors or 
the consequences of inflammation or vascular damage. 
These processes also may impair synthesis or secretion 
of hypothalamic hormones, with resultant pituitary failure 
(Table 2-2).
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
19
Developmental and Genetic Causes 
of Hypopituitarism
Pituitary dysplasia
Pituitary dysplasia may result in aplastic, hypoplastic, 
or ectopic pituitary gland development. Because pitu-
itary development follows midline cell migration from 
the nasopharyngeal Rathke’s pouch, midline craniofa-
cial disorders may be associated with pituitary dysplasia. 
Acquired pituitary failure in the newborn also can be 
caused by birth trauma, including cranial hemorrhage, 
asphyxia, and breech delivery.
Septo-optic dysplasia
Hypothalamic dysfunction and hypopituitarism may 
result from dysgenesis of the septum pellucidum or cor-
pus callosum. Affected children have mutations in the 
HESX1 gene, which is involved in early development 
of the ventral prosencephalon. These children exhibit 
variable combinations of cleft palate, syndactyly, ear 
deformities, hypertelorism, optic atrophy, micropenis, 
and anosmia. Pituitary dysfunction leads to diabetes 
insipidus, GH deficiency and short stature, and, occa-
sionally, TSH deficiency.
Tissue-specific factor mutations
Several pituitary cell–specific transcription factors, such 
as Pit-1 and Prop-1, are critical for determining the 
development and committed function of differentiated 
anterior pituitary cell lineages. Autosomal dominant or 
recessive Pit-1 mutations cause combined GH, PRL, 
and TSH deficiencies. These patients usually present 
with growth failure and varying degrees of hypothy-
roidism. The pituitary may appear hypoplastic on MRI.
Prop-1 is expressed early in pituitary development 
and appears to be required for Pit-1 function. Familial 
and sporadic PROP1 mutations result in combined GH, 
PRL, TSH, and gonadotropin deficiency. Over 80% of 
these patients have growth retardation; by adulthood, 
all are deficient in TSH and gonadotropins, and a small 
minority later develop ACTH deficiency. Because of 
gonadotropin deficiency, these individuals do not enter 
puberty spontaneously. In some cases, the pituitary 
gland is enlarged. TPIT mutations result in ACTH defi-
ciency associated with hypocortisolism.
Developmental hypothalamic dysfunction
Kallmann syndrome
Kallmann syndrome results from defective hypothalamic 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) synthesis and 
is associated with anosmia or hyposmia due to olfactory 
bulb agenesis or hypoplasia (Chap. 8). The syndrome also 
may be associated with color blindness, optic atrophy, 
nerve deafness, cleft palate, renal abnormalities, crypt-
orchidism, and neurologic abnormalities such as mirror 
movements. Defects in the X-linked KAL gene impair 
embryonic migration of GnRH neurons from the hypo-
thalamic olfactory placode to the hypothalamus. Genetic 
abnormalities, in addition to KAL mutations, also can 
cause isolated GnRH deficiency. Autosomal recessive (i.e., 
GPR54, KISS1) and dominant (i.e., FGFR1) modes of 
transmission have been described, and there is a growing 
list of genes associated with GnRH deficiency (GNRH1, 
PROK2, PROKR2, CH7, PCSK1, FGF8, TAC3,
TACR3). GnRH deficiency prevents progression through 
puberty. Males present with delayed puberty and pro-
nounced hypogonadal features, including micropenis, 
probably the result of low testosterone levels during 
infancy. Females present with primary amenorrhea and 
failure of secondary sexual development.
Kallmann syndrome and other causes of congeni-
tal GnRH deficiency are characterized by low LH 
and FSH levels and low concentrations of sex steroids 
(testosterone or estradiol). In sporadic cases of isolated 
gonadotropin deficiency, the diagnosis is often one of 
exclusion after other causes of hypothalamic-pituitary 
dysfunction have been eliminated. Repetitive GnRH 
administration restores normal pituitary gonadotropin 
responses, pointing to a hypothalamic defect.
Long-term treatment of men with human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) or testosterone restores pubertal 
development and secondary sex characteristics; women 
can be treated with cyclic estrogen and progestin. Fer-
tility also may be restored by the administration of 
gonadotropins or by using a portable infusion pump to 
deliver subcutaneous, pulsatile GnRH.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
This is a rare genetically heterogeneous disorder char-
acterized by mental retardation, renal abnormalities, 
obesity, and hexadactyly, brachydactyly, or syndactyly. 
Central diabetes insipidus may or may not be associ-
ated. GnRH deficiency occurs in 75% of males and 
half of affected females. Retinal degeneration begins in 
early childhood, and most patients are blind by age 30. 
Numerous subtypes of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) 
have been identified, with genetic linkage to at least 
nine different loci. Several of the loci encode genes 
involved in basal body cilia function, and this may 
account for the diverse clinical manifestations.
Leptin and leptin receptor mutations
Deficiencies of leptin or its receptor cause a broad spec-
trum of hypothalamic abnormalities, including hyper-
phagia, obesity, and central hypogonadism (Chap. 16). 
Decreased GnRH production in these patients results in 
attenuated pituitary FSH and LH synthesis and release.
Prader-Willi syndrome
This is a contiguous gene syndrome that results from 
deletion of the paternal copies of the imprinted SNRPN 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
20
gene, the NECDIN gene, and possibly other genes on 
chromosome 15q. Prader-Willi syndrome is associated 
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hyperphagia-
obesity, chronic muscle hypotonia, mental retardation, 
and adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Multiple somatic 
defects also involve the skull, eyes, ears, hands, and feet. 
Diminished hypothalamic oxytocin- and vasopressin-
producing nuclei have been reported. Deficient GnRH 
synthesis is suggested by the observation that chronic 
GnRH treatment restores pituitary LH and FSH release.
Acquired Hypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism may be caused by accidental or neuro-
surgical trauma; vascular events such as apoplexy; pitu-
itary or hypothalamic neoplasms, craniopharyngioma, 
lymphoma, or metastatic tumors; inflammatory disease 
such as lymphocytic hypophysitis; infiltrative disorders 
such as sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, and tuberculosis; 
or irradiation.
Increasing evidence suggests that patients with brain 
injury, including sports trauma, subarachnoid hemor-
rhage, and irradiation, have transient hypopituitarism 
and require intermittent long-term endocrine follow-
up, as permanent hypothalamic or pituitary dysfunction 
will develop in 25–40% of these patients.
Hypothalamic infiltration disorders
These disorders—including sarcoidosis, histiocytosis X, 
amyloidosis, and hemochromatosis—frequently involve 
both hypothalamic and pituitary neuronal and neuro-
chemical tracts. Consequently, diabetes insipidus occurs 
in half of patients with these disorders. Growth retar-
dation is seen if attenuated GH secretion occurs before 
pubertal epiphyseal closure. Hypogonadotropic hypo-
gonadism and hyperprolactinemia are also common.
Inflammatory lesions
Pituitary damage and subsequent dysfunction can be 
seen with chronic infections such as tuberculosis, with 
opportunistic fungal infections associated with AIDS, 
and in tertiary syphilis. Other inflammatory processes, 
such as granulomas and sarcoidosis, may mimic the fea-
tures of a pituitary adenoma. These lesions may cause 
extensive hypothalamic and pituitary damage, leading to 
trophic hormone deficiencies.
Cranial irradiation
Cranial irradiation may result in long-term hypotha-
lamic and pituitary dysfunction, especially in children 
and adolescents, as they are more susceptible to damage 
after whole-brain or head and neck therapeutic irradia-
tion. The development of hormonal abnormalities cor-
relates strongly with irradiation dosage and the time 
interval after completion of radiotherapy. Up to two-
thirds of patients ultimately develop hormone insuffi-
ciency after a median dose of 50 Gy (5000 rad) directed 
at the skull base. The development of hypopituitarism 
occurs over 5–15 years and usually reflects hypothalamic 
damage rather than primary destruction of pituitary 
cells. Although the pattern of hormone loss is variable, 
GH deficiency is most common, followed by gonado-
tropin and ACTH deficiency. When deficiency of one 
or more hormones is documented, the possibility of 
diminished reserve of other hormones is likely. Accord-
ingly, anterior pituitary function should be continu-
ally evaluated over the long term in previously irradi-
ated patients, and replacement therapy instituted when 
appropriate (see below).
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
This occurs most often in postpartum women; it usu-
ally presents with hyperprolactinemia and MRI evi-
dence of a prominent pituitary mass that often resembles 
an adenoma, with mildly elevated PRL levels. Pituitary 
failure caused by diffuse lymphocytic infiltration may be 
transient or permanent but requires immediate evalua-
tion and treatment. Rarely, isolated pituitary hormone 
deficiencies have been described, suggesting a selective 
autoimmune process targeted to specific cell types. Most 
patients manifest symptoms of progressive mass effects 
with headache and visual disturbance. The erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate often is elevated. As the MRI image 
may be indistinguishable from that of a pituitary ade-
noma, hypophysitis should be considered in a postpartum 
woman with a newly diagnosed pituitary mass before 
an unnecessary surgical intervention is undertaken. The 
inflammatory process often resolves after several months 
of glucocorticoid treatment, and pituitary function may 
be restored, depending on the extent of damage.
Pituitary apoplexy
Acute intrapituitary hemorrhagic vascular events can 
cause substantial damage to the pituitary and surround-
ing sellar structures. Pituitary apoplexy may occur 
spontaneously in a preexisting adenoma; postpartum 
(Sheehan’s syndrome); or in association with diabe-
tes, hypertension, sickle cell anemia, or acute shock. 
The hyperplastic enlargement of the pituitary, which 
occurs normally during pregnancy, increases the risk for 
hemorrhage and infarction. Apoplexy is an endocrine 
emergency that may result in severe hypoglycemia, 
hypotension and shock, central nervous system (CNS) 
hemorrhage, and death. Acute symptoms may include 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
21
severe headache with signs of meningeal irritation, bilat-
eral visual changes, ophthalmoplegia, and, in severe 
cases, cardiovascular collapse and loss of consciousness. 
Pituitary CT or MRI may reveal signs of intratumoral 
or sellar hemorrhage, with deviation of the pituitary 
stalk and compression of pituitary tissue.
Patients with no evident visual loss or impaired con-
sciousness can be observed and managed conservatively 
with high-dose glucocorticoids. Those with significant 
or progressive visual loss or loss of consciousness require 
urgent surgical decompression. Visual recovery after 
sellar surgery is inversely correlated with the length of 
time after the acute event. Therefore, severe ophthal-
moplegia or visual deficits are indications for early sur-
gery. Hypopituitarism is very common after apoplexy.
Empty sella
A partial or apparently totally empty sella is often an 
incidental MRI finding. These patients usually have 
normal pituitary function, implying that the surround-
ing rim of pituitary tissue is fully functional. Hypopi-
tuitarism, however, may develop insidiously. Pituitary 
masses also may undergo clinically silent infarction and 
involution with development of a partial or totally 
empty sella by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) filling the dural 
herniation. Rarely, small but functional pituitary ade-
nomas may arise within the rim of pituitary tissue, and 
they are not always visible on MRI.
Presentation and Diagnosis
The clinical manifestations of hypopituitarism depend 
on which hormones are lost and the extent of the 
hormone deficiency. GH deficiency causes growth dis-
orders in children and leads to abnormal body compo-
sition in adults (see below). Gonadotropin deficiency 
causes menstrual disorders and infertility in women and 
decreased sexual function, infertility, and loss of sec-
ondary sexual characteristics in men. TSH and ACTH 
deficiency usually develop later in the course of pitu-
itary failure. TSH deficiency causes growth retardation 
in children and features of hypothyroidism in children 
and adults. The secondary form of adrenal insufficiency 
caused by ACTH deficiency leads to hypocortisolism 
with relative preservation of mineralocorticoid produc-
tion. PRL deficiency causes failure of lactation. When 
lesions involve the posterior pituitary, polyuria and poly-
dipsia reflect loss of vasopressin secretion. Epidemiologic 
studies have documented an increased mortality rate in 
patients with long-standing pituitary damage, primarily 
from increased cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease. 
Previous head or neck irradiation is also a determinant of 
increased mortality rates in patients with hypopituitarism.
Laboratory Investigation
Biochemical diagnosis of pituitary insufficiency is made 
by demonstrating low levels of trophic hormones in the 
setting of low levels of target hormones. For example, 
low free thyroxine in the setting of a low or inappro-
priately normal TSH level suggests secondary hypo-
thyroidism. Similarly, a low testosterone level without 
elevation of gonadotropins suggests hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism. Provocative tests may be required to 
assess pituitary reserve (Table 2-3). GH responses to 
insulin-induced hypoglycemia, arginine, l-dopa, growth 
hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), or growth 
hormone–releasing peptides (GHRPs) can be used to 
assess GH reserve. Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) administration induces ACTH release, and 
administration of synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin) evokes 
adrenal cortisol release as an indirect indicator of pitu-
itary ACTH reserve (Chap. 5). ACTH reserve is most 
reliably assessed by measuring ACTH and cortisol lev-
els during insulin-induced hypoglycemia. However, 
this test should be performed cautiously in patients with 
suspected adrenal insufficiency because of enhanced sus-
ceptibility to hypoglycemia and hypotension. Adminis-
tering insulin to induce hypoglycemia is contraindicated 
in patients with active coronary artery disease or seizure 
disorders.
Treatment	
Hypopituitarism
Hormone replacement therapy, including glucocorti-
coids, thyroid hormone, sex steroids, growth hormone, 
and vasopressin, is usually safe and free of complica-
tions. Treatment regimens that mimic physiologic hor-
mone production allow for maintenance of satisfactory 
clinical homeostasis. Effective dosage schedules are 
outlined in Table 2-4. Patients in need of glucocorticoid 
replacement require careful dose adjustments during 
stressful events such as acute illness, dental procedures, 
trauma, and acute hospitalization.
Hypothalamic, Pituitary, and 
Other Sellar Masses
Pituitary Tumors
Pituitary adenomas are the most common cause of pitu-
itary hormone hypersecretion and hyposecretion syn-
dromes in adults. They account for ∼15% of all intra-
cranial neoplasms and have been identified with a 
population prevalence of ∼80/100,000. At autopsy, up 
to one-quarter of all pituitary glands harbor an unsus-
pected microadenoma (<10-mm diameter). Similarly, 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
22
Table 2-3
Tests of Pituitary Sufficiency
Hormone
Test
Blood Samples
Interpretation
Growth 
hormone
Insulin tolerance test: Regular 
insulin (0.05–0.15 U/kg IV)
−30, 0, 30, 60, 120 min for glucose 
and GH
Glucose <40 mg/dL; GH should be 
>3 μg/L
GHRH test: 1 μg/kg IV
0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120 min for GH
Normal response is GH >3 μg/L
l-Arginine test: 30 g IV over 
30 min
0, 30, 60, 120 min for GH
Normal response is GH >3 μg/L
l-Dopa test: 500 mg PO
0, 30, 60, 120 min for GH
Normal response is GH >3 μg/L
Prolactin
TRH test: 200–500 μg IV
0, 20, and 60 min for TSH and PRL
Normal prolactin is >2 μg/L and 
increase >200% of baseline
ACTH
Insulin tolerance test: regular 
insulin (0.05–0.15 U/kg IV)
−30, 0, 30, 60, 90 min for glucose 
and cortisol
Glucose <40 mg/dL
Cortisol should increase by >7 μg/
dL or to >20 μg/dL
CRH test: 1 μg/kg ovine CRH IV 
at 8 a.m.
0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 min for ACTH 
and cortisol
Basal ACTH increases 2- to 4-fold 
and peaks at 20–100 pg/mL
Cortisol levels >20–25 μg/dL
Metyrapone test: Metyrapone 
(30 mg/kg) at midnight
Plasma 11-deoxycortisol and  
cortisol at 8 a.m.; ACTH can 
also be measured
Plasma cortisol should be <4 μg/dL 
to ensure an adequate response
Normal response is  
11-deoxycortisol >7.5 μg/dL or 
ACTH >75 pg/mL
Standard ACTH stimulation test: 
ACTH 1-24 (cosyntropin),  
0.25 mg IM or IV
0, 30, 60 min for cortisol and  
aldosterone
Normal response is cortisol >21 μg/dL 
and aldosterone response of  
>4 ng/dL above baseline
Low-dose ACTH test: ACTH 
1-24 (cosyntropin), 1 μg IV
0, 30, 60 min for cortisol
Cortisol should be >21 μg/dL
3-day ACTH stimulation test 
consists of 0.25 mg ACTH 1-24 
given IV over 8 h each day
Cortisol >21 μg/dL
TSH
Basal thyroid function tests: T4, 
T3, TSH
Basal measurements
Low free thyroid hormone levels in 
the setting of TSH levels that are 
not appropriately increased indi-
cate pituitary insufficiency
TRH test: 200–500 μg IV
0, 20, 60 min for TSH and PRLa
TSH should increase by >5 mU/L 
unless thyroid hormone levels are 
increased
LH, FSH
LH, FSH, testosterone, estrogen
Basal measurements
Basal LH and FSH should be 
increased in postmenopausal 
women
Low testosterone levels in the  
setting of low LH and FSH indicate 
pituitary insufficiency
GnRH test: GnRH (100 μg) IV
0, 30, 60 min for LH and FSH
In most adults, LH should increase 
by 10 IU/L and FSH by 2 IU/L
Normal responses are variable
Multiple 
hormones
Combined anterior pituitary  
test: GHRH (1 μg/kg), 
CRH (1 μg/kg), GnRH (100 μg), 
TRH (200 μg) are given IV
−30, 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 min for 
GH, ACTH, cortisol, LH, FSH, and 
TSH
Combined or individual releasing 
hormone responses must be ele-
vated in the context of basal target 
gland hormone values and may not 
be uniformly diagnostic (see text)
aEvoked PRL response indicates lactotrope integrity.
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
23
pituitary imaging detects small clinically inapparent 
pituitary lesions in at least 10% of individuals.
Pathogenesis
Pituitary adenomas are benign neoplasms that arise from 
one of the five anterior pituitary cell types. The clini-
cal and biochemical phenotypes of pituitary adenomas 
depend on the cell type from which they are derived. 
Thus, tumors arising from lactotrope (PRL), somato-
trope (GH), corticotrope (ACTH), thyrotrope (TSH), 
or gonadotrope (LH, FSH) cells hypersecrete their 
respective hormones (Table 2-5). Plurihormonal 
tumors that express combinations of GH, PRL, TSH, 
ACTH, and the glycoprotein hormone α or β sub-
unit may be diagnosed by careful immunocytochemis-
try or may manifest as clinical syndromes that combine 
features of these hormonal hypersecretory syndromes. 
Morphologically, these tumors may arise from a single 
Table 2-4
Hormone Replacement Therapy for Adult 
Hypopituitarisma
Trophic  
Hormone Deficit
Hormone Replacement
ACTH
Hydrocortisone (10–20 mg a.m.; 
5–10 mg p.m.)
Cortisone acetate (25 mg a.m.; 
12.5 mg p.m.)
Prednisone (5 mg a.m.)
TSH
l-Thyroxine (0.075–0.15 mg daily)
FSH/LH
Males
Testosterone enanthate (200 mg 
IM every 2 weeks)
Testosterone skin patch (5 mg/d)
Females
Conjugated estrogen (0.65–1.25 
mg qd for 25 days)
Progesterone (5–10 mg qd) on 
days 16–25
Estradiol skin patch (0.5 mg, 
every other day)
For fertility: Menopausal  
gonadotropins, human chorionic 
gonadotropins
GH
Adults: Somatotropin  
(0.1–1.25 mg SC qd)
Children: Somatotropin  
(0.02–0.05 mg/kg per day)
Vasopressin
Intranasal desmopressin  
(5–20 mg twice daily)
Oral 300–600 mg qd
aAll doses shown should be individualized for specific patients and 
should be reassessed during stress, surgery, or pregnancy.
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
Table 2-5
Classification of Pituitary Adenomasa
Adenoma Cell 
Origin
Hormone 
Product
Clinical Syndrome
Lactotrope
PRL
Hypogonadism,  
galactorrhea
Gonadotrope
FSH, LH, 
subunits
Silent or  
hypogonadism
Somatotrope
GH
Acromegaly/gigantism
Corticotrope
ACTH
Cushing’s disease
Mixed growth 
hormone and 
prolactin cell
GH, PRL
Acromegaly, hypogo-
nadism, galactorrhea
Other  
plurihormonal 
cell
Any
Mixed
Acidophil stem 
cell
PRL, GH
Hypogonadism,  
galactorrhea,  
acromegaly
Mammosomato-
trope
PRL, GH
Hypogonadism,  
galactorrhea,  
acromegaly
Thyrotrope
TSH
Thyrotoxicosis
Null cell
None
Pituitary failure
Oncocytoma
None
Pituitary failure
aHormone-secreting tumors are listed in decreasing order of fre-
quency. All tumors may cause local pressure effects, including visual 
disturbances, cranial nerve palsy, and headache.
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
Source: Adapted from S Melmed, in JL Jameson (ed): Principles of 
Molecular Medicine, Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, 1998.
polysecreting cell type or include cells with mixed func-
tion within the same tumor.
Hormonally active tumors are characterized by 
autonomous hormone secretion with diminished feed-
back responsiveness to physiologic inhibitory pathways. 
Hormone production does not always correlate with 
tumor size. Small hormone-secreting adenomas may 
cause significant clinical perturbations, whereas larger 
adenomas that produce less hormone may be clinically 
silent and remain undiagnosed (if no central compres-
sive effects occur). About one-third of all adenomas 
are clinically nonfunctioning and produce no distinct 
clinical hypersecretory syndrome. Most of them arise 
from gonadotrope cells and may secrete small amounts 
of α- and β-glycoprotein hormone subunits or, very 
rarely, intact circulating gonadotropins. True pituitary 
carcinomas with documented extracranial metastases are 
exceedingly rare.
Almost all pituitary adenomas are monoclonal in ori-
gin, implying the acquisition of one or more somatic 
mutations that confer a selective growth advantage. 
Consistent with their clonal origin, complete surgical 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
24
resection of small pituitary adenomas usually cures hor-
mone hypersecretion. Nevertheless, hypothalamic hor-
mones such as GHRH and CRH also enhance mitotic 
activity of their respective pituitary target cells in addi-
tion to their role in pituitary hormone regulation. Thus, 
patients who harbor rare abdominal or chest tumors that 
elaborate ectopic GHRH or CRH may present with 
somatotrope or corticotrope hyperplasia with GH or 
ACTH hypersecretion.
Several etiologic genetic events have been implicated 
in the development of pituitary tumors. The pathogen-
esis of sporadic forms of acromegaly has been particu-
larly informative as a model of tumorigenesis. GHRH, 
after binding to its G protein–coupled somatotrope 
receptor, utilizes cyclic AMP (adenosine monophos-
phate) as a second messenger to stimulate GH secretion 
and somatotrope proliferation. A subset (∼35%) of GH-
secreting pituitary tumors contain sporadic mutations in 
Gsα (Arg 201 → Cys or His; Gln 227 → Arg). These 
mutations attenuate intrinsic GTPase activity, resulting 
in constitutive elevation of cyclic AMP, Pit-1 induc-
tion, and activation of cyclic AMP response element 
binding protein (CREB), thereby promoting somato-
trope cell proliferation and GH secretion.
Characteristic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in vari-
ous chromosomes has been documented in large or 
invasive macroadenomas, suggesting the presence of 
putative tumor suppressor genes at these loci. LOH of 
chromosome regions on 11q13, 13, and 9 is present in 
up to 20% of sporadic pituitary tumors, including GH-, 
PRL-, and ACTH-producing adenomas and some non-
functioning tumors.
Compelling evidence also favors growth factor pro-
motion of pituitary tumor proliferation. Basic fibroblast 
growth factor (bFGF) is abundant in the pituitary and 
has been shown to stimulate pituitary cell mitogenesis. 
Other factors involved in initiation and promotion of 
pituitary tumors include loss of negative-feedback inhi-
bition (as seen with primary hypothyroidism or hypo-
gonadism) and estrogen-mediated or paracrine angio-
genesis. Growth characteristics and neoplastic behavior 
also may be influenced by several activated oncogenes, 
including RAS and pituitary tumor transforming gene 
(PTTG), or inactivation of growth suppressor genes, 
including MEG3.
Genetic syndromes associated with pituitary 
tumors
Several familial syndromes are associated with pituitary 
tumors, and the genetic mechanisms for some of them 
have been unraveled (Table 2-6).
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 1 is an autoso-
mal dominant syndrome characterized primarily by a 
genetic predisposition to parathyroid, pancreatic islet, 
and pituitary adenomas (Chap. 23). MEN1 is caused 
Table 2-6
Familial Pituitary Tumor Syndromes
Gene 
Mutated
Clinical Features
Multiple  
endocrine 
neoplasia 1
(MEN 1)
MEN1
(11q13)
Hyperparathyroidism
Pancreatic  
neuroendocrine 
tumors
Foregut carcinoids
Adrenal adenomas
Skin lesions
Pituitary adenomas 
(40%)
Multiple  
endocrine 
neoplasia 4
(MEN 4)
CDKNIB
(12p13)
Hyperparathyroidsm
Pituitary adenomas
Other tumors
Carney  
complex
PRKAR1A 
17q23-24
Pituitary hyperplasia 
and adenomas (10%)
Atrial myxomas
Schwannomas
Adrenal hyperplasia
Lentigines
Familial  
pituitary  
adenomas
AIP 
(11q13.3)
Acromegaly/gigantism 
(15%)
by inactivating germ-line mutations in MENIN, a con-
stitutively expressed tumor-suppressor gene located 
on chromosome 11q13. Loss of heterozygosity, or a 
somatic mutation of the remaining normal MENIN allele, 
leads to tumorigenesis. About half of affected patients 
develop prolactinomas; acromegaly and Cushing’s syn-
drome are less commonly encountered.
Carney syndrome is characterized by spotty skin pig-
mentation, myxomas, and endocrine tumors, including 
testicular, adrenal, and pituitary adenomas. Acromeg-
aly occurs in about 20% of these patients. A subset of 
patients have mutations in the R1α regulatory subunit 
of protein kinase A (PRKAR1A).
McCune-Albright syndrome consists of polyostotic 
fibrous dysplasia, pigmented skin patches, and a variety 
of endocrine disorders, including acromegaly, adrenal 
adenomas, and autonomous ovarian function (Chap. 10). 
Hormonal hypersecretion results from constitutive cyclic 
AMP production caused by inactivation of the GTPase 
activity of Gsα. The Gsα mutations occur postzygoti-
cally, leading to a mosaic pattern of mutant expression.
Familial acromegaly is a rare disorder in which family 
members may manifest either acromegaly or gigan-
tism. The disorder is associated with LOH at a chro-
mosome 11q13 locus distinct from that of MENIN. 
A subset of families with a predisposition for famil-
ial pituitary tumors, especially acromegaly, have been 
found to harbor inactivating mutations in the AIP gene, 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
25
which encodes the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interact-
ing protein.
Other Sellar Masses
Craniopharyngiomas are benign, suprasellar cystic masses 
that present with headaches, visual field deficits, and 
variable degrees of hypopituitarism. They are derived 
from Rathke’s pouch and arise near the pituitary stalk, 
commonly extending into the suprasellar cistern. 
Craniopharyngiomas are often large, cystic, and locally 
invasive. Many are partially calcified, exhibiting a char-
acteristic appearance on skull x-ray and CT images. 
More than half of all patients present before age 20, usu-
ally with signs of increased intracranial pressure, includ-
ing headache, vomiting, papilledema, and hydrocephalus. 
Associated symptoms include visual field abnormalities, 
personality changes and cognitive deterioration, cranial 
nerve damage, sleep difficulties, and weight gain. Hypo-
pituitarism can be documented in about 90%, and dia-
betes insipidus occurs in about 10% of patients. About 
half of affected children present with growth retardation. 
MRI is generally superior to CT for evaluating cystic 
structure and tissue components of craniopharyngiomas. 
CT is useful to define calcifications and evaluate invasion 
into surrounding bony structures and sinuses.
Treatment usually involves transcranial or trans­
sphenoidal surgical resection followed by postoperative 
radiation of residual tumor. Surgery alone is curative in 
less than half of patients because of recurrences due to 
adherence to vital structures or because of small tumor 
deposits in the hypothalamus or brain parenchyma. The 
goal of surgery is to remove as much tumor as possible 
without risking complications associated with efforts 
to remove firmly adherent or inaccessible tissue. In 
the absence of radiotherapy, about 75% of craniopha-
ryngiomas recur, and 10-year survival is less than 50%. 
In patients with incomplete resection, radiotherapy 
improves 10-year survival to 70–90% but is associated 
with increased risk of secondary malignancies. Most 
patients require lifelong pituitary hormone replacement.
Developmental failure of Rathke’s pouch oblit-
eration may lead to Rathke’s cysts, which are small 
(<5 mm) cysts entrapped by squamous epithelium 
and are found in about 20% of individuals at autopsy. 
Although Rathke’s cleft cysts do not usually grow and 
are often diagnosed incidentally, about a third pres-
ent in adulthood with compressive symptoms, diabetes 
insipidus, and hyperprolactinemia due to stalk compres-
sion. Rarely, hydrocephalus develops. The diagnosis is 
suggested preoperatively by visualizing the cyst wall on 
MRI, which distinguishes these lesions from craniopha-
ryngiomas. Cyst contents range from CSF-like fluid to 
mucoid material. Arachnoid cysts are rare and generate an 
MRI image that is isointense with cerebrospinal fluid.
Sella chordomas usually present with bony clival ero-
sion, local invasiveness, and, on occasion, calcification. 
Normal pituitary tissue may be visible on MRI, distin-
guishing chordomas from aggressive pituitary adeno-
mas. Mucinous material may be obtained by fine-needle 
aspiration.
Meningiomas arising in the sellar region may be diffi-
cult to distinguish from nonfunctioning pituitary adeno-
mas. Meningiomas typically enhance on MRI and may 
show evidence of calcification or bony erosion. Menin-
giomas may cause compressive symptoms.
Histiocytosis X includes a variety of syndromes asso-
ciated with foci of eosinophilic granulomas. Diabetes 
insipidus, exophthalmos, and punched-out lytic bone 
lesions (Hand-Schüller-Christian disease) are associated 
with granulomatous lesions visible on MRI, as well as 
a characteristic axillary skin rash. Rarely, the pituitary 
stalk may be involved.
Pituitary metastases occur in ∼3% of cancer patients. 
Bloodborne metastatic deposits are found almost exclu-
sively in the posterior pituitary. Accordingly, diabetes 
insipidus can be a presenting feature of lung, gastroin-
testinal, breast, and other pituitary metastases. About 
half of pituitary metastases originate from breast cancer; 
about 25% of patients with metastatic breast cancer have 
such deposits. Rarely, pituitary stalk involvement results 
in anterior pituitary insufficiency. The MRI diagno-
sis of a metastatic lesion may be difficult to distinguish 
from an aggressive pituitary adenoma; the diagnosis may 
require histologic examination of excised tumor tissue. 
Primary or metastatic lymphoma, leukemias, and plas-
macytomas also occur within the sella.
Hypothalamic hamartomas and gangliocytomas may arise 
from astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons with 
varying degrees of differentiation. These tumors may 
overexpress hypothalamic neuropeptides, including 
GnRH, GHRH, and CRH. With GnRH-producing 
tumors, children present with precocious puberty, psy-
chomotor delay, and laughing-associated seizures. Med-
ical treatment of GnRH-producing hamartomas with 
long-acting GnRH analogues effectively suppresses 
gonadotropin secretion and controls premature puber-
tal development. Rarely, hamartomas also are associ-
ated with craniofacial abnormalities; imperforate anus; 
cardiac, renal, and lung disorders; and pituitary failure 
as features of Pallister-Hall syndrome, which is caused by 
mutations in the carboxy terminus of the GLI3 gene. 
Hypothalamic hamartomas are often contiguous with 
the pituitary, and preoperative MRI diagnosis may not 
be possible. Histologic evidence of hypothalamic neu-
rons in tissue resected at transsphenoidal surgery may be 
the first indication of a primary hypothalamic lesion.
Hypothalamic gliomas and optic gliomas occur mainly in 
childhood and usually present with visual loss. Adults 
have more aggressive tumors; about a third are associ-
ated with neurofibromatosis.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
26
Brain germ-cell tumors may arise within the sellar 
region. They include dysgerminomas, which frequently 
are associated with diabetes insipidus and visual loss. 
They rarely metastasize. Germinomas, embryonal carcino-
mas, teratomas, and choriocarcinomas may arise in the para-
sellar region and produce hCG. These germ-cell tumors 
present with precocious puberty, diabetes insipidus, 
visual field defects, and thirst disorders. Many patients 
are GH deficient with short stature.
Metabolic Effects of  
Hypothalamic Lesions
Lesions involving the anterior and preoptic hypo-
thalamic regions cause paradoxical vasoconstriction, 
tachycardia, and hyperthermia. Acute hyperthermia 
usually is due to a hemorrhagic insult, but poikilother-
mia may also occur. Central disorders of thermoregula-
tion result from posterior hypothalamic damage. The 
periodic hypothermia syndrome is characterized by episodic 
attacks of rectal temperatures <30°C (86°F), sweating, 
vasodilation, vomiting, and bradycardia. Damage to 
the ventromedial hypothalamic nuclei by craniopha-
ryngiomas, hypothalamic trauma, or inflammatory dis-
orders may be associated with hyperphagia and obesity. 
This region appears to contain an energy-satiety center 
where melanocortin receptors are influenced by leptin, 
insulin, POMC products, and gastrointestinal peptides 
(Chap. 16). Polydipsia and hypodipsia are associated 
with damage to central osmoreceptors located in pre-
optic nuclei (Chap. 3). Slow-growing hypothalamic 
lesions can cause increased somnolence and disturbed 
sleep cycles as well as obesity, hypothermia, and emo-
tional outbursts. Lesions of the central hypothalamus may 
stimulate sympathetic neurons, leading to elevated serum 
catecholamine and cortisol levels. These patients are pre-
disposed to cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, and gastric 
erosions.
Evaluation
Local mass effects
Clinical manifestations of sellar lesions vary, depend-
ing on the anatomic location of the mass and the 
direction of its extension (Table 2-7). The dorsal sel-
lar diaphragm presents the least resistance to soft tissue 
expansion from the sella; consequently, pituitary adeno-
mas frequently extend in a suprasellar direction. Bony 
invasion may occur as well.
Headaches are common features of small intrasellar 
tumors, even with no demonstrable suprasellar exten-
sion. Because of the confined nature of the pituitary, 
small changes in intrasellar pressure stretch the dural 
plate; however, headache severity correlates poorly with 
adenoma size or extension.
Table 2-7
Features of Sellar Mass Lesionsa
Impacted Structure
Clinical Impact
Pituitary
Hypogonadism
Hypothyroidism
Growth failure and adult  
hyposomatotropism
Hypoadrenalism
Optic chiasm
Loss of red perception
Bitemporal hemianopia
Superior or bitemporal field 
defect
Scotoma
Blindness
Hypothalamus
Temperature dysregulation
Appetite and thirst disorders
Obesity
Diabetes insipidus
Sleep disorders
Behavioral dysfunction
Autonomic dysfunction
Cavernous sinus
Opthalmoplegia with or without 
ptosis or diplopia
Facial numbness
Frontal lobe
Personality disorder
Anosmia
Brain
Headache
Hydrocephalus
Psychosis
Dementia
Laughing seizures
aAs the intrasellar mass expands, it first compresses intrasellar pitu-
itary tissue, then usually invades dorsally through the dura to lift the 
optic chiasm or laterally to the cavernous sinuses. Bony erosion is 
rare, as is direct brain compression. Microadenomas may present 
with headache.
Suprasellar extension can lead to visual loss by sev-
eral mechanisms, the most common being compres-
sion of the optic chiasm, but rarely, direct invasion of 
the optic nerves or obstruction of CSF flow leading to 
secondary visual disturbances also occurs. Pituitary stalk 
compression by a hormonally active or inactive intra-
sellar mass may compress the portal vessels, disrupting 
pituitary access to hypothalamic hormones and dopa-
mine; this results in early hyperprolactinemia and later 
concurrent loss of other pituitary hormones. This “stalk 
section” phenomenon may also be caused by trauma, 
whiplash injury with posterior clinoid stalk compres-
sion, or skull base fractures. Lateral mass invasion may 
impinge on the cavernous sinus and compress its neural 
contents, leading to cranial nerve III, IV, and VI pal-
sies as well as effects on the ophthalmic and maxillary 
branches of the fifth cranial nerve. Patients may present 
with diplopia, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, and decreased 
facial sensation, depending on the extent of neural 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
27
damage. Extension into the sphenoid sinus indicates that 
the pituitary mass has eroded through the sellar floor. 
Aggressive tumors rarely invade the palate roof and 
cause nasopharyngeal obstruction, infection, and CSF 
leakage. Temporal and frontal lobe involvement may 
rarely lead to uncinate seizures, personality disorders, 
and anosmia. Direct hypothalamic encroachment by an 
invasive pituitary mass may cause important metabolic 
sequelae, including precocious puberty or hypogonadism, 
diabetes insipidus, sleep disturbances, dysthermia, and 
appetite disorders.
MRI
Sagittal and coronal T1-weighted MRI imaging before 
and after administration of gadolinium allows precise 
visualization of the pituitary gland with clear delinea-
tion of the hypothalamus, pituitary stalk, pituitary tissue 
and surrounding suprasellar cisterns, cavernous sinuses, 
sphenoid sinus, and optic chiasm. Pituitary gland height 
ranges from 6 mm in children to 8 mm in adults; during 
pregnancy and puberty, the height may reach 10–12 mm. 
The upper aspect of the adult pituitary is flat or slightly 
concave, but in adolescent and pregnant individuals, this 
surface may be convex, reflecting physiologic pituitary 
enlargement. The stalk should be midline and vertical. 
CT scan is reserved to define the extent of bony erosion 
or the presence of calcification.
Anterior pituitary gland soft tissue consistency is 
slightly heterogeneous on MRI, and signal intensity 
resembles that of brain matter on T1-weighted imaging 
(Fig. 2-4). Adenoma density is usually lower than that 
of surrounding normal tissue on T1-weighted imag-
ing, and the signal intensity increases with T2-weighted 
images. The high phospholipid content of the posterior 
pituitary results in a “pituitary bright spot.”
Sellar masses are encountered commonly as inciden-
tal findings on MRI, and most of them are pituitary 
adenomas (incidentalomas). In the absence of hormone 
hypersecretion, these small intrasellar lesions can be 
monitored safely with MRI, which is performed annu-
ally and then less often if there is no evidence of further 
growth. Resection should be considered for incidentally 
discovered macroadenomas, as about one-third become 
invasive or cause local pressure effects. If hormone 
hypersecretion is evident, specific therapies are indi-
cated. When larger masses (>1 cm) are encountered, 
they should also be distinguished from nonadenomatous 
lesions. Meningiomas often are associated with bony 
hyperostosis; craniopharyngiomas may be calcified and 
are usually hypodense, whereas gliomas are hyperdense 
on T2-weighted images.
Ophthalmologic evaluation
Because optic tracts may be contiguous to an expand-
ing pituitary mass, reproducible visual field assessment 
using perimetry techniques should be performed on 
all patients with sellar mass lesions that abut the optic 
chiasm (Chap. 28). Bitemporal hemianopia or superior 
bitemporal defects are classically observed, reflecting the 
location of these tracts within the inferior and poste-
rior part of the chiasm. Homonymous cuts reflect post-
chiasmal lesions, and monocular field cuts prechiasmal 
lesions. Loss of red perception is an early sign of optic 
tract pressure. Early diagnosis reduces the risk of blind-
ness, scotomas, or other visual disturbances.
Laboratory investigation
The presenting clinical features of functional pituitary 
adenomas (e.g., acromegaly, prolactinomas, or Cush-
ing’s syndrome) should guide the laboratory studies 
(Table 2-8). However, for a sellar mass with no obvi-
ous clinical features of hormone excess, laboratory stud-
ies are geared toward determining the nature of the 
tumor and assessing the possible presence of hypopitu-
itarism. When a pituitary adenoma is suspected based 
on MRI, initial hormonal evaluation usually includes 
(1) basal PRL; (2) insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I; 
(3) 24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC) and/or overnight 
oral dexamethasone (1 mg) suppression test; (4) α sub-
unit, FSH, and LH; and (5) thyroid function tests. 
Additional hormonal evaluation may be indicated based 
on the results of these tests. Pending more detailed 
assessment of hypopituitarism, a menstrual history, 
measurement of testosterone and 8 a.m. cortisol levels, 
and thyroid function tests usually identify patients with 
Figure 2-4
Pituitary adenoma. Coronal T1-weighted postcontrast MR 
image shows a homogeneously enhancing mass (arrowheads) 
in the sella turcica and suprasellar region compatible with a 
pituitary adenoma; the small arrows outline the carotid arteries.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
28
pituitary hormone deficiencies that require hormone 
replacement before further testing or surgery.
Histologic evaluation
Immunohistochemical staining of pituitary tumor spec-
imens obtained at transsphenoidal surgery confirms 
clinical and laboratory studies and provides a histologic 
diagnosis when hormone studies are equivocal and in 
cases of clinically nonfunctioning tumors. Occasion-
ally, ultrastructural assessment by electron microscopy is 
required for diagnosis.
Treatment	
Hypothalamic, Pituitary, and Other Sellar 
Masses
Overview  Successful 
management 
of 
sellar 
masses requires accurate diagnosis as well as selection 
of optimal therapeutic modalities. Most pituitary tumors 
Table 2-8
Screening Tests for Functional Pituitary 
Adenomas
Test
Comments
Acromegaly
Serum IGF-I
Interpret IGF-I relative 
to age- and sex-
matched controls
Oral glucose 
tolerance 
test with GH 
obtained at 0, 
30, and 60 min
Normal subjects 
should suppress 
growth hormone to 
<1 μg/L
Prolactinoma
Serum PRL
Exclude medications
MRI of the sella 
should be ordered if 
prolactin is elevated
Cushing’s 
disease
24-h urinary free 
cortisol
Ensure urine  
collection is total 
and accurate
Dexamethasone 
(1 mg) at 11 p.m. 
and fasting 
plasma cortisol 
measured at  
8 a.m.
Normal subjects  
suppress to  
<5 μg/dL
ACTH assay
Distinguishes adrenal 
adenoma (ACTH 
suppressed) from 
ectopic ACTH or 
Cushing’s disease 
(ACTH normal or 
elevated)
Note: For abbreviations, see text.
are benign and slow growing. Clinical features result 
from local mass effects and hormonal hypo- or hyper-
secretion syndromes caused directly by the adenoma 
or occurring as a consequence of treatment. Thus, life-
long management and follow-up are necessary for 
these patients.
MRI with gadolinium enhancement for pituitary 
visualization, new advances in transsphenoidal surgery 
and in stereotactic radiotherapy (including gamma-
knife radiotherapy), and novel therapeutic agents have 
improved pituitary tumor management. The goals of 
pituitary tumor treatment include normalization of 
excess pituitary secretion, amelioration of symptoms 
and signs of hormonal hypersecretion syndromes, and 
shrinkage or ablation of large tumor masses with relief 
of adjacent structure compression. Residual anterior 
pituitary function should be preserved during treat-
ment and sometimes can be restored by removing the 
tumor mass. Ideally, adenoma recurrence should be pre-
vented.
Transsphenoidal Surgery  Transsphenoi-
dal rather than transfrontal resection is the desired surgi-
cal approach for pituitary tumors, except for the rare inva-
sive suprasellar mass surrounding the frontal or middle 
fossa or the optic nerves or invading posteriorly behind 
the clivus. Intraoperative microscopy facilitates visual dis-
tinction between adenomatous and normal pituitary tis-
sue as well as microdissection of small tumors that may 
not be visible by MRI (Fig. 2-5). Transsphenoidal surgery 
also avoids the cranial invasion and manipulation of brain 
tissue required by subfrontal surgical approaches. Endo-
scopic techniques with three-dimensional intraoperative 
localization have also improved visualization and access 
to tumor tissue.
In addition to correction of hormonal hypersecre-
tion, pituitary surgery is indicated for mass lesions that 
impinge on surrounding structures. Surgical decom-
pression and resection are required for an expanding 
pituitary mass accompanied by persistent headache, 
progressive visual field defects, cranial nerve palsies, 
hydrocephalus, and, occasionally, intrapituitary hemor-
rhage and apoplexy. Transsphenoidal surgery some-
times is used for pituitary tissue biopsy to establish a 
histologic diagnosis.
Whenever possible, the pituitary mass lesion should 
be selectively excised; normal pituitary tissue should be 
manipulated or resected only when critical for effective 
mass dissection. Nonselective hemihypophysectomy 
or total hypophysectomy may be indicated if no hyper-
secreting mass lesion is clearly discernible, multifocal 
lesions are present, or the remaining nontumorous pitu-
itary tissue is obviously necrotic. This strategy, however, 
increases the likelihood of hypopituitarism and the 
need for lifelong hormone replacement.
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
29
Preoperative mass effects, including visual field 
defects and compromised pituitary function, may be 
reversed by surgery, particularly when the deficits are 
not long-standing. For large and invasive tumors, it is 
necessary to determine the optimal balance between 
maximal tumor resection and preservation of anterior 
pituitary function, especially for preserving growth and 
reproductive function in younger patients. Similarly, 
tumor invasion outside the sella is rarely amenable to 
surgical cure; the surgeon must judge the risk-versus-
benefit ratio of extensive tumor resection.
Side Effects  Tumor size, the degree of invasiveness, 
and experience of the surgeon largely determine the 
incidence of surgical complications. Operative mortality 
rate is about 1%. Transient diabetes insipidus and hypo-
pituitarism occur in up to 20% of patients. Permanent 
diabetes insipidus, cranial nerve damage, nasal septal 
Optic chiasm
Pituitary tumor
Venus plexus
of cavernous
sinus
Sphenoid
sinus
Sphenoid
bone
Surgical curette
Nasal septum
Oculomotor
nerve
Trochlear
nerve
Internal carotid
artery
Pituitary
tumor
Sphenoid
sinus
Trigeminal
nerve
perforation, or visual disturbances may be encoun-
tered in up to 10% of patients. CSF leaks occur in 4% of 
patients. Less common complications include carotid 
artery injury, loss of vision, hypothalamic damage, and 
meningitis. Permanent side effects are rare after surgery 
for microadenomas.
Radiation  Radiation is used either as a primary 
therapy for pituitary or parasellar masses or, more com-
monly, as an adjunct to surgery or medical therapy. 
Focused megavoltage irradiation is achieved by precise 
MRI localization, using a high-voltage linear accelerator 
and accurate isocentric rotational arcing. A major deter-
minant of accurate irradiation is reproduction of the 
patient’s head position during multiple visits and main-
tenance of absolute head immobility. A total of <50 Gy 
(5000 rad) is given as 180-cGy (180-rad) fractions divided 
over about 6 weeks. Stereotactic radiosurgery delivers a 
large single high-energy dose from a cobalt 60 source 
(gamma knife), linear accelerator, or cyclotron. Long-
term effects of gamma-knife surgery are unclear but 
appear to be similar to those encountered with conven-
tional radiation.
The role of radiation therapy in pituitary tumor 
management depends on multiple factors, including 
the nature of the tumor, the age of the patient, and the 
availability of surgical and radiation expertise. Because 
of its relatively slow onset of action, radiation therapy 
is usually reserved for postsurgical management. As an 
adjuvant to surgery, radiation is used to treat residual 
tumor and in an attempt to prevent regrowth. Irradia-
tion offers the only means for potentially ablating sig-
nificant postoperative residual nonfunctioning tumor 
tissue. In contrast, PRL- and GH-secreting tumor tissues 
are amenable to medical therapy.
Side Effects  In the short term, radiation may cause 
transient nausea and weakness. Alopecia and loss of 
taste and smell may be more long lasting. Failure of 
pituitary hormone synthesis is common in patients 
who have undergone head and neck or pituitary-
directed irradiation. More than 50% of patients develop 
loss of GH, ACTH, TSH, and/or gonadotropin secretion 
within 10 years, usually due to hypothalamic damage.  
Lifelong follow-up with testing of anterior pituitary 
hormone reserve is therefore required after radiation 
treatment. Optic nerve damage with impaired vision 
due to optic neuritis is reported in about 2% of patients 
who undergo pituitary irradiation. Cranial nerve dam-
age is uncommon now that radiation doses are ≤2 Gy 
(200 rad) at any one treatment session and the maxi-
mum dose is <50 Gy (5000 rad). The use of stereotactic 
radiotherapy may reduce damage to adjacent struc-
tures. Radiotherapy for pituitary tumors has been 
associated with adverse mortality rates, mainly from 
Figure 2-5 
Transsphenoidal resection of pituitary mass via the endo-
nasal approach. (Adapted from R Fahlbusch: Endocrinol 
Metab Clin 21:669, 1992.)
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
30
cerebrovascular disease. The cumulative risk of develop-
ing a secondary tumor after conventional radiation is 
1.3% after 10 years and 1.9% after 20 years.
Medical  Medical therapy for pituitary tumors is 
highly specific and depends on tumor type. For pro-
lactinomas, dopamine agonists are the treatment of 
choice. For acromegaly, somatostatin analogues and 
GH receptor antagonists are indicated. For TSH-secret-
ing tumors, somatostatin analogues and occasion-
ally dopamine agonists are indicated. ACTH-secreting 
tumors and nonfunctioning tumors are generally not 
responsive to medications and require surgery and/or 
irradiation.
Prolactin
Synthesis
PRL consists of 198 amino acids and has a molecular 
mass of 21,500 kDa; it is weakly homologous to GH 
and human placental lactogen (hPL), reflecting the 
duplication and divergence of a common GH-PRL-
hPL precursor gene. PRL is synthesized in lactotropes, 
which constitute about 20% of anterior pituitary cells. 
Lactotropes and somatotropes are derived from a com-
mon precursor cell that may give rise to a tumor that 
secretes both PRL and GH. Marked lactotrope cell 
hyperplasia develops during pregnancy and the first few 
months of lactation. These transient functional changes 
in the lactotrope population are induced by estrogen.
Secretion
Normal adult serum PRL levels are about 10–25 μg/L 
in women and 10–20 μg/L in men. PRL secretion is 
pulsatile, with the highest secretory peaks occurring dur-
ing rapid eye movement sleep. Peak serum PRL levels 
(up to 30 μg/L) occur between 4:00 and 6:00 a.m. The 
circulating half-life of PRL is about 50 min.
PRL is unique among the pituitary hormones in that 
the predominant central control mechanism is inhibi-
tory, reflecting dopamine-mediated suppression of PRL 
release. This regulatory pathway accounts for the spon-
taneous PRL hypersecretion that occurs with pituitary 
stalk section, often a consequence of compressive mass 
lesions at the skull base. Pituitary dopamine type 2 (D2) 
receptors mediate inhibition of PRL synthesis and secre-
tion. Targeted disruption (gene knockout) of the murine 
D2 receptor in mice results in hyperprolactinemia and 
lactotrope proliferation. As discussed below, dopamine 
agonists play a central role in the management of hyper-
prolactinemic disorders.
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) (pyro Glu-
His-Pro-NH2) is a hypothalamic tripeptide that elicits 
prolactin release within 15–30 min after intravenous 
injection. The physiologic relevance of TRH for PRL 
regulation is unclear, and it appears primarily to regulate 
TSH (Chap. 4). Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) also 
induces PRL release, whereas glucocorticoids and thy-
roid hormone weakly suppress PRL secretion.
Serum PRL levels rise transiently after exercise, 
meals, sexual intercourse, minor surgical procedures, 
general anesthesia, chest wall injury, acute myocardial 
infarction, and other forms of acute stress. PRL levels 
increase markedly (about tenfold) during pregnancy and 
decline rapidly within 2 weeks of parturition. If breast-
feeding is initiated, basal PRL levels remain elevated; 
suckling stimulates reflex increases in PRL levels that 
last for about 30–45 min. Breast suckling activates neu-
ral afferent pathways in the hypothalamus that induce 
PRL release. With time, suckling-induced responses 
diminish and interfeeding PRL levels return to normal.
Action
The PRL receptor is a member of the type I cytokine 
receptor family that also includes GH and interleu-
kin (IL) 6 receptors. Ligand binding induces receptor 
dimerization and intracellular signaling by Janus kinase 
(JAK), which stimulates translocation of the signal trans-
duction and activators of transcription (STAT) family 
to activate target genes. In the breast, the lobuloalveo-
lar epithelium proliferates in response to PRL, placen-
tal lactogens, estrogen, progesterone, and local paracrine 
growth factors, including IGF-I.
PRL acts to induce and maintain lactation, decrease 
reproductive function, and suppress sexual drive. These 
functions are geared toward ensuring that maternal lac-
tation is sustained and not interrupted by pregnancy. 
PRL inhibits reproductive function by suppressing 
hypothalamic GnRH and pituitary gonadotropin secre-
tion and by impairing gonadal steroidogenesis in both 
women and men. In the ovary, PRL blocks folliculo-
genesis and inhibits granulosa cell aromatase activity, 
leading to hypoestrogenism and anovulation. PRL also 
has a luteolytic effect, generating a shortened, or inad-
equate, luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. In men, 
attenuated LH secretion leads to low testosterone lev-
els and decreased spermatogenesis. These hormonal 
changes decrease libido and reduce fertility in patients 
with hyperprolactinemia.
Hyperprolactinemia
Etiology
Hyperprolactinemia is the most common pituitary hor-
mone hypersecretion syndrome in both men and women. 
PRL-secreting 
pituitary 
adenomas 
(prolactinomas) 
are the most common cause of PRL levels >200 μg/L 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
31
(see below). Less pronounced PRL elevation can also be 
seen with microprolactinomas but is more commonly 
caused by drugs, pituitary stalk compression, hypothy-
roidism, or renal failure (Table 2-9).
Pregnancy and lactation are the important physi-
ologic causes of hyperprolactinemia. Sleep-associated 
hyperprolactinemia reverts to normal within an hour of 
awakening. Nipple stimulation and sexual orgasm also 
may increase PRL. Chest wall stimulation or trauma 
(including chest surgery and herpes zoster) invoke the 
reflex suckling arc with resultant hyperprolactinemia. 
Chronic renal failure elevates PRL by decreasing 
peripheral clearance. Primary hypothyroidism is associ-
ated with mild hyperprolactinemia, probably because of 
compensatory TRH secretion.
Lesions of the hypothalamic-pituitary region that 
disrupt hypothalamic dopamine synthesis, portal vessel 
Table 2-9
Etiology of Hyperprolactinemia
I.	
Physiologic 
	
  hypersecretion
	 	
Pregnancy
	 	
Lactation
	 	
Chest wall stimulation
	 	
Sleep
	 	
Stress
II.	 Hypothalamic–pituitary 
	
  stalk damage
	 	
Tumors
	 	
  Craniopharyngioma
Suprasellar pituitary 
mass
Meningioma
Dysgerminoma
Metastases
	 	
Empty sella
	 	
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
	 	
Adenoma with stalk  
	
  compression
	 	
Granulomas
	 	
Rathke’s cyst
	 	
Irradiation
	 	
Trauma
Pituitary stalk section
Suprasellar surgery
III.	 Pituitary hypersecretion
	 	
Prolactinoma
	 	
Acromegaly
IV.	 Systemic disorders
	 	
Chronic renal failure
	 	
Hypothyroidism
	 	
Cirrhosis
	 	
Pseudocyesis
	 	
Epileptic seizures 
V.	 Drug-induced 
	   hypersecretion
	 	 Dopamine receptor 
	   blockers
Atypical  
antipsychotics:  
risperidone
Phenothiazines: 
chlorpromazine, 
perphenazine
Butyrophenones:  
haloperidol
Thioxanthenes
Metoclopramide
	 	 Dopamine synthesis  
	   inhibitors
α-Methyldopa
	 	 Catecholamine  
	   depletors
Reserpine
	 	 Opiates
	 	 H2 antagonists
Cimetidine,  
ranitidine
	 	 Imipramines
Amitriptyline,  
amoxapine
	 	 Serotonin reuptake  
	   inhibitors
Fluoxetine
	 	 Calcium channel 
	   blockers
Verapamil
Estrogens
TRH
Note: Hyperprolactinemia >200 μg/L almost invariably is indica-
tive of a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma. Physiologic causes, 
hypothyroidism, and drug-induced hyperprolactinemia should be 
excluded before extensive evaluation.
delivery, or lactotrope responses are associated with 
hyperprolactinemia. Thus, hypothalamic tumors, cysts, 
infiltrative disorders, and radiation-induced dam-
age cause elevated PRL levels, usually in the range of 
30–100 μg/L. Plurihormonal adenomas (including GH 
and ACTH tumors) may hypersecrete PRL directly. 
Pituitary masses, including clinically nonfunctioning 
pituitary tumors, may compress the pituitary stalk to 
cause hyperprolactinemia.
Drug-induced inhibition or disruption of dopami-
nergic receptor function is a common cause of hyper-
prolactinemia (Table 2-9). Thus, antipsychotics and 
antidepressants are a relatively common cause of mild 
hyperprolactinemia. Most patients receiving risperi-
done have elevated prolactin levels, sometimes exceed-
ing 200 ug/L. Methyldopa inhibits dopamine synthesis 
and verapamil blocks dopamine release, also leading to 
hyperprolactinemia. Hormonal agents that induce PRL 
include estrogens and TRH.
Presentation and diagnosis
Amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and infertility are the hall-
marks of hyperprolactinemia in women. If hyperprolac-
tinemia develops before menarche, primary amenorrhea 
results. More commonly, hyperprolactinemia develops 
later in life and leads to oligomenorrhea and ultimately 
to amenorrhea. If hyperprolactinemia is sustained, ver-
tebral bone mineral density can be reduced compared 
with age-matched controls, particularly when it is asso-
ciated with pronounced hypoestrogenemia. Galac-
torrhea is present in up to 80% of hyperprolactinemic 
women. Although usually bilateral and spontaneous, it 
may be unilateral or expressed only manually. Patients 
also may complain of decreased libido, weight gain, and 
mild hirsutism.
In men with hyperprolactinemia, diminished libido, 
infertility, and visual loss (from optic nerve compres-
sion) are the usual presenting symptoms. Gonadotropin 
suppression leads to reduced testosterone, impotence, 
and oligospermia. True galactorrhea is uncommon in 
men with hyperprolactinemia. If the disorder is long-
standing, secondary effects of hypogonadism are evi-
dent, including osteopenia, reduced muscle mass, and 
decreased beard growth.
The diagnosis of idiopathic hyperprolactinemia is 
made by exclusion of known causes of hyperprolac-
tinemia in the setting of a normal pituitary MRI. Some 
of these patients may harbor small microadenomas 
below visible MRI sensitivity (∼2 mm).
Galactorrhea
Galactorrhea, the inappropriate discharge of milk-containing 
fluid from the breast, is considered abnormal if it persists 
longer than 6 months after childbirth or discontinuation 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
32
of breast-feeding. Postpartum galactorrhea associated 
with amenorrhea is a self-limiting disorder usually asso-
ciated with moderately elevated PRL levels. Galactor-
rhea may occur spontaneously, or it may be elicited by 
nipple pressure. In both men and women, galactorrhea 
may vary in color and consistency (transparent, milky, 
or bloody) and arise either unilaterally or bilaterally. 
Mammography or ultrasound is indicated for bloody 
discharges (particularly from a single nipple), which 
may be caused by breast cancer. Galactorrhea is com-
monly associated with hyperprolactinemia caused by 
any of the conditions listed in Table 2-9. Acromegaly 
is associated with galactorrhea in about one-third of 
patients. Treatment of galactorrhea usually involves 
managing the underlying disorder (e.g., replacing T4 for 
hypothyroidism, discontinuing a medication, treating 
prolactinoma).
Laboratory investigation
Basal, fasting morning PRL levels (normally <20 μg/L) 
should be measured to assess hypersecretion. Both 
false-positive and false-negative results may be 
encountered. In patients with markedly elevated PRL 
levels (>1000 μg/L), reported results may be falsely 
lowered because of assay artifacts; sample dilution 
is required to measure these high values accurately. 
Falsely elevated values may be caused by aggregated 
forms of circulating PRL, which are usually biologi-
cally inactive (macroprolactinemia). Hypothyroidism 
should be excluded by measuring TSH and T4 levels.
Treatment	
Hyperprolactinemia
Treatment of hyperprolactinemia depends on the 
cause of elevated PRL levels. Regardless of the etiol-
ogy, however, treatment should be aimed at normal-
izing PRL levels to alleviate suppressive effects on 
gonadal function, halt galactorrhea, and preserve 
bone mineral density. Dopamine agonists are effective 
for most causes of hyperprolactinemia (see the treat-
ment section for prolactinoma, below) regardless of 
the underlying cause.
If the patient is taking a medication known to cause 
hyperprolactinemia, the drug should be withdrawn, if 
possible. For psychiatric patients who require neuro-
leptic agents, supervised dose titration or the addition 
of a dopamine agonist can help restore normoprolac-
tinemia and alleviate reproductive symptoms. However, 
dopamine agonists sometimes worsen the underlying 
psychiatric condition, especially at high doses. Hyper-
prolactinemia usually resolves after adequate thyroid 
hormone replacement in hypothyroid patients or after 
renal transplantation in patients undergoing dialysis. 
Resection of hypothalamic or sellar mass lesions can 
reverse hyperprolactinemia caused by stalk compres-
sion and reduced dopamine tone. Granulomatous infil-
trates occasionally respond to glucocorticoid admin-
istration. In patients with irreversible hypothalamic 
damage, no treatment may be warranted. In up to 30% 
of patients with hyperprolactinemia—usually without 
a visible pituitary microadenoma—the condition may 
resolve spontaneously.
Prolactinoma
Etiology and prevalence
Tumors arising from lactotrope cells account for 
about half of all functioning pituitary tumors, with a 
population prevalence of ∼10/100,000 in men and 
∼30/100,000 in women. Mixed tumors that secrete 
combinations of GH and PRL, ACTH and PRL, and 
rarely TSH and PRL are also seen. These plurihor-
monal tumors are usually recognized by immuno-
histochemistry, sometimes without apparent clinical 
manifestations from the production of additional hor-
mones. Microadenomas are classified as <1 cm in diam-
eter and usually do not invade the parasellar region. 
Macroadenomas are >1 cm in diameter and may be 
locally invasive and impinge on adjacent structures. 
The female:male ratio for microprolactinomas is 20:1, 
whereas the sex ratio is near 1:1 for macroadenomas. 
Tumor size generally correlates directly with PRL con-
centrations; values >250 μg/L usually are associated 
with macroadenomas. Men tend to present with larger 
tumors than women, possibly because the features of 
male hypogonadism are less readily evident. PRL lev-
els remain stable in most patients, reflecting the slow 
growth of these tumors. About 5% of microadenomas 
progress in the long term to macroadenomas.
Presentation and diagnosis
Women usually present with amenorrhea, infertility, 
and galactorrhea. If the tumor extends outside the sella, 
visual field defects or other mass effects may be seen. 
Men often present with impotence, loss of libido, infer-
tility, or signs of central CNS compression, including 
headaches and visual defects. Assuming that physiologic 
and medication-induced causes of hyperprolactinemia 
are excluded (Table 2-9), the diagnosis of prolacti-
noma is likely with a PRL level >200 μg/L. PRL levels 
<100 μg/L may be caused by microadenomas, other 
sellar lesions that decrease dopamine inhibition, or non-
neoplastic causes of hyperprolactinemia. For this reason, 
an MRI should be performed in all patients with hyper- 
prolactinemia. It is important to remember that hy- 
perprolactinemia caused secondarily by the mass effects of 
nonlactotrope lesions is also corrected by treatment with 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
33
dopamine agonists despite failure to shrink the underly-
ing mass. Consequently, PRL suppression by dopamine 
agonists does not necessarily indicate that the underlying 
lesion is a prolactinoma.
Treatment	
Prolactinoma
As microadenomas rarely progress to become macroad-
enomas, no treatment may be needed if fertility is not 
desired. Estrogen replacement is indicated to prevent 
bone loss and other consequences of hypoestrogen-
emia and does not appear to increase the risk of tumor 
enlargement; these patients should be monitored by 
regular serial PRL and MRI measurements.
For symptomatic microadenomas, therapeutic goals 
include control of hyperprolactinemia, reduction of 
tumor size, restoration of menses and fertility, and reso-
lution of galactorrhea. Dopamine agonist doses should 
be titrated to achieve maximal PRL suppression and 
restoration of reproductive function (Fig. 2-6). A nor-
malized PRL level does not ensure reduced tumor size. 
However, tumor shrinkage usually is not seen in those 
who do not respond with lowered PRL levels. For mac-
roadenomas, formal visual field testing should be per-
formed before initiating dopamine agonists. MRI and 
visual fields should be assessed at 6- to 12-month inter-
vals until the mass shrinks and annually thereafter until 
maximum size reduction has occurred.
ELEVATED PROLACTIN LEVELS
MANAGEMENT OF PROLACTINOMA
Symptomatic Prolactinoma
Microadenoma
Macroadenoma
Exclude secondary causes of hyperprolactinemia
MRI evidence for pituitary mass
Test visual
  fields
Test pituitary
  reserve function
Titrate
  dopamine agonist
Drug intolerance
Titrate
  dopamine agonist
Repeat MRI
  within 4 months
Tumor shrinkage
  and prolactin
  normalized
Monitor PRL
  and repeat
  MRI annually
No tumor shrinkage
  or tumor growth
  or persistent
  hyperprolactinemia
Change
  dopamine agonist
Serum PRL
,20
.50 (mg/L)
20–50
Maintenance
Rx
Consider Surgery
Reassess
  diagnosis
Increase dose
Figure 2-6 
Management of prolactinoma. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PRL, prolactin.
Medical  Oral dopamine agonists (cabergoline and 
bromocriptine) are the mainstay of therapy for patients 
with micro- or macroprolactinomas. Dopamine agonists 
suppress PRL secretion and synthesis as well as lacto-
trope cell proliferation. In patients with microadenomas 
who have achieved normoprolactinemia and significant 
reduction of tumor mass, the dopamine agonist may be 
withdrawn after 2 years. These patients should be moni-
tored carefully for evidence of prolactinoma recurrence. 
About 20% of patients (especially males) are resistant to 
dopaminergic treatment; these adenomas may exhibit 
decreased D2 dopamine receptor numbers or a postre-
ceptor defect. D2 receptor gene mutations in the pitu-
itary have not been reported.
Cabergoline  An ergoline derivative, cabergoline 
is a long-acting dopamine agonist with high D2 recep-
tor affinity. The drug effectively suppresses PRL for 
>14 days after a single oral dose and induces prolacti-
noma shrinkage in most patients. Cabergoline (0.5 to 
1.0 mg twice weekly) achieves normoprolactinemia 
and resumption of normal gonadal function in ∼80% of 
patients with microadenomas; galactorrhea improves or 
resolves in 90% of patients. Cabergoline normalizes PRL 
and shrinks ∼70% of macroprolactinomas. Mass effect 
symptoms, including headaches and visual disorders, 
usually improve dramatically within days after cabergo-
line initiation; improvement of sexual function requires 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
34
several weeks of treatment but may occur before com-
plete normalization of prolactin levels. After initial con-
trol of PRL levels has been achieved, cabergoline should 
be reduced to the lowest effective maintenance dose. 
In ∼5% of treated patients harboring a microadenoma, 
hyperprolactinemia may resolve and not recur when 
dopamine agonists are discontinued after long-term 
treatment. Cabergoline also may be effective in patients 
resistant to bromocriptine. Adverse effects and drug 
intolerance are encountered less commonly than with 
bromocriptine.
Bromocriptine  The ergot alkaloid bromocrip-
tine mesylate is a dopamine receptor agonist that sup-
presses prolactin secretion. Because it is short acting, 
the drug is preferred when pregnancy is desired. In 
microadenomas bromocriptine rapidly lowers serum 
prolactin levels to normal in up to 70% of patients, 
decreases tumor size, and restores gonadal function. In 
patients with macroadenomas, prolactin levels are also 
normalized in 70% of patients and tumor mass shrink-
age (≥50%) is achieved in most patients.
Therapy is initiated by administering a low bromocrip-
tine dose (0.625–1.25 mg) at bedtime with a snack, fol-
lowed by gradually increasing the dose. Most patients 
are controlled with a daily dose of ≤7.5 mg (2.5 mg tid).
Side Effects  Side effects of dopamine agonists 
include constipation, nasal stuffiness, dry mouth, night-
mares, insomnia, and vertigo; decreasing the dose usu-
ally alleviates these problems. Nausea, vomiting, and 
postural hypotension with faintness may occur in ∼25% 
of patients after the initial dose. These symptoms may 
persist in some patients. In general, fewer side effects 
are reported with cabergoline. For the approximately 
15% of patients who are intolerant of oral bromocrip-
tine, cabergoline may be better tolerated. Intravaginal 
administration of bromocriptine is often efficacious in 
patients with intractable gastrointestinal side effects. 
Auditory hallucinations, delusions, and mood swings 
have been reported in up to 5% of patients and may 
be due to the dopamine agonist properties or to the 
lysergic acid derivative of the compounds. Rare reports 
of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, pleural fibrosis, car-
diac arrhythmias, and hepatitis have been described. 
Patients with Parkinson’s disease who receive at least  
3 mg of cabergoline daily have been reported to be 
at risk for development of cardiac valve regurgita-
tion. Studies analyzing over 500 prolactinoma patients 
receiving recommended doses of cabergoline (up to  
2 mg weekly) have shown no evidence for an increased 
incidence of valvular disorders. Nevertheless, as no con-
trolled prospective studies are available, it is prudent to 
perform echocardiograms before initiating standard-
dose cabergoline therapy.
Surgery  Indications for surgical adenoma debulking 
include dopamine resistance or intolerance and the pres-
ence of an invasive macroadenoma with compromised 
vision that fails to improve after drug treatment. Initial 
PRL normalization is achieved in about 70% of micro-
prolactinomas after surgical resection, but only 30% of 
macroadenomas can be resected successfully. Follow-up 
studies have shown that hyperprolactinemia recurs in up 
to 20% of patients within the first year after surgery; long-
term recurrence rates exceed 50% for macroadenomas. 
Radiotherapy for prolactinomas is reserved for patients 
with aggressive tumors that do not respond to maximally 
tolerated dopamine agonists and/or surgery.
Pregnancy  The pituitary increases in size during 
pregnancy, reflecting the stimulatory effects of estrogen 
and perhaps other growth factors on pituitary vascular-
ity and lactotrope cell hyperplasia. About 5% of micro-
adenomas significantly increase in size, but 15–30% of 
macroadenomas grow during pregnancy. Bromocrip-
tine has been used for more than 30 years to restore 
fertility in women with hyperprolactinemia, without 
evidence of teratogenic effects. Nonetheless, most 
authorities recommend strategies to minimize fetal 
exposure to the drug. For women taking bromocrip-
tine who desire pregnancy, mechanical contraception 
should be used through three regular menstrual cycles 
to allow for conception timing. When pregnancy is 
confirmed, bromocriptine should be discontinued and 
PRL levels followed serially, especially if headaches or 
visual symptoms occur. For women harboring macroad-
enomas, regular visual field testing is recommended, 
and the drug should be reinstituted if tumor growth is 
apparent. Although pituitary MRI may be safe during 
pregnancy, this procedure should be reserved for symp-
tomatic patients with severe headache and/or visual 
field defects. Surgical decompression may be indicated 
if vision is threatened. Although comprehensive data  
support the efficacy and relative safety of bromocriptine- 
facilitated fertility, patients should be advised of poten-
tial unknown deleterious effects and the risk of tumor 
growth during pregnancy. As cabergoline is long acting 
with a high D2-receptor affinity, it is not recommended 
for use in women when fertility is desired.
Growth Hormone
Synthesis
GH is the most abundant anterior pituitary hormone, 
and GH-secreting somatotrope cells constitute up to 50% 
of the total anterior pituitary cell population. Mammo-
somatotrope cells, which coexpress PRL with GH, can 
be identified by using double immunostaining tech-
niques. Somatotrope development and GH transcription 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
35
are determined by expression of the cell-specific Pit-1 
nuclear transcription factor. Five distinct genes encode 
GH and related proteins. The pituitary GH gene (hGH-N) 
produces two alternatively spliced products that give 
rise to 22-kDa GH (191 amino acids) and a less abun-
dant 20-kDa GH molecule with similar biologic activity. 
Placental syncytiotrophoblast cells express a GH variant 
(hGH-V) gene; the related hormone human chorionic 
somatotropin (HCS) is expressed by distinct members of 
the gene cluster.
Secretion
GH secretion is controlled by complex hypothalamic 
and peripheral factors. GHRH is a 44-amino-acid 
hypothalamic peptide that stimulates GH synthesis 
and release. Ghrelin, an octanoylated gastric-derived 
peptide, and synthetic agonists of the GHS-R induce 
GHRH and also directly stimulate GH release. Soma-
tostatin [somatotropin-release inhibiting factor (SRIF)] is 
synthesized in the medial preoptic area of the hypothal-
amus and inhibits GH secretion. GHRH is secreted in 
discrete spikes that elicit GH pulses, whereas SRIF sets 
basal GH secretory tone. SRIF also is expressed in many 
extrahypothalamic tissues, including the CNS, gastroin-
testinal tract, and pancreas, where it also acts to inhibit 
islet hormone secretion. IGF-I, the peripheral target 
hormone for GH, feeds back to inhibit GH; estrogen 
induces GH, whereas chronic glucocorticoid excess 
suppresses GH release.
Surface receptors on the somatotrope regulate GH 
synthesis and secretion. The GHRH receptor is a 
G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) that signals 
through the intracellular cyclic AMP pathway to stimu-
late somatotrope cell proliferation as well as GH pro-
duction. Inactivating mutations of the GHRH receptor 
cause profound dwarfism (see below). A distinct surface 
receptor for ghrelin, the gastric-derived GH secreta-
gogue, is expressed in the hypothalamus and pituitary. 
Somatostatin binds to five distinct receptor subtypes 
(SSTR1 to SSTR5); SSTR2 and SSTR5 subtypes pref-
erentially suppress GH (and TSH) secretion.
GH secretion is pulsatile, with highest peak lev-
els occurring at night, generally correlating with sleep 
onset. GH secretory rates decline markedly with age 
so that hormone levels in middle age are about 15% 
of pubertal levels. These changes are paralleled by an 
age-related decline in lean muscle mass. GH secretion 
is also reduced in obese individuals, though IGF-I lev-
els may not be suppressed, suggesting a change in the 
setpoint for feedback control. Elevated GH levels occur 
within an hour of deep sleep onset as well as after exer-
cise, physical stress, and trauma and during sepsis. Inte-
grated 24-h GH secretion is higher in women and is 
also enhanced by estrogen replacement. Using standard 
assays, random GH measurements are undetectable in 
∼50% of daytime samples obtained from healthy sub-
jects and are also undetectable in most obese and elderly 
subjects. Thus, single random GH measurements do not 
distinguish patients with adult GH deficiency from nor-
mal persons.
GH secretion is profoundly influenced by nutritional 
factors. Using newer ultrasensitive GH assays with a 
sensitivity of 0.002 μg/L, a glucose load suppresses GH 
to <0.7 μg/L in women and to <0.07 μg/L in men. 
Increased GH pulse frequency and peak amplitudes 
occur with chronic malnutrition or prolonged fasting. 
GH is stimulated by intravenous l-arginine, dopamine, 
and apomorphine (a dopamine receptor agonist), as well 
as by α-adrenergic pathways. β-Adrenergic blockage 
induces basal GH and enhances GHRH- and insulin-
evoked GH release.
Action
The pattern of GH secretion may affect tissue responses. 
The higher GH pulsatility observed in men compared 
with the relatively continuous GH secretion in women 
may be an important biologic determinant of linear 
growth patterns and liver enzyme induction.
The 70-kDa peripheral GH receptor protein has 
structural homology with the cytokine/hematopoi-
etic superfamily. A fragment of the receptor extracel-
lular domain generates a soluble GH-binding protein 
(GHBP) that interacts with GH in the circulation. The 
liver and cartilage contain the greatest number of GH 
receptors. GH binding to preformed receptor dimers is 
followed by internal rotation and subsequent signaling 
through the JAK/STAT pathway. Activated STAT pro-
teins translocate to the nucleus, where they modulate 
expression of GH-regulated target genes. GH analogues 
that bind to the receptor but are incapable of mediating 
receptor signaling are potent antagonists of GH action. 
A GH receptor antagonist (pegvisomant) is approved for 
treatment of acromegaly.
GH induces protein synthesis and nitrogen retention 
and impairs glucose tolerance by antagonizing insulin 
action. GH also stimulates lipolysis, leading to increased 
circulating fatty acid levels, reduced omental fat mass, 
and enhanced lean body mass. GH promotes sodium, 
potassium, and water retention and elevates serum levels 
of inorganic phosphate. Linear bone growth occurs as a 
result of complex hormonal and growth factor actions, 
including those of IGF-I. GH stimulates epiphyseal 
prechondrocyte differentiation. These precursor cells 
produce IGF-I locally, and their proliferation is also 
responsive to the growth factor.
Insulin-Like Growth Factors
Although GH exerts direct effects in target tissues, 
many of its physiologic effects are mediated indirectly 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
36
through IGF-I, a potent growth and differentiation fac-
tor. The liver is the major source of circulating IGF-I. 
In peripheral tissues, IGF-I exerts local paracrine actions 
that appear to be both dependent on and independent 
of GH. Thus, GH administration induces circulating 
IGF-I as well as stimulating local IGF-I production in 
multiple tissues.
Both IGF-I and IGF-II are bound to high-affinity 
circulating IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs) that regulate 
IGF bioactivity. Levels of IGFBP3 are GH dependent, 
and it serves as the major carrier protein for circulating 
IGF-I. GH deficiency and malnutrition usually are asso-
ciated with low IGFBP3 levels. IGFBP1 and IGFBP2 
regulate local tissue IGF action but do not bind appre-
ciable amounts of circulating IGF-I.
Serum IGF-I concentrations are profoundly affected 
by physiologic factors. Levels increase during puberty, 
peak at 16 years, and subsequently decline by >80% 
during the aging process. IGF-I concentrations are 
higher in women than in men. Because GH is the 
major determinant of hepatic IGF-I synthesis, abnor-
malities of GH synthesis or action (e.g., pituitary failure, 
GHRH receptor defect, GH receptor defect) reduce 
IGF-I levels. Hypocaloric states are associated with GH 
resistance; IGF-I levels are therefore low with cachexia, 
malnutrition, and sepsis. In acromegaly, IGF-I levels are 
invariably high and reflect a log-linear relationship with 
GH concentrations.
IGF-I physiology
IGF-I has been approved for use in patients with GH-
resistance syndromes. Injected IGF-I (100 μg/kg) 
induces hypoglycemia, and lower doses improve insu-
lin sensitivity in patients with severe insulin resistance 
and diabetes. In cachectic subjects, IGF-I infusion 
(12 μg/kg per hour) enhances nitrogen retention and 
lowers cholesterol levels. Longer-term subcutaneous 
IGF-I injections enhance protein synthesis and are ana-
bolic. Although bone formation markers are induced, 
bone turnover also may be stimulated by IGF-I.
IGF-I side effects are dose dependent, and overdose 
may result in hypoglycemia, hypotension, fluid reten-
tion, temporomandibular jaw pain, and increased intra-
cranial pressure, all of which are reversible. Avascular 
femoral head necrosis has been reported. Chronic excess 
IGF-I administration presumably would result in fea-
tures of acromegaly.
Disorders of Growth and 
Development
Skeletal maturation and somatic growth
The growth plate is dependent on a variety of hormonal 
stimuli, including GH, IGF-I, sex steroids, thyroid hor-
mones, paracrine growth factors, and cytokines. The 
growth-promoting process also requires caloric energy, 
amino acids, vitamins, and trace metals and consumes 
about 10% of normal energy production. Malnutrition 
impairs chondrocyte activity and reduces circulating 
IGF-I and IGFBP3 levels.
Linear bone growth rates are very high in infancy 
and are pituitary dependent. Mean growth velocity is 
∼6 cm/year in later childhood and usually is maintained 
within a given range on a standardized percentile chart. 
Peak growth rates occur during midpuberty when bone 
age is 12 (girls) or 13 (boys). Secondary sexual develop-
ment is associated with elevated sex steroids that cause 
progressive epiphyseal growth plate closure. Bone age is 
delayed in patients with all forms of true GH deficiency 
or GH receptor defects that result in attenuated GH 
action.
Short stature may occur as a result of constitutive 
intrinsic growth defects or because of acquired extrin-
sic factors that impair growth. In general, delayed bone 
age in a child with short stature is suggestive of a hor-
monal or systemic disorder, whereas normal bone age 
in a short child is more likely to be caused by a genetic 
cartilage dysplasia or growth plate disorder.
GH deficiency in children
GH deficiency
Isolated GH deficiency is characterized by short stat-
ure, micropenis, increased fat, high-pitched voice, and 
a propensity to hypoglycemia due to relatively unop-
posed insulin action. Familial modes of inheritance 
are seen in one-third of these individuals and may be 
autosomal dominant, recessive, or X-linked. About 
10% of children with GH deficiency have mutations in 
the GH-N gene, including gene deletions and a wide 
range of point mutations. Mutations in transcription 
factors Pit-1 and Prop-1, which control somatotrope 
development, result in GH deficiency in combination 
with other pituitary hormone deficiencies, which may 
become manifest only in adulthood. The diagnosis of 
idiopathic GH deficiency (IGHD) should be made only 
after known molecular defects have been rigorously 
excluded.
GHRH receptor mutations
Recessive mutations of the GHRH receptor gene in sub-
jects with severe proportionate dwarfism are associated 
with low basal GH levels that cannot be stimulated by 
exogenous GHRH, GHRP, or insulin-induced hypo-
glycemia, as well as anterior pituitary hypoplasia The 
syndrome exemplifies the importance of the GHRH 
receptor for somatotrope cell proliferation and hormonal 
responsiveness.
Growth hormone insensitivity
This is caused by defects of GH receptor structure or 
signaling. Homozygous or heterozygous mutations of 
the GH receptor are associated with partial or complete 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
37
GH insensitivity and growth failure (Laron syndrome). 
The diagnosis is based on normal or high GH levels, 
with decreased circulating GHBP, and low IGF-I levels. 
Very rarely, defective IGF-I, IGF-I receptor, or IGF-I 
signaling defects are also encountered. STAT5B muta-
tions result in immunodeficiency with abrogated GH 
signaling, leading to short stature with normal or ele-
vated GH levels and low IGF-I levels.
Nutritional short stature
Caloric deprivation and malnutrition, uncontrolled 
diabetes, and chronic renal failure represent secondary 
causes of abrogated GH receptor function. These con-
ditions also stimulate production of proinflammatory 
cytokines, which act to exacerbate the block of GH-
mediated signal transduction. Children with these con-
ditions typically exhibit features of acquired short stat-
ure with normal or elevated GH, and low IGF-I levels. 
Circulating GH receptor antibodies may rarely cause 
peripheral GH insensitivity.
Psychosocial short stature
Emotional and social deprivation lead to growth retar-
dation accompanied by delayed speech, discordant 
hyperphagia, and an attenuated response to administered 
GH. A nurturing environment restores growth rates.
Presentation and diagnosis
Short stature is commonly encountered in clinical prac-
tice, and the decision to evaluate these children requires 
clinical judgment in association with auxologic data and 
family history. Short stature should be evaluated com-
prehensively if a patient’s height is >3 standard devia-
tions (SDs) below the mean for age or if the growth rate 
has decelerated. Skeletal maturation is best evaluated by 
measuring a radiologic bone age, which is based mainly 
on the degree of wrist bone growth plate fusion. Final 
height can be predicted using standardized scales (Bay-
ley-Pinneau or Tanner-Whitehouse) or estimated by 
adding 6.5 cm (boys) or subtracting 6.5 cm (girls) from 
the midparental height.
Laboratory investigation
Because GH secretion is pulsatile, GH deficiency is best 
assessed by examining the response to provocative stim-
uli, including exercise, insulin-induced hypoglycemia, 
and other pharmacologic tests that normally increase GH 
to >7 μg/L in children. Random GH measurements do 
not distinguish normal children from those with true 
GH deficiency. Adequate adrenal and thyroid hormone 
replacement should be assured before testing. Age- and 
sex-matched IGF-I levels are not sufficiently sensitive or 
specific to make the diagnosis but can be useful to con-
firm GH deficiency. Pituitary MRI may reveal pituitary 
mass lesions or structural defects. Molecular analyses for 
known mutations should be undertaken when the cause 
of short stature remains cryptic, or when additional clin-
ical features suggest a gentic cause.
Treatment	
Disorders of Growth and Development
Replacement therapy with recombinant GH (0.02–0.05 
mg/kg per day subcutaneously) restores growth veloc-
ity in GH-deficient children to ∼10 cm/year. If pituitary 
insufficiency is documented, other associated hor-
mone deficits should be corrected—especially adrenal 
steroids. GH treatment is also moderately effective for 
accelerating growth rates in children with Turner syn-
drome and chronic renal failure.
In patients with GH insensitivity and growth retar-
dation due to mutations of the GH receptor, treatment 
with IGF-I bypasses the dysfunctional GH receptor.
Adult GH Deficiency (AGHD)
This disorder usually is caused by hypothalamic or pitu-
itary somatotrope damage. Acquired pituitary hormone 
deficiency follows a typical pattern in which loss of 
adequate GH reserve foreshadows subsequent hormone 
deficits. The sequential order of hormone loss is usually 
GH → FSH/LH → TSH → ACTH.
Presentation and diagnosis
The clinical features of AGHD include changes in body 
composition, lipid metabolism, and quality of life and 
cardiovascular dysfunction (Table 2-10). Body com-
position changes are common and include reduced lean 
body mass, increased fat mass with selective deposition 
of intraabdominal visceral fat, and increased waist-to-
hip ratio. Hyperlipidemia, left ventricular dysfunction, 
hypertension, and increased plasma fibrinogen levels 
also may be present. Bone mineral content is reduced, 
with resultant increased fracture rates. Patients may 
experience social isolation, depression, and difficulty 
maintaining gainful employment. Adult hypopituitarism 
is associated with a threefold increase in cardiovascular 
mortality rates in comparison to age- and sex-matched 
controls, and this may be due to GH deficiency, as 
patients in these studies were replaced with other defi-
cient pituitary hormones.
Laboratory investigation
AGHD is rare, and in light of the nonspecific nature 
of associated clinical symptoms, patients appropriate for 
testing should be selected carefully on the basis of well-
defined criteria. With few exceptions, testing should be 
restricted to patients with the following predisposing 
factors: (1) pituitary surgery, (2) pituitary or hypotha-
lamic tumor or granulomas, (3) history of cranial irra-
diation, (4) radiologic evidence of a pituitary lesion, 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
38
(5) childhood requirement for GH replacement therapy, 
and rarely (6) unexplained low age- and sex-matched 
IGF-I levels. The transition of a GH-deficient adoles-
cent to adulthood requires retesting to document sub-
sequent adult GH deficiency. Up to 20% of patients 
previously treated for childhood-onset GH deficiency 
are found to be GH sufficient on repeat testing as adults.
A significant proportion (∼25%) of truly GH-
deficient adults have low-normal IGF-I levels. Thus, 
as in the evaluation of GH deficiency in children, valid 
age- and sex-matched IGF-I measurements provide a 
useful index of therapeutic responses but are not suffi-
ciently sensitive for diagnostic purposes. The most vali-
dated test to distinguish pituitary-sufficient patients from 
those with AGHD is insulin-induced (0.05–0.1 U/kg) 
hypoglycemia. After glucose reduction to ∼40 mg/dL, 
most individuals experience neuroglycopenic symp-
toms (Chap. 20), and peak GH release occurs at 60 min 
and remains elevated for up to 2 h. About 90% of 
healthy adults exhibit GH responses >5 μg/L; AGHD 
is defined by a peak GH response to hypoglycemia of 
Table 2-10
Features of Adult Growth Hormone 
Deficiency
Clinical
  Impaired quality of life
    Decreased energy and drive
    Poor concentration
    Low self-esteem
    Social isolation
  Body composition changes
    Increased body fat mass
    Central fat deposition
    Increased waist-hip ratio
    Decreased lean body mass
  Reduced exercise capacity
    Reduced maximum O2 uptake
    Impaired cardiac function
    Reduced muscle mass
  Cardiovascular risk factors
    Impaired cardiac structure and function
    Abnormal lipid profile
    Decreased fibrinolytic activity
    Atherosclerosis
    Omental obesity
Imaging
  Pituitary: mass or structural damage
  Bone: reduced bone mineral density
  Abdomen: excess omental adiposity
Laboratory
  Evoked GH <3 ng/mL
  IGF-I and IGFBP3 low or normal
  Increased LDL cholesterol
Concomitant gonadotropin, TSH, and/or ACTH reserve 
deficits may be present
Abbreviation: LDL, low-density lipoprotein. For other abbreviations, 
see text.
<3 μg/L. Although insulin-induced hypoglycemia is 
safe when performed under appropriate supervision, 
it is contraindicated in patients with diabetes, isch-
emic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, or epilepsy 
and in elderly patients. Alternative stimulatory tests 
include intravenous arginine (30 g), GHRH (1 μg/kg), 
GHRP-6 (90 μg) and glucagon (1 mg). Combinations 
of these tests may evoke GH secretion in subjects who 
are not responsive to a single test.
Treatment	
Adult GH Deficiency
Once the diagnosis of AGHD is unequivocally estab-
lished, replacement of GH may be indicated. Con-
traindications to therapy include the presence of an 
active neoplasm, intracranial hypertension, and uncon-
trolled diabetes and retinopathy. The starting dose of  
0.1–0.2 mg/d should be titrated (up to a maximum of 
1.25 mg/d) to maintain IGF-I levels in the mid-normal 
range for age- and sex-matched controls (Fig. 2-7). 
Women require higher doses than men, and elderly 
patients require less GH. Long-term GH maintenance 
sustains normal IGF-I levels and is associated with per-
sistent body composition changes (e.g., enhanced lean 
body mass and lower body fat). High-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol increases, but total cholesterol and 
insulin levels do not change significantly. Lumbar spine 
bone mineral density increases, but this response 
is gradual (>1 year). Many patients note significant 
improvement in quality of life when evaluated by stan-
dardized questionnaires. The effect of GH replacement 
on mortality rates in GH-deficient patients is currently 
the subject of long-term prospective investigation.
History of pituitary pathology
Clinical features present
Evoked GH <3 µg/L
Treat with
  GH 0.1–0.3 mg/d
Exclude contraindications
Titrate GH dose
  up to 1.25 mg/d
Check IGF-I after 1 mo
No
response
Response
6 mo
Discontinue Rx
Monitor
  IGF-I Levels
MANAGEMENT OF ADULT GH DEFICIENCY
Figure 2-7 
Management of adult growth hormone (GH) deficiency. 
IGF, insulin-like growth factor.
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
39
About 30% of patients exhibit reversible dose-
related fluid retention, joint pain, and carpal tunnel syn-
drome, and up to 40% exhibit myalgias and paresthesia. 
Patients receiving insulin require careful monitoring for 
dosing adjustments, as GH is a potent counterregula-
tory hormone for insulin action. Patients with Type 2 
diabetes mellitus initially develop further insulin resis-
tance. However, glycemic control improves with the sus-
tained loss of abdominal fat associated with long-term 
GH replacement. Headache, increased intracranial pres-
sure, hypertension, and tinnitus occur rarely. Pituitary 
tumor regrowth and progression of skin lesions or other 
tumors are being assessed in long-term surveillance 
programs. To date, development of these potential side 
effects does not appear significant.
Acromegaly
Etiology
GH hypersecretion is usually the result of a somatotrope 
adenoma but may rarely be caused by extrapituitary 
lesions (Table 2-11). In addition to more common 
GH-secreting somatotrope adenomas, mixed mammo-
somatotrope tumors and acidophilic stem-cell adenomas 
secrete both GH and PRL. In patients with acidophilic 
stem-cell adenomas, features of hyperprolactinemia 
(hypogonadism and galactorrhea) predominate over 
the less clinically evident signs of acromegaly. Occa-
sionally, mixed plurihormonal tumors are encountered 
that also secrete ACTH, the glycoprotein hormone α 
subunit, or TSH in addition to GH. Patients with par-
tially empty sellas may present with GH hypersecretion 
due to a small GH-secreting adenoma within the com-
pressed rim of pituitary tissue; some of these may reflect 
the spontaneous necrosis of tumors that were previously 
larger. GH-secreting tumors rarely arise from ectopic 
pituitary tissue remnants in the nasopharynx or midline 
sinuses.
There are case reports of ectopic GH secretion by 
tumors of pancreatic, ovarian, lung, or hematopoietic 
origin. Rarely, excess GHRH production may cause 
acromegaly because of chronic stimulation of somato-
tropes. These patients present with classic features of 
acromegaly, elevated GH levels, pituitary enlarge-
ment on MRI, and pathologic characteristics of pitu-
itary hyperplasia. The most common cause of GHRH-
mediated acromegaly is a chest or abdominal carcinoid 
tumor. Although these tumors usually express positive 
GHRH immunoreactivity, clinical features of acro-
megaly are evident in only a minority of patients with 
carcinoid disease. Excessive GHRH also may be elabo-
rated by hypothalamic tumors, usually choristomas or 
neuromas.
Presentation and diagnosis
Protean manifestations of GH and IGF-I hypersecre-
tion are indolent and often are not clinically diagnosed 
for 10 years or more. Acral bony overgrowth results in 
frontal bossing, increased hand and foot size, mandibu-
lar enlargement with prognathism, and widened space 
between the lower incisor teeth. In children and ado-
lescents, initiation of GH hypersecretion before epiphy-
seal long bone closure is associated with development 
of pituitary gigantism (Fig. 2-8). Soft tissue swell-
ing results in increased heel pad thickness, increased 
shoe or glove size, ring tightening, characteristic coarse 
facial features, and a large, fleshy nose. Other commonly 
encountered clinical features include hyperhidrosis, a 
deep and hollow-sounding voice, oily skin, arthropa-
thy, kyphosis, carpal tunnel syndrome, proximal muscle 
weakness and fatigue, acanthosis nigricans, and skin tags. 
Generalized visceromegaly occurs, including cardio-
megaly, macroglossia, and thyroid gland enlargement.
The most significant clinical impact of GH excess 
occurs with respect to the cardiovascular system. Cor-
onary heart disease, cardiomyopathy with arrhyth-
mias, left ventricular hypertrophy, decreased diastolic 
Table 2-11
Causes of Acromegaly
Prevalence, %
Excess Growth Hormone Secretion
Pituitary
98
Densely or sparsely granulated GH 
cell adenoma
60
Mixed GH cell and PRL cell adenoma
25
Mammosomatotrope cell adenoma
10
Plurihormonal adenoma
GH cell carcinoma or metastases
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 (GH 
cell adenoma)
McCune-Albright syndrome
Ectopic sphenoid or parapharyngeal 
sinus pituitary adenoma
Extrapituitary tumor
Pancreatic islet cell tumor
<1
Lymphoma
Excess Growth Hormone–Releasing Hormone 
Secretion
Central
<1
Hypothalamic hamartoma, choris-
toma, ganglioneuroma
<1
Peripheral
<1
Bronchial carcinoid, pancreatic islet 
cell tumor, small cell lung cancer, 
adrenal adenoma, medullary thyroid 
carcinoma, pheochromocytoma
Abbreviations: GH, growth hormone; PRL, prolactin.
Source: Adapted from S Melmed: N Engl J Med 322:966, 1990.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
40
function, and hypertension ultimately occur in most 
patients if untreated. Upper airway obstruction with 
sleep apnea occurs in more than 60% of patients and is 
associated with both soft tissue laryngeal airway obstruc-
tion and central sleep dysfunction. Diabetes mellitus 
develops in 25% of patients with acromegaly, and most 
patients are intolerant of a glucose load (as GH coun-
teracts the action of insulin). Acromegaly is associated 
with an increased risk of colon polyps and mortality 
from colonic malignancy; polyps are diagnosed in up 
to one-third of patients. Overall mortality is increased 
about threefold and is due primarily to cardiovascular 
and cerebrovascular disorders and respiratory disease. 
Unless GH levels are controlled, survival is reduced by 
an average of 10 years compared with an age-matched 
control population.
Laboratory investigation
Age- and sex-matched serum IGF-I levels are elevated 
in acromegaly. Consequently, an IGF-I level pro-
vides a useful laboratory screening measure when clini-
cal features raise the possibility of acromegaly. Due to 
the pulsatility of GH secretion, measurement of a sin-
gle random GH level is not useful for the diagnosis or 
exclusion of acromegaly and does not correlate with 
disease severity. The diagnosis of acromegaly is con-
firmed by demonstrating the failure of GH suppres-
sion to <0.4 μg/L within 1–2 h of an oral glucose load 
(75 g). When newer ultrasensitive GH assays are used, 
normal nadir GH levels are even lower (<0.05 μg/L). 
About 20% of patients exhibit a paradoxical GH rise 
after glucose. PRL should be measured, as it is elevated 
in ∼25% of patients with acromegaly. Thyroid func-
tion, gonadotropins, and sex steroids may be attenuated 
because of tumor mass effects. Because most patients 
will undergo surgery with glucocorticoid coverage, tests 
of ACTH reserve in asymptomatic patients are more 
efficiently deferred until after surgery.
Treatment	
Acromegaly
The goal of treatment is to control GH and IGF-I hyper-
secretion, ablate or arrest tumor growth, ameliorate 
comorbidities, restore mortality rates to normal, and 
preserve pituitary function.
Surgical resection of GH-secreting adenomas is the 
initial treatment for most patients (Fig. 2-9). Somatosta-
tin analogues are used as adjuvant treatment for pre-
operative shrinkage of large, invasive macroadenomas, 
immediate relief of debilitating symptoms, and reduction
Figure 2-8
Features of acromegaly/gigantism. A 22-year-old man with 
gigantism due to excess growth hormone is shown to the 
left of his identical twin. The increased height and progna-
thism (A) and enlarged hand (B) and foot (C) of the affected 
twin are apparent. Their clinical features began to diverge 
at the age of approximately 13 years. (Reproduced from 
R Gagel, IE McCutcheon: N Engl J Med 324:524, 1999; with 
permission.)
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
41
of GH hypersecretion; in frail patients experiencing mor-
bidity; and in patients who decline surgery or, when 
surgery fails, to achieve biochemical control. Irradiation 
or repeat surgery may be required for patients who can-
not tolerate or do not respond to adjunctive medical 
therapy. The high rate of late hypopituitarism and the 
slow rate (5–15 years) of biochemical response are the 
main disadvantages of radiotherapy. Irradiation is also 
relatively ineffective in normalizing IGF-I levels. Stereo-
tactic ablation of GH-secreting adenomas by gamma-
knife radiotherapy is promising, but initial reports sug-
gest that long-term results and side effects are similar 
to those observed with conventional radiation. Soma-
tostatin analogues may be required while awaiting the 
full benefits of radiotherapy. Systemic sequelae of acro-
megaly, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and 
arthritis, should be managed aggressively. Mandibular 
surgical repair may be indicated.
Surgery  Transsphenoidal surgical resection by an 
experienced surgeon is the preferred primary treatment 
for both microadenomas (cure rate ∼70%) and macroad-
enomas (<50% cured). Soft tissue swelling improves 
immediately after tumor resection. GH levels return to 
normal within an hour, and IGF-I levels are normalized 
within 3–4 days. In ∼10% of patients, acromegaly may 
recur several years after apparently successful surgery; 
hypopituitarism develops in up to 15% of patients after 
surgery. 
Somatostatin 
Analogues  Somatostatin
analogues exert their therapeutic effects through SSTR2 
and SSTR5 receptors, both of which invariably are
GH-Secreting
Adenoma
Surgery
Debulking required
  for CNS pressure effects
Somatostatin analogue
Somatostatin
  analogue
Assess likelihood
  of surgical cure
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
Increase dose/frequency of somatostatin
analogue; add GH receptor antagonist;
or add dopamine agonist
Likely
Unlikely
Monitor
controlled
controlled
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
• GH receptor 
  antagonist
• Radiation therapy
• Reoperation
Monitor
controlled
uncontrolled
Monitor
controlled
uncontrolled
elevated
Measure
  GH/IGF-I
MANAGEMENT OF ACROMEGALY
expressed by GH-secreting tumors. Octreotide acetate 
is an eight-amino-acid synthetic somatostatin ana-
logue. In contrast to native somatostatin, the analogue 
is relatively resistant to plasma degradation. It has a 2-h 
serum half-life and possesses fortyfold greater potency 
than native somatostatin to suppress GH. Octreotide 
is administered by subcutaneous injection, beginning 
with 50 μg tid; the dose can be increased gradually 
up to 1500 μg/d. Fewer than 10% of patients do not 
respond to the analogue. Octreotide suppresses inte-
grated GH levels and normalizes IGF-I levels in ∼75% of 
treated patients.
The long-acting somatostatin depot formulations, 
octreotide and lanreotide, are the preferred medical 
treatment for patients with acromegaly. Sandostatin-
LAR is a sustained-release, long-acting formulation 
of octreotide incorporated into microspheres that 
sustain drug levels for several weeks after intramus-
cular injection. GH suppression occurs for as long as 
6 weeks after a 30-mg intramuscular injection; long-
term monthly treatment sustains GH and IGF-I sup-
pression and also reduces pituitary tumor size in ∼50% 
of patients. Lanreotide autogel, a slow-release depot 
somatostatin preparation, is a cyclic somatostatin 
octapeptide analogue that suppresses GH and IGF-I 
hypersecretion after a 60-mg subcutaneous injec-
tion. Long-term monthly administration controls GH 
hypersecretion in two-thirds of treated patients and 
improves patient compliance because of the long inter-
val required between drug injections. Rapid relief of 
headache and soft tissue swelling occurs in ∼75% of 
patients within days to weeks of somatostatin analogue 
Figure 2-9 
Management of acromegaly. GH, growth hor-
mone; CNS, central nervous system; IGF, insulin-
like growth factor. (Adapted from S Melmed et al: 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:1509–1517, 2009; © 
The Endocrine Society.)
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
42
initiation. Most patients report symptomatic improve-
ment, including amelioration of headache, perspiration, 
obstructive apnea, and cardiac failure.
Side Effects  Somatostatin analogues are well tol-
erated in most patients. Adverse effects are short-lived 
and mostly relate to drug-induced suppression of gas-
trointestinal motility and secretion. Nausea, abdominal 
discomfort, fat malabsorption, diarrhea, and flatulence 
occur in one-third of patients, and these symptoms usu-
ally remit within 2 weeks. Octreotide suppresses post-
prandial gallbladder contractility and delays gallblad-
der emptying; up to 30% of patients develop long-term 
echogenic sludge or asymptomatic cholesterol gall-
stones. Other side effects include mild glucose intoler-
ance due to transient insulin suppression, asymptomatic 
bradycardia, hypothyroxinemia, and local injection site 
discomfort.
GH 
Receptor 
Antagonist  Pegvisomant 
antagonizes endogenous GH action by blocking periph-
eral GH binding to its receptor. Consequently, serum 
IGF-I levels are suppressed, reducing the deleterious 
effects of excess endogenous GH. Pegvisomant is admin-
istered by daily subcutaneous injection (10–20 mg) and 
normalizes IGF-I in >90% of patients. GH levels, however, 
remain elevated as the drug does not have antitumor 
actions. Side effects include reversible liver enzyme ele-
vation, lipodystrophy, and injection site pain. Tumor size 
should be monitored by MRI.
Combined treatment with monthly somatostatin 
analogues and weekly or biweekly pegvisomant injec-
tions has been used effectively in resistant patients.
Dopamine Agonists  Bromocriptine and cab-
ergoline may modestly suppress GH secretion in some 
patients. High doses of bromocriptine (≥20 mg/d) or 
cabergoline (0.5 mg/d) are usually required to achieve 
modest GH therapeutic efficacy. Combined treatment 
with octreotide and cabergoline may induce additive 
biochemical control compared with either drug alone.
Radiation  External radiation therapy or high-
energy stereotactic techniques are used as adjuvant 
therapy for acromegaly. An advantage of radiation is 
that patient compliance with long-term treatment is 
not required. Tumor mass is reduced, and GH levels are 
attenuated over time. However, 50% of patients require 
at least 8 years for GH levels to be suppressed to  
<5 μg/L; this level of GH reduction is achieved in about 
90% of patients after 18 years but represents subop-
timal GH suppression. Patients may require interim 
medical therapy for several years before attaining maxi-
mal radiation benefits. Most patients also experience 
hypothalamic-pituitary damage, leading to gonado-
tropin, ACTH, and/or TSH deficiency within 10 years  
of therapy.
In summary, surgery is the preferred primary treat-
ment for GH-secreting microadenomas (Fig. 2-9). The 
high frequency of GH hypersecretion after macroad-
enoma resection usually necessitates adjuvant or pri-
mary medical therapy for these larger tumors. Patients 
unable to receive or respond to unimodal medical treat-
ment may benefit from combined treatments or can be 
offered radiation.
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone 
(See also Chap. 5)
Synthesis
ACTH-secreting corticotrope cells constitute about 
20% of the pituitary cell population. ACTH (39 
amino acids) is derived from the POMC precursor 
protein (266 amino acids) that also generates several 
other peptides, including β-lipotropin, β-endorphin, 
met-enkephalin, α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone 
(α-MSH), and corticotropin-like intermediate lobe pro-
tein (CLIP). The POMC gene is potently suppressed by 
glucocorticoids and induced by CRH, arginine vaso-
pressin (AVP), and proinflammatory cytokines, includ-
ing IL-6, as well as leukemia inhibitory factor.
CRH, a 41-amino-acid hypothalamic peptide syn-
thesized in the paraventricular nucleus as well as in 
higher brain centers, is the predominant stimulator of 
ACTH synthesis and release. The CRH receptor is a 
GPCR that is expressed on the corticotrope and signals 
to induce POMC transcription.
Secretion
ACTH secretion is pulsatile and exhibits a characteris-
tic circadian rhythm, peaking at 6 a.m. and reaching a 
nadir at about midnight. Adrenal glucocorticoid secre-
tion, which is driven by ACTH, follows a parallel 
diurnal pattern. ACTH circadian rhythmicity is deter-
mined by variations in secretory pulse amplitude rather 
than changes in pulse frequency. Superimposed on this 
endogenous rhythm, ACTH levels are increased by 
physical and psychological stress, exercise, acute illness, 
and insulin-induced hypoglycemia.
Loss of cortisol feedback inhibition, as occurs in pri-
mary adrenal failure, results in extremely high ACTH 
levels. Glucocorticoid-mediated negative regulation of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis occurs as 
a consequence of both hypothalamic CRH suppression 
and direct attenuation of pituitary POMC gene expres-
sion and ACTH release.
Acute inflammatory or septic insults activate the 
HPA axis through the integrated actions of proinflam-
matory cytokines, bacterial toxins, and neural signals. 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
43
The overlapping cascade of ACTH-inducing cytokines 
[tumor necrosis factor (TNF); IL-1, -2, and -6; and leu-
kemia inhibitory factor] activates hypothalamic CRH 
and AVP secretion, pituitary POMC gene expression, 
and local pituitary paracrine cytokine networks. The 
resulting cortisol elevation restrains the inflammatory 
response and enables host protection. Concomitantly, 
cytokine-mediated central glucocorticoid receptor resis-
tance impairs glucocorticoid suppression of the HPA. 
Thus, the neuroendocrine stress response reflects the net 
result of highly integrated hypothalamic, intrapituitary, 
and peripheral hormone and cytokine signals.
Action
The major function of the HPA axis is to maintain 
metabolic homeostasis and mediate the neuroendo-
crine stress response. ACTH induces adrenocortical 
steroidogenesis by sustaining adrenal cell proliferation 
and function. The receptor for ACTH, designated 
melanocortin-2 receptor, is a GPCR that induces ste-
roidogenesis by stimulating a cascade of steroidogenic 
enzymes (Chap. 5).
ACTH Deficiency
Presentation and diagnosis
Secondary adrenal insufficiency occurs as a result of 
pituitary ACTH deficiency. It is characterized by 
fatigue, weakness, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and, 
occasionally, hypoglycemia. In contrast to primary adre-
nal failure, hypocortisolism associated with pituitary fail-
ure usually is not accompanied by hyperpigmentation or 
mineralocorticoid deficiency.
ACTH deficiency is commonly due to glucocor-
ticoid withdrawal after treatment-associated suppres-
sion of the HPA axis. Isolated ACTH deficiency may 
occur after surgical resection of an ACTH-secreting 
pituitary adenoma that has suppressed the HPA axis; 
this phenomenon is suggestive of a surgical cure. The 
mass effects of other pituitary adenomas or sellar lesions 
may lead to ACTH deficiency, but usually in combina-
tion with other pituitary hormone deficiencies. Partial 
ACTH deficiency may be unmasked in the presence 
of an acute medical or surgical illness, when clinically 
significant hypocortisolism reflects diminished ACTH 
reserve. Rarely, TPIT or POMC mutations result in 
primary ACTH deficiency.
Laboratory diagnosis
Inappropriately low ACTH levels in the setting of low 
cortisol levels are characteristic of diminished ACTH 
reserve. Low basal serum cortisol levels are associated 
with blunted cortisol responses to ACTH stimulation 
and impaired cortisol response to insulin-induced hypo-
glycemia, or testing with metyrapone or CRH. For a 
description of provocative ACTH tests, see Chap. 5.
Treatment	
ACTH Deficiency
Glucocorticoid replacement therapy improves most fea-
tures of ACTH deficiency. The total daily dose of hydro-
cortisone replacement preferably should not exceed  
25 mg daily, divided into two or three doses. Prednisone 
(5 mg each morning) is longer acting and has fewer 
mineralocorticoid effects than hydrocortisone. Some 
authorities advocate lower maintenance doses in an 
effort to avoid cushingoid side effects. Doses should be 
increased severalfold during periods of acute illness or 
stress.
Cushing’s Syndrome  
(ACTH-Producing Adenoma)
(See also Chap. 5)
Etiology and prevalence
Pituitary corticotrope adenomas account for 70% of 
patients with endogenous causes of Cushing’s syn-
drome. However, it should be emphasized that iat-
rogenic hypercortisolism is the most common cause 
of cushingoid features. Ectopic tumor ACTH pro-
duction, cortisol-producing adrenal adenomas, adre-
nal carcinoma, and adrenal hyperplasia account for the 
other causes; rarely, ectopic tumor CRH production is 
encountered.
ACTH-producing adenomas account for about 
10–15% of all pituitary tumors. Because the clinical fea-
tures of Cushing’s syndrome often lead to early diagno-
sis, most ACTH-producing pituitary tumors are relatively 
small microadenomas. However, macroadenomas also are 
seen, while some ACTH-expressing adenomas are clini-
cally silent. Cushing’s disease is 5–10 times more com-
mon in women than in men. These pituitary adenomas 
exhibit unrestrained ACTH secretion, with resultant 
hypercortisolemia. However, they retain partial suppress-
ibility in the presence of high doses of administered glu-
cocorticoids, providing the basis for dynamic testing to 
distinguish pituitary from nonpituitary causes of Cush-
ing’s syndrome.
Presentation and diagnosis
The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome presents two great 
challenges: (1) to distinguish patients with pathologic 
cortisol excess from those with physiologic or other dis-
turbances of cortisol production and (2) to determine 
the etiology of cortisol excess.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
44
Typical features of chronic cortisol excess include thin 
skin, central obesity, hypertension, plethoric moon facies, 
purple striae and easy bruisability, glucose intolerance or 
diabetes mellitus, gonadal dysfunction, osteoporosis, prox-
imal muscle weakness, signs of hyperandrogenism (acne, 
hirsutism), and psychological disturbances (depression, 
mania, and psychoses) (Table 2-12). Hematopoietic fea-
tures of hypercortisolism include leukocytosis, lympho-
penia, and eosinopenia. Immune suppression includes 
delayed hypersensitivity. These protean yet commonly 
encountered manifestations of hypercortisolism make 
it challenging to decide which patients mandate formal 
laboratory evaluation. Certain features make pathologic 
causes of hypercortisolism more likely; they include 
characteristic central redistribution of fat, thin skin with 
striae and bruising, and proximal muscle weakness. In 
children and in young females, early osteoporosis may 
be particularly prominent. The primary cause of death is 
cardiovascular disease, but infections and risk of suicide 
are also increased.
Rapid development of features of hypercortisolism 
associated with skin hyperpigmentation and severe 
Table 2-12
Clinical Features of Cushing’s Syndrome  
(All Ages)
Symptoms/Signs
Frequency, %
Obesity or weight gain (>115% ideal 
body weight)
80
Thin skin
80
Moon facies
75
Hypertension
75
Purple skin striae
65
Hirsutism
65
Menstrual disorders (usually amenorrhea)
60
Plethora
60
Abnormal glucose tolerance
55
Impotence
55
Proximal muscle weakness
50
Truncal obesity
50
Acne
45
Bruising
45
Mental changes
45
Osteoporosis
40
Edema of lower extremities
30
Hyperpigmentation
20
Hypokalemic alkalosis
15
Diabetes mellitus
15
Source: Adapted from MA Magiokou et al, in ME Wierman (ed): 
Diseases of the Pituitary. Totowa, NJ, Humana, 1997.
myopathy suggests an ectopic source of ACTH. Hyper-
tension, hypokalemic alkalosis, glucose intolerance, 
and edema are also more pronounced in these patients. 
Serum potassium levels <3.3 mmol/L are evident in 
∼70% of patients with ectopic ACTH secretion but 
are seen in <10% of patients with pituitary-dependent 
Cushing’s syndrome.
Laboratory investigation
The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome is based on labo-
ratory documentation of endogenous hypercortisolism. 
Measurement of 24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC) is a 
precise and cost-effective screening test. Alternatively, 
the failure to suppress plasma cortisol after an overnight 
1-mg dexamethasone suppression test can be used to 
identify patients with hypercortisolism. As nadir lev-
els of cortisol occur at night, elevated midnight sam-
ples of cortisol are suggestive of Cushing’s syndrome. 
Basal plasma ACTH levels often distinguish patients 
with ACTH-independent (adrenal or exogenous glu-
cocorticoid) from those with ACTH-dependent (pitu-
itary, ectopic ACTH) Cushing’s syndrome. Mean basal 
ACTH levels are about eightfold higher in patients 
with ectopic ACTH secretion than in those with pitu-
itary ACTH-secreting adenomas. However, extensive 
overlap of ACTH levels in these two disorders pre-
cludes using ACTH measurements to make the dis-
tinction. Instead, dynamic testing based on differential 
sensitivity to glucocorticoid feedback or ACTH stimu-
lation in response to CRH or cortisol reduction is used 
to distinguish ectopic from pituitary sources of excess 
ACTH (Table 2-13). Very rarely, circulating CRH 
levels are elevated, reflecting ectopic tumor-derived 
secretion of CRH and often ACTH. For further dis-
cussion of dynamic testing for Cushing’s syndrome, see 
Chap. 5.
Most ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors are <5 mm 
in diameter, and about half are undetectable by sensi-
tive MRI. The high prevalence of incidental pituitary 
microadenomas diminishes the ability to distinguish 
ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors accurately from non-
secreting incidentalomas.
Inferior petrosal venous sampling
Because pituitary MRI with gadolinium enhancement is 
insufficiently sensitive to detect small (<2 mm) pituitary 
ACTH-secreting adenomas, bilateral inferior petrosal 
sinus ACTH sampling before and after CRH adminis-
tration may be required to distinguish these lesions from 
ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors that may have simi-
lar clinical and biochemical characteristics. Simultane-
ous assessment of ACTH in each inferior petrosal vein 
and in the peripheral circulation provides a strategy for 
confirming and localizing pituitary ACTH production. 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
45
Sampling is performed at baseline and 2, 5, and 10 min 
after intravenous bovine CRH (1 μg/kg) injection. An 
increased ratio (>2) of inferior petrosal:peripheral vein 
ACTH confirms pituitary Cushing’s syndrome. After 
CRH injection, peak petrosal:peripheral ACTH ratios 
≥3 confirm the presence of a pituitary ACTH-secreting 
tumor. The sensitivity of this test is >95%, with very 
rare false-positive results. False-negative results may be 
encountered in patients with aberrant venous drainage. 
ACTH-dependent
hypercortisolism 
Biochemical
  cure
Persistent
  hypercortisolism
Pituitary
  irradiation
Consider chest/abdomen
imaging
Ectopic ACTH excluded
Glucocorticoid
  replacement,
  if needed
Follow-up:
Steroidogenic
  inhibitors
and/or
Pituitary MRI
Petrosal sinus
  ACTH samplinga
ACTH-secreting
  pituitary adenoma
Transsphenoidal surgical
  resection
Adrenalectomy
Serial biochemical
  and MRI
  evaluation
?Irradiation
Risk of Nelson’s
syndrome
MANAGEMENT OF CUSHING’S DISEASE
Figure 2-10 
Management of Cushing’s syndrome. ACTH, adrenocorti-
cotropin hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. aNot 
usually required.
Petrosal sinus catheterizations are technically difficult, 
and about 0.05% of patients develop neurovascular 
complications. The procedure should not be performed 
in patients with hypertension or in the presence of a 
well-visualized pituitary adenoma on MRI.
Treatment	
Cushing’s Syndrome
Selective transsphenoidal resection is the treatment of 
choice for Cushing’s disease (Fig. 2-10). The remission 
rate for this procedure is ∼80% for microadenomas but 
<50% for macroadenomas. After successful tumor resec-
tion, most patients experience a postoperative period 
of symptomatic ACTH deficiency that may last up to  
12 months. This usually requires low-dose cortisol 
replacement, as patients experience both steroid with-
drawal symptoms and have a suppressed HPA axis. 
Biochemical recurrence occurs in approximately 5% of 
patients in whom surgery was initially successful.
When initial surgery is unsuccessful, repeat surgery 
is sometimes indicated, particularly when a pituitary 
source for ACTH is well documented. In older patients, 
in whom issues of growth and fertility are less impor-
tant, hemi- or total hypophysectomy may be neces-
sary if a discrete pituitary adenoma is not recognized. 
Pituitary irradiation may be used after unsuccess-
ful surgery, but it cures only about 15% of patients. 
Because the effects of radiation are slow and only
Table 2-13
Differential Diagnosis of ACTH-Dependent 
Cushing’s Syndromea
ACTH-Secreting 
Pituitary Tumor
Ectopic ACTH 
Secretion
Etiology
Pituitary  
corticotrope 
adenoma
Plurihormonal 
adenoma
Bronchial, 
abdominal  
carcinoid
Small cell  
lung cancer 
Thymoma
Sex
F > M
M > F
Clinical features
Slow onset
Rapid onset
Pigmentation
Severe myopathy
Serum potassium 
<3.3 μg/L
<10%
75%
24-h urinary free 
cortisol (UFC)
High
High
Basal ACTH level
Inappropriately 
high
Very high
Dexamethasone 
suppression
1 mg overnight
Low dose  
(0.5 mg q6h)
Cortisol >5 μg/dL
Cortisol >5 μg/dL
High dose (2 mg 
q6h)
Cortisol <5 μg/dL
Cortisol >5 μg/dL
UFC >80%  
suppressed
Microadenomas: 
90%
Macroadenomas: 
50%
10%
Inferior petrosal 
sinus sampling 
(IPSS)
Basal
IPSS: peripheral
>2
<2
CRH induced
  IPSS: peripheral
>3
<3
aACTH-independent causes of Cushing’s syndrome are diagnosed by 
suppressed ACTH levels and an adrenal mass in the setting of hyper-
cortisolism. Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome is excluded by history.
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH, corticotropin- 
releasing hormone; F, female; M, male.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
46
partially effective in adults, steroidogenic inhibitors are 
used in combination with pituitary irradiation to block 
adrenal effects of persistently high ACTH levels.
Ketoconazole, an imidazole derivative antimycotic 
agent, inhibits several P450 enzymes and effectively 
lowers cortisol in most patients with Cushing’s disease 
when administered twice daily (600–1200 mg/d). Ele-
vated hepatic transaminases, gynecomastia, impotence, 
gastrointestinal upset, and edema are common side 
effects. Metyrapone (2–4 g/d) inhibits 11β-hydroxylase 
activity and normalizes plasma cortisol in up to 75% of 
patients. Side effects include nausea and vomiting, rash, 
and exacerbation of acne or hirsutism. Mitotane (o,p′-
DDD; 3–6 g/d orally in four divided doses) suppresses 
cortisol hypersecretion by inhibiting 11β-hydroxylase 
and cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzymes and by 
destroying adrenocortical cells. Side effects of mitotane 
include gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, gyneco-
mastia, hyperlipidemia, skin rash, and hepatic enzyme 
elevation. It also may lead to hypoaldosteronism. Other 
agents include aminoglutethimide (250 mg tid), trilo-
stane (200–1000 mg/d), cyproheptadine (24 mg/d), and 
IV etomidate (0.3 mg/kg per hour). Glucocorticoid insuf-
ficiency is a potential side effect of agents used to block 
steroidogenesis.
The use of steroidogenic inhibitors has decreased 
the need for bilateral adrenalectomy. Removal of both 
adrenal glands corrects hypercortisolism but may be 
associated with significant morbidity rates and necessi-
tates permanent glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid 
replacement. Adrenalectomy in the setting of residual 
corticotrope adenoma tissue predisposes to the devel-
opment of Nelson’s syndrome, a disorder characterized 
by rapid pituitary tumor enlargement and increased 
pigmentation secondary to high ACTH levels. Radiation 
therapy may be indicated to prevent the development 
of Nelson’s syndrome after adrenalectomy.
Gonadotropins: FSH and LH
Synthesis and Secretion
Gonadotrope cells constitute about 10% of anterior 
pituitary cells and produce two gonadotropins—LH and 
FSH. Like TSH and hCG, LH and FSH are glycopro-
tein hormones that consist of α and β subunits. The α 
subunit is common to these glycoprotein hormones; 
specificity is conferred by the β subunits, which are 
expressed by separate genes.
Gonadotropin synthesis and release are dynamically 
regulated. This is particularly true in women, in whom 
rapidly fluctuating gonadal steroid levels vary throughout 
the menstrual cycle. Hypothalamic GnRH, a 10-amino-
acid peptide, regulates the synthesis and secretion of both 
LH and FSH. GnRH is secreted in discrete pulses every 
60–120 min, and the pulses in turn elicit LH and FSH 
pulses (Fig. 2-3). The pulsatile mode of GnRH input is 
essential to its action; pulses prime gonadotrope respon-
siveness, whereas continuous GnRH exposure induces 
desensitization. Based on this phenomenon, long-acting 
GnRH agonists are used to suppress gonadotropin lev-
els in children with precocious puberty and in men with 
prostate cancer and are used in some ovulation-induction 
protocols to reduce levels of endogenous gonadotropins 
(Chap. 10). Estrogens act at both the hypothalamus and 
the pituitary to modulate gonadotropin secretion. Chronic 
estrogen exposure is inhibitory, whereas rising estrogen 
levels, as occur during the preovulatory surge, exert posi-
tive feedback to increase gonadotropin pulse frequency 
and amplitude. Progesterone slows GnRH pulse fre-
quency but enhances gonadotropin responses to GnRH. 
Testosterone feedback in men also occurs at the hypo-
thalamic and pituitary levels and is mediated in part by its 
conversion to estrogens.
Although GnRH is the main regulator of LH and FSH 
secretion, FSH synthesis is also under separate control by 
the gonadal peptides inhibin and activin, which are mem-
bers of the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) family. 
Inhibin selectively suppresses FSH, whereas activin stimu-
lates FSH synthesis (Chap. 10).
Action
The gonadotropin hormones interact with their respec-
tive GPCRs expressed in the ovary and testis, evoking 
germ-cell development and maturation and steroid hor-
mone biosynthesis. In women, FSH regulates ovarian 
follicle development and stimulates ovarian estrogen pro-
duction. LH mediates ovulation and maintenance of the 
corpus luteum. In men, LH induces Leydig cell testoster-
one synthesis and secretion, and FSH stimulates seminif-
erous tubule development and regulates spermatogenesis.
Gonadotropin Deficiency
Hypogonadism is the most common presenting fea-
ture of adult hypopituitarism even when other pituitary 
hormones are also deficient. It is often a harbinger of 
hypothalamic or pituitary lesions that impair GnRH pro-
duction or delivery through the pituitary stalk. As noted 
above, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is a common 
presenting feature of hyperprolactinemia.
A variety of inherited and acquired disorders are 
associated with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
(IHH) (Chap. 8). Hypothalamic defects associated with 
GnRH deficiency include two X-linked disorders, 
Kallmann syndrome (see above) and mutations in the 
DAX1 gene, as well as dominant mutations in FGFR1. 
Mutations in GPR54, kisspeptin, the GnRH receptor, 
and the LH β or FSH β subunit genes are additional 
causes of selective gonadotropin deficiency. Acquired 
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
47
forms of GnRH deficiency leading to hypogonado-
tropism are seen in association with anorexia nervosa, 
stress, starvation, and extreme exercise but also may be 
idiopathic. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in these 
disorders is reversed by removal of the stressful stimulus 
or by caloric replenishment.
Presentation and diagnosis
In premenopausal women, hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism presents as diminished ovarian function leading 
to oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, infertility, decreased 
vaginal secretions, decreased libido, and breast atrophy. 
In hypogonadal adult men, secondary testicular failure is 
associated with decreased libido and potency, infertility, 
decreased muscle mass with weakness, reduced beard 
and body hair growth, soft testes, and characteristic fine 
facial wrinkles. Osteoporosis occurs in both untreated 
hypogonadal women and men.
Laboratory investigation
Central hypogonadism is associated with low or inap-
propriately normal serum gonadotropin levels in the 
setting of low sex hormone concentrations (testoster-
one in men, estradiol in women). Because gonadotro-
pin secretion is pulsatile, valid assessments may require 
repeated measurements or the use of pooled serum sam-
ples. Men have reduced sperm counts.
Intravenous GnRH (100 μg) stimulates gonadotropes 
to secrete LH (which peaks within 30 min) and FSH 
(which plateaus during the ensuing 60 min). Normal 
responses vary according to menstrual cycle stage, age, 
and sex of the patient. Generally, LH levels increase 
about threefold, whereas FSH responses are less pro-
nounced. In the setting of gonadotropin deficiency, 
a normal gonadotropin response to GnRH indicates 
intact pituitary gonadotrope function and suggests a 
hypothalamic abnormality. An absent response, how-
ever, cannot reliably distinguish pituitary from hypotha-
lamic causes of hypogonadism. For this reason, GnRH 
testing usually adds little to the information gained 
from baseline evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
gonadotrope axis except in cases of isolated GnRH 
deficiency (e.g., Kallmann syndrome).
MRI examination of the sellar region and assess-
ment of other pituitary functions usually are indicated in 
patients with documented central hypogonadism.
Treatment	
Gonadotropin Deficiency
In males, testosterone replacement is necessary to 
achieve and maintain normal growth and development of 
the external genitalia, secondary sex characteristics, male 
sexual behavior, and androgenic anabolic effects, includ-
ing maintenance of muscle function and bone mass. 
Testosterone may be administered by intramuscular 
injections every 1–4 weeks or by using skin patches 
that are replaced daily (Chap. 8). Testosterone gels are 
also available. Gonadotropin injections [hCG or human 
menopausal gonadotropin (hMG)] over 12–18 months 
are used to restore fertility. Pulsatile GnRH therapy 
(25–150 ng/kg every 2 h), administered by a subcuta-
neous infusion pump, is also effective for treatment of 
hypothalamic hypogonadism when fertility is desired.
In premenopausal women, cyclical replacement of 
estrogen and progesterone maintains secondary sexual 
characteristics and integrity of genitourinary tract mucosa 
and prevents premature osteoporosis (Chap. 10). Gonado-
tropin therapy is used for ovulation induction. Follicu-
lar growth and maturation are initiated using hMG or 
recombinant FSH; hCG or human luteinizing hormone 
(hLH) is subsequently injected to induce ovulation. As in 
men, pulsatile GnRH therapy can be used to treat hypo-
thalamic causes of gonadotropin deficiency.
Nonfunctioning and Gonadotropin-
Producing Pituitary Adenomas
Etiology and prevalence
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas include those that 
secrete little or no pituitary hormones as well as tumors 
that produce too little hormone to result in recognizable 
clinical features. They are the most common type of pitu-
itary adenoma and are usually macroadenomas at the time 
of diagnosis because clinical features are not apparent until 
tumor mass effects occur. Based on immunohistochem-
istry, most clinically nonfunctioning adenomas can be 
shown to originate from gonadotrope cells. These tumors 
typically produce small amounts of intact gonadotropins 
(usually FSH) as well as uncombined α, LH β, and FSH 
β subunits. Tumor secretion may lead to elevated α and 
FSH β subunits and, rarely, to increased LH β subunit 
levels. Some adenomas express α subunits without FSH 
or LH. TRH administration often induces an atypical 
increase of tumor-derived gonadotropins or subunits.
Presentation and diagnosis
Clinically nonfunctioning tumors often present with 
optic chiasm pressure and other symptoms of local expan-
sion or may be incidentally discovered on an MRI per-
formed for another indication (incidentaloma). Rarely, 
menstrual disturbances or ovarian hyperstimulation occur 
in women with large tumors that produce FSH and LH. 
More commonly, adenoma compression of the pituitary 
stalk or surrounding pituitary tissue leads to attenuated 
LH and features of hypogonadism. PRL levels are usu-
ally slightly increased, also because of stalk compression. 
It is important to distinguish this circumstance from true 
prolactinomas, as nonfunctioning tumors do not shrink in 
response to treatment with dopamine agonists.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
48
Laboratory investigation
The goal of laboratory testing in clinically nonfunction-
ing tumors is to classify the type of the tumor, identify 
hormonal markers of tumor activity, and detect possible 
hypopituitarism. Free α subunit levels may be elevated 
in 10–15% of patients with nonfunctioning tumors. 
In female patients, peri- or postmenopausal basal FSH 
concentrations are difficult to distinguish from tumor-
derived FSH elevation. Premenopausal women have 
cycling FSH levels, also preventing clear-cut diagnostic 
distinction from tumor-derived FSH. In men, gonad-
otropin-secreting tumors may be diagnosed because 
of slightly increased gonadotropins (FSH > LH) in the 
setting of a pituitary mass. Testosterone levels are usu-
ally low despite the normal or increased LH level, 
perhaps reflecting reduced LH bioactivity or the loss 
of normal LH pulsatility. Because this pattern of hor-
mone test results is also seen in primary gonadal failure 
and, to some extent, with aging (Chap. 8), the find-
ing of increased gonadotropins alone is insufficient for 
the diagnosis of a gonadotropin-secreting tumor. In the 
majority of patients with gonadotrope adenomas, TRH 
administration stimulates LH β subunit secretion; this 
response is not seen in normal individuals. GnRH test-
ing, however, is not helpful for making the diagnosis. 
For nonfunctioning and gonadotropin-secreting tumors, 
the diagnosis usually rests on immunohistochemical 
analyses of surgically resected tumor tissue, as the mass 
effects of these tumors usually necessitate resection.
Although acromegaly or Cushing’s syndrome usually 
presents with unique clinical features, clinically inappar-
ent (silent) somatotrope or corticotrope adenomas may 
only be diagnosed by immunostaining of resected tumor 
tissue. If PRL levels are <100 μg/L in a patient harbor-
ing a pituitary mass, a nonfunctioning adenoma causing 
pituitary stalk compression should be considered.
Treatment	
Nonfunctioning and Gonadotropin-
Producing Pituitary Adenomas
Asymptomatic small, nonfunctioning microadenomas 
adenomas with no threat to vision may be followed 
with regular MRI and visual field testing without imme-
diate intervention. However, for macroadenomas, trans-
sphenoidal surgery is indicated to reduce tumor size 
and relieve mass effects (Fig. 2-11). Although it is not 
usually possible to remove all adenoma tissue surgi-
cally, vision improves in 70% of patients with preopera-
tive visual field defects. Preexisting hypopituitarism that 
results from tumor mass effects may improve or resolve 
completely. Beginning about 6 months postoperatively, 
MRI scans should be performed yearly to detect tumor 
regrowth. Within 5–6 years after successful surgical 
resection, ∼15% of nonfunctioning tumors recur. When 
substantial tumor remains after transsphenoidal sur-
gery, adjuvant radiotherapy may be indicated to pre-
vent tumor regrowth. Radiotherapy may be deferred if 
no postoperative residual mass is evident.
Nonfunctioning pituitary tumors respond poorly to 
dopamine agonist treatment, and somatostatin ana-
logues are largely ineffective for shrinking these tumors. 
The selective GnRH antagonist Nal-Glu GnRH sup-
presses FSH hypersecretion but has no effect on ade-
noma size.
Low risk of
  visual loss
Nonfunctioning Pituitary Mass
MANAGEMENT OF A NONFUNCTIONING PITUITARY MASS
Differential diagnosis based on MRI and clinical features
Dynamic pituitary reserve testing
Exclude aneurysm
Follow-up: MRI
MRI
Trophic hormone
  testing and
  replacement
May require
  disease-specific
  therapy
MRI
Trophic hormone
  testing and
  replacement
Surgery
Histologic diagnosis
Other sellar mass (not adenoma)
Microadenoma
Macroadenoma
Observe
Surgery
Nonfunctioning adenoma
Figure 2-11 
Management of a nonfunctioning pituitary mass.
 
CHAPTER 2
Disorders of the Anterior Pituitary and Hypothalamus 
49
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
Synthesis and Secretion
TSH-secreting thyrotrope cells constitute 5% of the 
anterior pituitary cell population. TSH is structurally 
related to LH and FSH. It shares a common α subunit 
with these hormones but contains a specific TSH β sub-
unit. TRH is a hypothalamic tripeptide (pyroglutamyl 
histidylprolinamide) that acts through a GPCR to stim-
ulate TSH synthesis and secretion; it also stimulates the 
lactotrope cell to secrete PRL. TSH secretion is stimu-
lated by TRH, whereas thyroid hormones, dopamine, 
somatostatin, and glucocorticoids suppress TSH by 
overriding TRH induction.
Thyrotrope growth and TSH secretion are both 
induced when negative feedback inhibition by thyroid 
hormones is removed. Thus, thyroid damage (including 
surgical thyroidectomy), radiation-induced hypothy-
roidism, chronic thyroiditis, and prolonged goitrogen 
exposure are associated with increased TSH. Long-
standing untreated hypothyroidism can lead to thyro-
trope hyperplasia and pituitary enlargement, which may 
be evident on MRI.
Action
TSH is secreted in pulses, though the excursions are 
modest in comparison to other pituitary hormones 
because of the low amplitude of the pulses and the rela-
tively long half-life of TSH. Consequently, single deter-
minations of TSH suffice to assess its circulating levels. 
TSH binds to a GPCR on thyroid follicular cells to stim-
ulate thyroid hormone synthesis and release (Chap. 4).
TSH Deficiency
Features of central hypothyroidism due to TSH defi-
ciency mimic those seen with primary hypothyroidism 
but are generally less severe. Pituitary hypothyroid-
ism is characterized by low basal TSH levels in the set-
ting of low free thyroid hormone. In contrast, patients 
with hypothyroidism of hypothalamic origin (presum-
ably due to a lack of endogenous TRH) may exhibit 
normal or even slightly elevated TSH levels. The TSH 
produced in this circumstance appears to have reduced 
biologic activity because of altered glycosylation.
TRH (200 μg) injected intravenously causes a two- 
to threefold increase in TSH (and PRL) levels within 
30 min. Although TRH testing can be used to assess 
TSH reserve, abnormalities of the thyroid axis usually 
can be detected based on basal free T4 and TSH levels, 
and TRH testing is rarely indicated.
Thyroid-replacement therapy should be initiated 
after adequate adrenal function has been established. 
Dose adjustment is based on thyroid hormone levels 
and clinical parameters rather than the TSH level.
TSH-Secreting Adenomas
TSH-producing macroadenomas are rare but are often 
large and locally invasive when they occur. Patients 
usually present with thyroid goiter and hyperthyroid-
ism, reflecting overproduction of TSH. Diagnosis is 
based on demonstrating elevated serum free T4 levels, 
inappropriately normal or high TSH secretion, and 
MRI evidence of a pituitary adenoma.
It is important to exclude other causes of inappro-
priate TSH secretion, such as resistance to thyroid 
hormone, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by 
mutations in the thyroid hormone β receptor (Chap. 4). 
The presence of a pituitary mass and elevated α subunit 
levels are suggestive of a TSH-secreting tumor. Dysal-
buminemic hyperthyroxinemia syndromes, caused by 
mutations in serum thyroid hormone binding proteins, 
are also characterized by elevated thyroid hormone lev-
els, but with normal rather than suppressed TSH levels. 
Moreover, free thyroid hormone levels are normal in 
these disorders, most of which are familial.
Treatment	
TSH-Secreting Adenomas
The initial therapeutic approach is to remove or debulk 
the tumor mass surgically, usually using a transsphenoi-
dal approach. Total resection is not often achieved as 
most of these adenomas are large and locally invasive. 
Normal circulating thyroid hormone levels are achieved 
in about two-thirds of patients after surgery. Thyroid 
ablation or antithyroid drugs (methimazole and pro-
pylthiouracil) can be used to reduce thyroid hormone 
levels. Somatostatin analogue treatment effectively 
normalizes TSH and α subunit hypersecretion, shrinks 
the tumor mass in 50% of patients, and improves visual 
fields in 75% of patients; euthyroidism is restored in 
most patients. Because somatostatin analogues mark-
edly suppress TSH, biochemical hypothyroidism often 
requires concomitant thyroid hormone replacement, 
which may also further control tumor growth.
Diabetes Insipidus
See Chap. 3 for diagnosis and treatment of diabetes 
insipidus.
 Gary L. Robertson 
50
 The neurohypophysis, or posterior pituitary, is formed 
by axons that originate in large cell bodies in the supra-
optic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. 
It produces two hormones: (1) arginine vasopres-
sin (AVP), also known as antidiuretic hormone, and 
(2) oxytocin. AVP acts on the renal tubules to reduce 
water loss by concentrating the urine. Oxytocin stimu-
lates postpartum milk letdown in response to suckling. 
AVP defi ciency causes diabetes insipidus (DI), which 
is characterized by the production of large amounts of 
dilute urine. Excessive or inappropriate AVP produc-
tion predisposes to hyponatremia if water intake is not 
reduced in parallel with urine output. 
 VasOpressin 
 syntHesis AnD secRetion 
 AVP is a nonapeptide composed of a six-member disul-
fi de ring and a tripeptide tail ( Fig. 3-1 ). It is synthe-
sized via a polypeptide precursor that includes AVP, 
neurophysin, and copeptin, all encoded by a single gene 
on chromosome 20. After preliminary processing and 
folding, the precursor is packaged in neurosecretory 
vesicles, where it is transported down the axon, further 
 DISORDERS OF THE NEUROHYPOPHYSIS 
 chapTer 3 
processed to AVP, and stored in neurosecretory vesicles 
until the hormone and other components are released 
by exocytosis into peripheral blood. 
 AVP secretion is regulated primarily by the “effec-
tive” osmotic pressure of body fl uids. This control is 
mediated by specialized hypothalamic cells known as 
osmoreceptors , which are extremely sensitive to small 
changes in the plasma concentration of sodium and 
certain other solutes but normally are insensitive to 
other solutes such as urea and glucose. The osmore-
ceptors appear to include inhibitory as well as stimu-
latory components that function in concert to form 
a threshold, or set point, control system. Below this 
threshold, plasma AVP is suppressed to levels that 
permit the development of a maximum water diuresis. 
Above it, plasma AVP rises steeply in direct proportion 
to plasma osmolarity, quickly reaching levels suffi cient 
to effect a maximum antidiuresis. The absolute levels 
of plasma osmolarity/sodium at which minimally and 
maximally effective levels of plasma AVP occur, vary 
appreciably from person to person, apparently owing 
to genetic infl uences on the set and sensitivity of the 
system. However, the average threshold, or set point, 
for AVP release corresponds to a plasma osmolarity or 
sodium of about 280 mosmol/L or 135 meq/L, respec-
tively; levels only 2–4% higher normally result in max-
imum antidiuresis. 
 Though it is relatively stable in a healthy adult, the 
set point of the osmoregulatory system can be low-
ered by pregnancy, the menstrual cycle, estrogen, and 
relatively large, acute reductions in blood pressure or 
volume. Those reductions are mediated largely by 
neuronal afferents that originate in transmural pres-
sure receptors of the heart and large arteries and proj-
ect via the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves to the 
brainstem, from which postsynaptic projections ascend 
to the hypothalamus. These pathways maintain a tonic 
inhibitory tone that decreases when blood volume or 
pressure falls by >10–20%. This baroregulatory system 
DDAVP
–Cys–Tyr–Phe–Gln–Asp–Cys–Pro–D–Arg–Gly–NH2
S
S
AVP
NH2–Cys–Tyr–Phe–Gln–Asp–Cys–Pro–L–Arg–Gly–NH2
S
S
Oxytocin
NH2–Cys–Tyr–Ile–Gln–Asp–Cys–Pro–L–Leu–Gly–NH2
S
S
 Figure 3-1 
Primary structures of arginine vasopressin (AVP), oxytocin, 
and desmopressin. 
 
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis
51
is probably of minor importance in the physiology 
of AVP secretion because the hemodynamic changes 
required to effect it usually do not occur during nor-
mal activities. However, the baroregulatory system 
undoubtedly plays an important role in AVP secretion 
in patients with large, acute disturbances of hemody-
namic function.
AVP secretion also can be stimulated by nausea, acute 
hypoglycemia, glucocorticoid deficiency, smoking, and, 
possibly, hyperangiotensinemia. The emetic stimuli are 
extremely potent since they typically elicit immediate, 
50- to 100-fold increases in plasma AVP even when the 
nausea is transient and is not associated with vomiting or 
other symptoms. They appear to act via the emetic cen-
ter in the medulla and can be blocked completely by 
treatment with antiemetics such as fluphenazine. There is 
no evidence that pain or other noxious stresses have any 
effect on AVP unless they elicit a vasovagal reaction with 
its associated nausea and hypotension.
Glomerulus
Henle's loop
Collecting
tubule
Collecting duct
principal cells
180 L/d
(290)
Na + H2O
Na
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
AQP2
Vesicle
AQP3
AQP4
V2 receptor
Basal
Apical
AVP
cAMP
36 L/d
(290)
24 L/d
(60)
1 L/d
Tight junctions
Figure 3-2
Antidiuretic effect of arginine vasopressin (AVP) in the reg-
ulation of urine volume. In a typical 70-kg adult, the kidney 
filters ∼180 L/d of plasma. Of this, ∼144 L (80%) is reabsorbed 
isosmotically in the proximal tubule and another 8 L (4–5%) is 
reabsorbed without solute in the descending limb of Henle’s 
loop. The remainder is diluted to an osmolarity of ∼60 mmol/
kg by selective reabsorption of sodium and chloride in the 
ascending limb. In the absence of AVP, the urine issuing from 
the loop passes largely unmodified through the distal tubules 
and collecting ducts, resulting in a maximum water diure-
sis. In the presence of AVP, solute-free water is reabsorbed 
osmotically through the principal cells of the collecting ducts,
resulting in the excretion of a much smaller volume of concen-
trated urine. This antidiuretic effect is mediated via a G protein–
coupled V2 receptor that increases intracellular cyclic AMP, 
thereby inducing translocation of aquaporin 2 (AQP2) water 
channels into the apical membrane. The resultant increase in 
permeability permits an influx of water that diffuses out of the 
cell through AQP3 and AQP4 water channels on the basal-
lateral surface. The net rate of flux across the cell is determined 
by the number of AQP2 water channels in the apical mem-
brane and the strength of the osmotic gradient between tubu-
lar fluid and the renal medulla. Tight junctions on the lateral 
surface of the cells serve to prevent unregulated water flow.
Action
The most important, if not the only, physiologic action 
of AVP is to reduce water excretion by promoting con-
centration of urine. This antidiuretic effect is achieved 
by increasing the hydroosmotic permeability of cells 
that line the distal tubule and medullary collecting ducts 
of the kidney (Fig. 3-2). In the absence of AVP, these 
cells are impermeable to water and reabsorb little, if 
any, of the relatively large volume of dilute filtrate that 
enters from the proximal nephron. This results in the 
excretion of very large volumes (as much as 0.2 mL/
kg per min) of maximally dilute urine (specific gravity 
and osmolarity ∼1.000 and 50 mosmol/L, respectively), 
a condition known as water diuresis. In the presence of 
AVP, these cells become selectively permeable to water, 
allowing the water to diffuse back down the osmotic 
gradient created by the hypertonic renal medulla. 
As a result, the dilute fluid passing through the tubules 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
52
is concentrated and the rate of urine flow decreases. 
The magnitude of this effect varies in direct propor-
tion to the plasma AVP concentration and, at maximum 
levels, approximates a urine flow rate as low as 0.35 mL/
min and a urine osmolarity as high as 1200 mosmol/L. 
This action is mediated via binding to G protein–coupled 
V2 receptors on the serosal surface of the cell, activation 
of adenyl cyclase, and insertion into the luminal surface of 
water channels composed of a protein known as aquaporin 
2 (AQP2). The V2 receptors and aquaporin 2 are encoded 
by genes on chromosomes Xq28 and 12q13, respectively.
At high concentrations, AVP also causes contraction of 
smooth muscle in blood vessels and in the gastrointestinal 
tract, induces glycogenolysis in the liver, and potentiates 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) release by corti-
cotropin-releasing factor. These effects are mediated by 
V1a or V1b receptors that are coupled to phospholipase C. 
Their role, if any, in human physiology/pathophysiology 
is uncertain.
Metabolism
AVP distributes rapidly into a space roughly equal to 
the extracellular fluid volume. It is cleared irrevers-
ibly with a t1/2 of 10–30 minutes. Most AVP clearance 
is due to degradation in the liver and kidneys. During 
pregnancy, the metabolic clearance of AVP is increased 
three- to fourfold due to placental production of an 
N-terminal peptidase.
Thirst
Because AVP cannot reduce water loss below a certain 
minimum level obligated by urinary solute load and 
evaporation from skin and lungs, a mechanism for ensur-
ing adequate intake is essential for preventing dehy-
dration. This vital function is performed by the thirst 
mechanism. Like AVP, thirst is regulated primarily by an 
osmostat that is situated in the anteromedial hypothala-
mus and is able to detect very small changes in the plasma 
concentration of sodium and certain other effective sol-
utes. The thirst osmostat appears to be “set” about 5% 
higher than the AVP osmostat. This arrangement ensures 
that thirst, polydipsia, and dilution of body fluids do not 
occur until plasma osmolarity/sodium start to exceed the 
defensive capacity of the antidiuretic mechanism.
Oxytocin
Oxytocin is also a nonapeptide, and it differs from AVP 
only at positions 3 and 8 (Fig. 3-1). However, it has rela-
tively little antidiuretic effect and seems to act mainly on 
mammary ducts to facilitate milk letdown during nursing. 
It also may help initiate or facilitate labor by stimulating 
contraction of uterine smooth muscle, but it is not clear if 
this action is physiologic or necessary for normal delivery.
Deficiencies of Vasopressin 
Secretion and Action
Diabetes Insipidus
Clinical characteristics
Decreased secretion or action of AVP usually mani-
fests as diabetes insipidus, a syndrome characterized by 
the production of abnormally large volumes of dilute 
urine. The 24-hour urine volume is >50 mL/kg body 
weight, and the osmolarity is <300 mosmol/L. The 
polyuria produces symptoms of urinary frequency, 
enuresis, and/or nocturia, which may disturb sleep and 
cause mild daytime fatigue or somnolence. It also results 
in a slight rise in plasma osmolarity that stimulates thirst 
and a commensurate increase in fluid intake (polydip-
sia). Overt clinical signs of dehydration are uncommon 
unless fluid intake is impaired.
Etiology
Deficient secretion of AVP can be primary or second-
ary. The primary form usually results from agenesis or 
irreversible destruction of the neurohypophysis and is 
referred to variously as neurohypophyseal DI, pituitary DI, 
or central DI. It can be caused by a variety of congeni-
tal, acquired, or genetic disorders, but in about one-half 
of all adult patients it is idiopathic (Table 3-1). The 
surgically induced forms of pituitary DI usually appear 
within 24 hours and then go through a 2- to 3-week 
interim period of inappropriate antidiuresis, after which 
they may or may not recur. The genetic form usually 
is transmitted in an autosomal dominant mode and is 
caused by diverse mutations in the coding region of 
the AVP–neurophysin II (or AVP-NPII) gene. All the 
mutations alter one or more amino acids known to 
be critical for correct folding of the prohormone, thus 
interfering with its processing and trafficking through 
the endoplasmic reticulum. The AVP deficiency and 
DI develop gradually several months to years after birth, 
progressing from partial to severe and permanent DI. 
They appear to result from accumulation of misfolded 
mutant precursor followed by selective degeneration of 
AVP-producing magnocellular neurons. An autosomal 
recessive form due to an inactivating mutation in the 
AVP portion of the gene, an X-linked recessive form 
due to an unidentified gene on Xq28, and an autoso-
mal recessive form due to mutations of the WFS 1 gene 
responsible for Wolfram’s syndrome [diabetes insipi-
dus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and neural deaf-
ness (DIDMOAD)] have also been described. A primary 
 
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis
53
deficiency of plasma AVP also can result from increased 
metabolism by an N-terminal aminopeptidase produced 
by the placenta. It is referred to as gestational DI since 
the signs and symptoms manifest during pregnancy and 
usually remit several weeks after delivery.
Secondary deficiencies of AVP result from inhibi-
tion of secretion by excessive intake of fluids. They are 
referred to as primary polydipsia and can be divided into 
three subcategories. One of them, dipsogenic DI, is char-
acterized by inappropriate thirst caused by a reduction 
in the set of the osmoregulatory mechanism. It some-
times occurs in association with multifocal diseases of 
the brain such as neurosarcoid, tuberculous meningi-
tis, and multiple sclerosis but is often idiopathic. The 
second subtype, psychogenic polydipsia, is not associated 
with thirst, and the polydipsia seems to be a feature of 
Table 3-1 
Causes of Diabetes Insipidus
  Pituitary diabetes insipidus
  Acquired
    Head trauma (closed and penetrating) including  
  pituitary surgery
    Neoplasms
      Primary
        Craniopharyngioma
        Pituitary adenoma (suprasellar)
        Dysgerminoma
        Meningioma
      Metastatic (lung, breast)
      Hematologic (lymphoma, leukemia)
    Granulomas
      Sarcoidosis
      Histiocytosis
      Xanthoma disseminatum
    Infectious
      Chronic meningitis
      Viral encephalitis
      Toxoplasmosis
    Inflammatory
      Lymphocytic infundibuloneurohypophysitis
      Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
      Lupus erythematosus
      Scleroderma
    Chemical toxins
      Tetrodotoxin
      Snake venom
    Vascular
      Sheehan’s syndrome
      Aneurysm (internal carotid)
      Aortocoronary bypass
      Hypoxic encephalopathy
    Pregnancy (vasopressinase)
    Idiopathic
    Congenital malformations
      Septo-optic dysplasia
      Midline craniofacial defects
      Holoprosencephaly
      Hypogenesis, ectopia of pituitary
    Genetic
      Autosomal dominant (AVP-neurophysin gene)
      Autosomal recessive (AVP-neurophysin gene)
      Autosomal recessive-Wolfram-(4p − WFS 1 gene)
      X-linked recessive (Xq28)
      Deletion chromosome 7q 
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Acquired
  Drugs
    Lithium
    Demeclocycline
    Methoxyflurane
    Amphotericin B
    Aminoglycosides
    Cisplatin
    Rifampin
    Foscarnet
  Metabolic
    Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria
    Hypokalemia
  Obstruction (ureter or urethra)
  Vascular
    Sickle cell disease and trait
    Ischemia (acute tubular necrosis)
  Granulomas
    Sarcoidosis
  Neoplasms
    Sarcoma
  Infiltration
    Amyloidosis
  Pregnancy
  Idiopathic
Genetic
  X-linked recessive (AVP receptor-2 gene)
  Autosomal recessive (AQP2 gene)
  Autosomal dominant (AQP2 gene)
Primary polydipsia
Acquired
  Psychogenic
    Schizophrenia
    Obsessive compulsive disorder
  Dipsogenic (abnormal thirst)
    Granulomas
      Sarcoidosis
    Infectious
      Tuberculous meningitis
    Head trauma (closed and penetrating)
    Demyelination
      Multiple sclerosis
    Drugs
      Lithium
      Carbamazepine
    Idiopathic
  Iatrogenic
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
54
psychosis or obsessive compulsive disorder. The third 
subtype, iatrogenic polydipsia, results from recommen-
dations to increase fluid intake for its presumed health 
benefits.
Primary deficiencies in the antidiuretic action of 
AVP result in nephrogenic DI (Table 3-1). They can be 
genetic, acquired, or drug induced. The genetic form 
usually is transmitted in a semirecessive X-linked man-
ner and is caused by mutations in the coding region 
of the V2 receptor gene that impair trafficking and/
or ligand binding of the mutant receptor. Autosomal 
recessive or dominant forms are caused by AQP2 gene 
mutations that result in complete or partial defects in 
trafficking and function of the water channels in distal 
and collecting tubules of the kidney.
Secondary deficiencies in the antidiuretic response 
to AVP result from polyuria per se. They are caused by 
washout of the medullary concentration gradient and/
or suppression of aquaporin function. They usually 
resolve 24–48 hours after the polyuria is corrected but 
can complicate interpretation of some acute tests used 
for differential diagnosis.
Pathophysiology
When the secretion or action of AVP falls below 
80–85% of normal, urine concentration ceases and the 
rate of urine output rises to symptomatic levels. If the 
defect is due to pituitary, gestational, or nephrogenic 
DI, the polyuria results in a small (1–2%) decrease in 
body water and a commensurate increase in plasma 
osmolarity and sodium concentration that stimulate 
thirst and a compensatory increase in water intake. As 
a result, hypernatremia and other overt physical or laboratory 
signs of dehydration do not develop unless the patient also has 
a defect in thirst or fails to drink for some other reason.
The severity of the antidiuretic defect varies markedly 
from patient to patient. In some, the deficiencies in AVP 
secretion or action are so severe that even an intense 
stimulus such as nausea or severe dehydration does not 
raise plasma AVP enough to concentrate the urine. In 
others, the deficiency is incomplete, and a modest stim-
ulus such as a few hours of fluid deprivation, smoking, 
or a vasovagal reaction increases plasma AVP sufficiently 
to raise urine osmolarity as high as 800 mosmol/L. The 
maximum achieved is usually less than normal, but that is 
the case largely because maximal concentrating capacity 
is temporarily impaired by chronic polyuria.
In primary polydipsia, the pathogenesis of the poly-
dipsia and polyuria is the reverse of that in pituitary, 
nephrogenic, and gestational DI. Thus, the excessive 
intake of fluids slightly increases body water, thereby 
reducing plasma osmolarity, AVP secretion, and uri-
nary concentration. The latter results in a compensa-
tory increase in urinary free-water excretion that varies 
in direct proportion to intake. Therefore, hyponatremia 
or clinically appreciable overhydration is uncommon 
unless the polydipsia is very severe or the compensatory 
water diuresis is impaired by a drug or disease that stim-
ulates or mimics endogenous AVP.
In the dipsogenic form of primary polydipsia, fluid 
intake is excessive because the osmotic threshold for 
thirst appears to be reset to the left, often well below 
that for AVP release. When deprived of fluids or sub-
jected to another acute osmotic or nonosmotic stimu-
lus, these individuals invariably increase plasma AVP 
normally, but the resultant increase in urine concentra-
tion is usually subnormal because the individuals’ renal 
capacities to concentrate the urine also are blunted tem-
porarily by chronic polyuria. Thus, the maximum level 
of urine osmolarity achieved is usually indistinguishable 
from that in patients with partial pituitary, partial ges-
tational, or partial nephrogenic DI. Patients with psy-
chogenic or iatrogenic polydipsia respond similarly to 
fluid restriction but do not complain of thirst and usu-
ally offer other explanations for their high fluid intake.
Differential diagnosis
When symptoms of urinary frequency, enuresis, noc-
turia, and/or persistent thirst are present, the possibility 
of DI should be evaluated after excluding glucosuria by 
collecting a 24-hour urine on ad libitum fluid intake. 
If the volume exceeds 50 mL/kg per day (3500 mL in a 
70-kg male) and the osmolarity is <300 mosmol/L, DI 
is confirmed and the patient should be evaluated further 
to determine the type.
In differentiating among the various types of DI, the 
history alone may be sufficient if it reveals a likely ante-
cedent such as pituitary surgery. Usually, however, that 
type of indicator is absent, ambiguous, or misleading and 
other approaches are needed. Except in the rare patient 
with hypertonic dehydration under basal conditions, dif-
ferentiation should begin with a fluid deprivation test. It 
can be performed on an outpatient basis if the necessary 
staff and facilities are available. To minimize patient dis-
comfort, avoid excessive dehydration, and maximize the 
information obtained, the test should be started in the 
morning and continued with hourly monitoring of body 
weight, plasma osmolarity and/or sodium concentration, 
urine volume, and urine osmolarity until either of two 
endpoints is reached. If fluid deprivation does not result 
in urine concentration (osmolarity >300 mosmol/L, spe-
cific gravity >1.010) before body weight decreases by 
5% or plasma osmolarity/sodium rise above the upper 
limit of normal, the patient has severe pituitary or severe 
nephrogenic DI. These disorders usually can be distin-
guished by administering desmopressin (0.03 μg/kg SC 
or IV) and repeating the measurement of urine osmolar-
ity 1–2 hours later. An increase of >50% indicates severe 
pituitary DI, whereas a smaller or absent response is 
strongly suggestive of nephrogenic DI.
 
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis
55
Conversely, if fluid deprivation results in concentra-
tion of the urine, severe defects in AVP secretion and 
action are excluded and the question becomes whether 
the patient has partial pituitary DI, partial nephro-
genic DI, or primary polydipsia. The maximum levels 
of urine osmolarity achieved before and after desmo-
pressin injection are of no help in this regard because 
the values in the three groups vary widely and overlap 
owing to impairment of renal concentrating capacity 
caused by polyuria per se. Therefore, another approach 
is needed to differentiate among them. The easiest 
and least expensive method is to measure plasma AVP 
before and during the fluid deprivation test and ana-
lyze the results in relation to the concurrent plasma and 
urine osmolarity (Fig. 3-3). This approach invariably 
differentiates partial nephrogenic DI from partial pitu-
itary DI and primary polydipsia. It also differentiates 
partial pituitary DI from primary polydipsia if plasma 
osmolarity and/or sodium are clearly above the nor-
mal range when the hormone is measured. However, 
the requisite level of hypertonic dehydration may be 
difficult to produce by fluid deprivation alone when 
urine concentration occurs. Therefore, it is usually 
necessary to continue the fluid deprivation and infuse 
hypertonic (3%) saline at a rate of 0.1 mL/kg per min 
until plasma osmolarity/sodium measured every 20 to 
30 minutes reach or slightly exceed the upper limit of 
normal. At that point, the measurement of plasma AVP 
should be repeated and the result related to the plasma 
osmolarity/sodium.
An alternative method of differential diagno-
sis is MRI of the pituitary and hypothalamus. In most 
healthy adults and children, the posterior pituitary 
emits a hyperintense signal in T1-weighted midsagittal 
images. This “bright spot” is almost always present in 
patients with primary polydipsia but is invariably absent 
or abnormally small in patients with pituitary DI. It is 
usually also small or absent in nephrogenic DI presum-
ably because of high secretion and turnover of AVP. 
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Urine osmolarity, mosmol/L
0.1
0.5 1
3
Plasma vasopressin, pg/mL
10
30 60
60
40
20
15
10
5
0
270
280
290
300
310
Plasma vasopressin, pg/mL
Plasma osmolarity, mosmol/L
Figure 3-3
Relationship of plasma AVP to urine 
osmolarity (left) and plasma osmolarity 
(right) before and during fluid deprivation–
hypertonic saline infusion test in patients 
who are normal or have primary poly-
dipsia (blue zones), pituitary diabetes 
insipidus (green zones), or nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus (pink zones).
Thus, a normal bright spot virtually excludes pituitary 
DI, argues against nephrogenic DI, and strongly suggests 
primary polydipsia. Lack of the bright spot is less help-
ful, however, because it is absent not only in pituitary 
and nephrogenic DI but also in some healthy adults and 
patients with empty sella who do not have DI or AVP 
deficiency.
The other way to distinguish among the three basic 
types of DI is a closely monitored trial of desmopressin 
therapy.
Treatment	
Diabetes Insipidus
The signs and symptoms of uncomplicated pituitary DI 
can be eliminated completely by treatment with desmo-
pressin (DDAVP), a synthetic analogue of AVP (Fig. 3-1). 
DDAVP acts selectively at V2 receptors to increase urine 
concentration and decrease urine flow in a dose-depen-
dent manner (Fig. 3-4). It is also more resistant to deg-
radation than is AVP and has a three- to fourfold longer 
duration of action. Desmopressin can be given by IV or 
SC injection, nasal inhalation, or oral tablet. The doses 
required to control pituitary DI completely vary widely, 
depending on the patient and the route of administra-
tion. However, they usually range from 1–2 μg qd or 
bid by injection, 10–20 μg bid or tid by nasal spray, or 
100–400 μg bid or tid orally. The onset of action is rapid, 
ranging from as little as 15 minutes after injection to  
60 minutes after oral administration. When given in 
doses sufficient to normalize urinary osmolarity and 
flow completely, desmopressin produces a slight 
(1–3%) increase in total body water and a commensu-
rate decrease in plasma osmolarity and sodium con-
centration that rapidly eliminates thirst and polydipsia. 
Consequently, water balance is maintained and hypo-
natremia does not develop unless the osmoregula-
tion of thirst is also impaired or fluid intake is exces-
sive for another reason such as a misconception about 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
56
the need to prevent dehydration. Fortunately, thirst 
abnormalities are rare in pituitary DI, and other moti-
vations to drink excessively usually can be eliminated 
by patient education. Therefore, desmopressin usu-
ally can be given safely in doses sufficient to normalize 
urine output completely, thereby avoiding the inconve-
nience and discomfort of intermittent escape otherwise 
needed to prevent water intoxication.
Primary polydipsia cannot be treated safely with 
desmopressin or any other antidiuretic drug because 
eliminating the polyuria does not eliminate the urge to 
drink. Therefore, it produces hyponatremia and/or other 
signs of water intoxication, usually within 24 to 48 hours 
if urine output is normalized completely. Patient educa-
tion may eliminate iatrogenic polydipsia, but it is largely 
ineffective in psychogenic or dipsogenic DI. In these 
patients, the only help currently available is to try to 
prevent water intoxication by warning about the use 
of drugs that can impair urinary free-water excretion 
directly or indirectly.
The polyuria and polydipsia of nephrogenic DI 
are not affected by treatment with standard doses 
of desmopressin. If resistance is partial, it may be over-
come by tenfold higher doses, but this treatment is 
too expensive and inconvenient to be useful chroni-
cally. However, treatment with conventional doses of a 
thiazide diuretic and/or amiloride in conjunction with a 
low-sodium diet and a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor 
(e.g., indomethacin) usually reduces the polyuria and 
polydipsia by 30–70% and may eliminate them com-
pletely in some patients. Side effects such as hypokale-
mia and gastric irritation can be minimized by the use 
of amiloride or potassium supplements and by taking 
medications with meals.
Adipsic Hypernatremia
Clinical characteristics
A defect in the thirst mechanism results in adipsic 
hypernatremia, a syndrome characterized by chronic 
or recurrent hypertonic dehydration. The hypernatre-
mia varies widely in severity and usually is associated 
with signs of hypovolemia such as tachycardia, postural 
hypotension, azotemia, hyperuricemia, and hypokale-
mia. Muscle weakness, pain, rhabdomyolysis, hypergly-
cemia, hyperlipidemia, and acute renal failure may also 
occur. DI usually does not exist at presentation but may 
develop during rehydration.
Etiology
Deficient thirst is usually due to hypogenesis or destruc-
tion of the osmoreceptors in the anterior hypothalamus. 
Because of their proximity, the osmoreceptors that 
regulate AVP secretion also are usually impaired. 
These defects can result from various congenital malfor-
mations of midline brain structures or may be acquired 
due to diseases such as occlusions of the anterior com-
municating artery, primary or metastatic tumors in the 
hypothalamus, head trauma, surgery, granulomatous 
diseases such as sarcoidosis and histiocytosis, AIDS, and 
cytomegalovirus encephalitis.
Pathophysiology
A deficiency of thirst results in a failure to drink enough 
water to replenish obligatory renal and extrarenal losses, 
causing hypertonic dehydration. In most patients, the 
response of AVP to osmotic stimulation is also deficient 
(Fig. 3-5). If the deficiency is partial, it may not be 
clinically apparent at first because the hypertonicity and 
hypovolemia are severe enough to stimulate the release 
of AVP in the small amounts necessary to concen-
trate the urine. However, when the hypertonicity and 
hypovolemia are reduced, plasma AVP falls and poly-
uria develops, often before the dehydration is corrected 
fully. Patients with a complete lack of osmoregulation 
600
300
0
12
9
6
3
0
12
9
6
3
0
71
70
69
296
294
292
290
288
143
142
141
140
139
6
5
4
3
Day
2
1
0
Urine
osmolarity,
mosmol/L
Plasma
osmolarity,
mosmol/L
Plasma
sodium,
meq/L
Urine
volume,
L/d
Fluid
intake,
L/d
Body
weight,
kg
Desmopressin 20 µg IN
Figure 3-4 
Effect of desmopressin therapy on water balance in a 
patient with uncomplicated pituitary diabetes insipidus. 
Note that treatment rapidly reduces thirst and fluid intake 
as well as urine output to normal, with only a slight increase 
in body water (weight) and a decrease in plasma osmolarity/ 
sodium. (From P Felig, L Frohman [eds]: Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001, with 
permission.)
 
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis
57
do not develop DI at any level of hydration because 
they cannot osmotically suppress or stimulate AVP 
secretion. Therefore, a hyponatremic syndrome indis-
tinguishable from inappropriate antidiuresis may develop 
Plasma vasopressin, pg/mL
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
240
260
280
300
320
Plasma osmolarity, mosmol/L
340
360
380
P
Partial AH
Normal range
Total AH
a
c
b
d
T
Figure 3-5
Heterogeneity of osmoregulatory dysfunction in adipsic 
hypernatremia (AH) and the syndrome of inappropri-
ate antidiuresis (SIAD). Each line depicts schematically 
the relationship of plasma arginine vasopressin (AVP) to 
plasma osmolarity during water loading and/or infusion 
of 3% saline in a patient with either AH (open symbols) or 
SIAD (closed symbols). The shaded area indicates the nor-
mal range of the relationship. The horizontal broken line 
indicates the plasma AVP level below which the hormone 
is undetectable and urinary concentration usually does 
not occur. Lines P and T represent patients with a selec-
tive deficiency in the osmoregulation of thirst and AVP that 
is either partial ( ) or total ( ). In the latter, plasma AVP 
does not change in response to increases or decreases 
in plasma osmolarity but remains within a range sufficient 
to concentrate the urine even if overhydration produces 
hypotonic hyponatremia. In contrast, if the osmoregula-
tory deficiency is partial ( ), rehydration of the patient sup-
presses plasma AVP to levels that result in urinary dilution 
and polyuria before plasma osmolarity and sodium are 
reduced to normal. Lines a–d represent different defects 
in the osmoregulation of plasma AVP observed in patients 
with SIAD. In a ( ), plasma AVP is markedly elevated and 
fluctuates widely without relation to changes in plasma 
osmolarity, indicating complete loss of osmoregulation. In 
b ( ), plasma AVP remains fixed at a slightly elevated level 
until plasma osmolarity reaches the normal range, at which 
point it begins to rise appropriately, indicating a selective 
defect in the inhibitory component of the osmoregulatory 
mechanism. In c ( ), plasma AVP rises in close correlation 
with plasma osmolarity before the latter reaches the nor-
mal range, indicating downward resetting of the osmostat. 
In d ( ), plasma AVP appears to be osmoregulated nor-
mally, suggesting that the inappropriate antidiuresis is 
caused by some other abnormality.
if rehydration is excessive. In most patients, the neu-
rohypophysis and the AVP response to hemodynamic 
or emetic stimuli are normal. In a few, however, the 
neurohypophysis is also destroyed, resulting in a com-
bination of chronic pituitary DI and hypodipsia that is 
particularly difficult to manage.
Differential diagnosis
Adipsic hypernatremia usually can be distinguished clin-
ically from other causes of inadequate fluid intake (e.g., 
coma, paralysis, restraints, absence of fresh water) that 
can also result in hypertonic dehydration. Previous epi-
sodes and/or denial of thirst and failure to drink sponta-
neously when the patient is conscious, unrestrained, and 
hypernatremic are virtually diagnostic of adipsia. The 
hypernatremia caused by excessive oral or intravenous 
intake of sodium can also be distinguished by the his-
tory and/or physical examination and laboratory signs of 
volume expansion rather than contraction.
Treatment	
Adipsic Hypernatremia
Adipsic hypernatremia should be treated by administer-
ing water orally if the patient is alert and cooperative or 
by using hypotonic fluids (0.45% saline or 5% dextrose 
and water) via IV if the patient is not. The amount of 
free water in liters required to correct the deficit (ΔFW) 
can be estimated from body weight in kg (BW) and the 
serum sodium concentration in mmol/L (SNa) by the 
formula ΔFW = 0.5BW × [(SNa − 140)/140]. If serum glu-
cose (SGlu) is elevated, the measured SNa should be cor-
rected (SNa
*) by the formula SNa
* = SNa + [(SGlu − 90)/36]. 
This amount plus an allowance for continuing insensible 
and urinary losses should be given over a 24- to 48-hour 
period. Close monitoring of serum sodium as well as 
fluid intake and urinary output is essential because, 
depending on the extent of osmoreceptor deficiency 
(Fig. 3-5), some patients will develop AVP-deficient DI, 
requiring desmopressin therapy to complete rehydra-
tion; others will develop hyponatremia and a syndrome 
of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD)-like picture if over-
hydrated. If hyperglycemia and/or hypokalemia are 
present, insulin and/or potassium supplements should 
be given with the expectation that both can be dis-
continued soon after rehydration is complete. Plasma 
urea/creatinine should be monitored closely for signs of 
acute renal failure.
Once the patient has been rehydrated, an MRI of the 
brain and tests of anterior pituitary function should be 
performed to look for the cause and collateral defects 
in other hypothalamic functions. A long-term manage-
ment plan to prevent or minimize recurrence of the fluid 
and electrolyte imbalance also should be developed.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
58
This should include a practical method that can be 
used to regulate fluid intake in accordance with day-
to-day variations in water balance. The most effective 
way to do this is to prescribe desmopressin to con-
trol DI if it is present, and teach the patient how to 
adjust daily fluid intake in accordance with day-to-day 
changes in body weight or serum sodium as deter-
mined by home monitoring analyzers. Prescribing a 
constant fluid intake is ineffective and potentially dan-
gerous because it does not take into account the large, 
uncontrolled variations in insensible loss that inevita-
bly result from changes in ambient temperature and 
physical activity.
Excess Vasopressin Secretion 
and Action
Hyponatremia
Clinical characteristics
Excessive secretion or action of AVP results in the 
production of decreased volumes of more highly 
concentrated urine. If not accompanied by a com- 
mensurate reduction in fluid intake or an increase in 
insensible loss, the reduction in urine output results 
in excess water retention with expansion and dilution 
of all body fluids. In some patients, excessive intake 
results from inappropriate thirst. If the hyponatremia 
develops gradually or has been present for more than a 
few days, it may be largely asymptomatic. However, if 
it develops acutely, it usually is accompanied by symp-
toms and signs of water intoxication that may include 
mild headache, confusion, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, 
coma, and convulsions. Severe hyponatremia may be 
lethal. Other clinical signs and symptoms vary greatly, 
depending on the pathogenesis of the defect in antidi-
uretic function.
Etiology
Hyponatremia and impaired urinary dilution can be 
caused by either a primary or a secondary defect in the 
regulation of AVP secretion or action. The primary 
forms are generally referred to as the syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuresis. They have many different causes, 
including ectopic production of AVP by lung cancer or 
other neoplasms; eutopic release by various diseases or 
drugs; and exogenous administration of AVP, desmo-
pressin, or large doses of oxytocin (Table 3-2). The 
ectopic forms result from abnormal expression of the 
AVP-NPII gene by primary or metastatic malignancies. 
The eutopic forms occur most often in patients with 
acute infections or strokes but have also been associ-
ated with many other neurologic diseases and injuries. 
Table 3-2
Causes of Syndrome of Inappropriate 
Antidiuresis (SIAD)
Neoplasms
  Carcinomas
    Lung
    Duodenum
    Pancreas
    Ovary
    Bladder, ureter
Other neoplasms
  Thymoma
  Mesothelioma
  Bronchial adenoma
  Carcinoid
  Gangliocytoma
  Ewing’s sarcoma
Head trauma (closed and 
penetrating)
Infections
Pneumonia, bacterial or 
viral
  Abscess, lung or brain
  Cavitation (aspergillosis)
  Tuberculosis, lung or brain
Meningitis, bacterial or 
viral
  Encephalitis
  AIDS
Vascular
Cerebrovascular  
occlusions, hemorrhage
Cavernous sinus  
thrombosis
Genetic
X-linked recessive
(V2 receptor gene)
Neurologic
  Guillain-Barré syndrome
  Multiple sclerosis
  Delirium tremens
Amyotrophic lateral  
sclerosis
  Hydrocephalus
  Psychosis
  Peripheral neuropathy
Congenital malformations
  Agenesis corpus callosum
  Cleft lip/palate
Other midline defects
Metabolic
Acute intermittent  
porphyria
  Pulmonary
  Asthma
  Pneumothorax
Positive-pressure  
respiration
Drugs
Vasopressin or desmo-
pressin
  Chlorpropamide
  Oxytocin, high dose
  Vincristine
  Carbamazepine
  Nicotine
  Phenothiazines
  Cyclophosphamide
  Tricyclic antidepressants
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
Serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors
In this case, the SIAD is usually self-limited and remits 
spontaneously within 2–3 weeks, but about 10% of 
cases are chronic. The mechanisms by which these dis-
eases disrupt osmoregulation are not known. The defect 
in osmoregulation can take any of four distinct forms 
(Fig. 3-5). In one of the most common (reset osmo-
stat), AVP secretion remains fully responsive to changes 
in plasma osmolarity/sodium, but the threshold, or set 
point, of the osmoregulatory system is abnormally low. 
These patients differ from those with the other types 
of osmoregulatory defect in that they are able to maxi-
mally suppress plasma AVP and dilute their urine if 
their fluid intake is high enough to reduce their plasma 
osmolarity/sodium to the new set point. Another, 
smaller subgroup (∼10% of the total) has inappropriate 
antidiuresis without a demonstrable defect in the osmo-
regulation of plasma AVP (Fig. 3-5). In some of them, 
 
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis
59
all young boys, the inappropriate antidiuresis has been 
traced to a constitutively activating mutation of the V2 
receptor gene. This unusual variant may be referred 
to as familial nephrogenic SIAD to distinguish it from 
other possible causes of the syndrome.
The secondary forms of osmotically inappropriate 
antidiuresis also have multiple causes. They usually are 
subdivided into three types, depending on the nature of 
the abnormal stimulus and the state of extracellular fluid 
volume. Type I occurs in sodium-retaining, edema-
forming states such as congestive heart failure, cirrho-
sis, and nephrosis. It is associated with markedly exces-
sive retention of water and sodium that is thought to 
be stimulated by a large reduction in “effective” blood 
volume caused by low cardiac output and/or redistribu-
tion of plasma from the intravascular space to the inter-
stitial space. Type II occurs in sodium-depleted states 
such as severe gastroenteritis, diuretic abuse, and miner-
alocorticoid deficiency. It is due to stimulation of AVP 
by a large reduction in blood volume and/or pressure. 
In both types, the increased AVP secretion appears to 
be due to downward resetting of the osmostat. Type III 
is due to nonosmotic, nonhemodynamic AVP stimuli 
such as nausea or isolated glucocorticoid deficiency that 
produce a form of euvolemic hyponatremia similar to 
SIAD (Table 3-3). They are differentiated because the 
cause of excess AVP secretion in type III can be cor-
rected quickly and completely by treatments (antiemet-
ics or glucocorticoids) that are not useful in SIAD.
Pathophysiology
When osmotic suppression of antidiuresis is impaired 
for any reason, retention of water and dilution of body 
fluids occur only if intake exceeds the rate of obligatory 
and insensible urinary losses. The excess water intake 
sometimes is due to an associated defect in the osmo-
regulation of thirst (dipsogenic) but also can be psy-
chogenic or iatrogenic, including IV administration of 
hypotonic fluids.
Table 3-3
Differential Diagnosis of Hyponatremia Based on Clinical Assessment of Extracellular Fluid 
Volume (ECFV)
Clinical Findings
Type I, Hypervolemic
Type II, Hypovolemic
Type III, Euvolemic
SIAD Euvolemic
History
  CHF, cirrhosis, or nephrosis
Yes
No
No
No
  Salt and water loss
No
Yes
No
No
  ACTH–cortisol  
  deficiency and/or nausea 
and vomiting
No
No
Yes
No
Physical examination
  Generalized edema, ascites
Yes
No
No
No
  Postural hypotension
Maybe
Maybe
Maybea
No
Laboratory
  BUN, creatinine
High-normal
High-normal
Low-normal
Low-normal
  Uric acid
High-normal
High-normal
Low-normal
Low-normal
  Serum potassium
Low-normal
Low-normalb
Normalc
Normal
  Serum albumin
Low-normal
High-normal
Normal
Normal
  Serum cortisol
Normal-high
Normal-highd
Lowe
Normal
  Plasma renin activity
High
High
Lowf
Low
  Urinary sodium  
  (meq unit of time)g
Low
Lowh
Highi
Highi
aPostural hypotension may occur in secondary (ACTH-dependent) adrenal insufficiency even though extracellular fluid volume and aldosterone 
are usually normal.
bSerum potassium may be high if hypovolemia is due to aldosterone deficiency.
cSerum potassium may be low if vomiting causes alkalosis.
dSerum cortisol is low if hypovolemia is due to primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison’s disease).
eSerum cortisol will be normal or high if the cause is nausea and vomiting rather than secondary (ACTH-dependent) adrenal insufficiency.
fPlasma renin activity may be high if the cause is secondary (ACTH) adrenal insufficiency.
gUrinary sodium should be expressed as the rate of excretion rather than the concentration. In a hyponatremic adult, an excretion 
rate >25 meq/d (or 25 μeq/mg of creatinine) could be considered high.
hThe rate of urinary sodium excretion may be high if the hypovolemia is due to diuretic abuse, primary adrenal insufficiency, or other causes of 
renal sodium wasting.
i The rate of urinary sodium excretion may be low if intake is curtailed by symptoms or treatment.
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CHF, congestive heart failure; SIAD, syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuresis.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
60
In SIAD, the excessive retention of water expands 
extracellular and intracellular volume, increases glomer-
ular filtration and atrial natriuretic hormone, suppresses 
plasma renin activity, and increases urinary sodium 
excretion. This natriuresis reduces total body sodium, 
and this serves to counteract the extracellular hypervol-
emia but aggravates the hyponatremia. The osmotically 
driven increase in intracellular volume results in swell-
ing of brain cells and increases intracranial pressure; this 
is probably responsible for the symptoms of acute water 
intoxication. Within a few days, this swelling may be 
counteracted by inactivation or elimination of intra-
cellular solutes, resulting in the remission of symptoms 
even though the hyponatremia persists. The pathophys-
iology of type III (euvolemic) hyponatremia is probably 
similar to that of SIAD.
In type I (hypervolemic) or type II (hypovolemic) 
hyponatremia, the antidiuretic effect of hemodynami-
cally induced AVP release is enhanced by decreased 
distal delivery of glomerular filtrate that results from 
increased reabsorption of sodium in proximal nephrons. 
If the marked reduction in urine output is not associ-
ated with a commensurate reduction in water intake or 
an increase in insensible loss, body fluids are expanded 
and diluted, resulting in hyponatremia. Unlike SIAD, 
however, glomerular filtration is reduced and plasma 
renin activity and aldosterone are elevated due to either 
effective hypovolemia (type I) or absolute hypovolemia 
(type II). Thus, urinary sodium excretion is low (unless 
sodium reabsorption is impaired by a diuretic), and the 
hyponatremia is usually accompanied by hypokalemia, 
azotemia, and hyperuricemia. The sodium retention is 
an appropriate compensatory response to severe volume 
and sodium depletion in type II but is inappropriate and 
deleterious in type I since body sodium and extracellular 
volume are already markedly increased, as evidenced by 
the presence of generalized edema.
Differential diagnosis
SIAD is a diagnosis of exclusion that usually can be 
made from the history, physical examination, and basic 
laboratory data. The possibility that hyponatremia is due 
to an osmotically driven shift of water from the intracel-
lular space to the extracellular space can be excluded if 
plasma glucose is not high enough to account for the 
hyponatremia [serum sodium decreases ∼1 meq/L for 
each rise in glucose of 2 mmol/L (36 mg/dL)] and/or 
plasma osmolarity is reduced in proportion to sodium 
(each decrease in serum sodium of 1 meq/L should 
reduce plasma osmolarity by ∼2 mosmol/L). The type 
of hypotonic hyponatremia can then be determined 
by standard clinical indicators of the extracellular fluid 
volume (Table 3-3). If these findings are ambiguous 
or contradictory, measuring the rate of urinary sodium 
excretion or plasma renin activity may be helpful 
provided that the hyponatremia is not in the recovery 
phase or due to a primary defect in renal conservation 
of sodium, diuretic abuse, or hyporeninemic hypoaldo-
steronism. The latter may be suspected if serum potas-
sium is elevated instead of low, as it usually is in types I 
and II hyponatremia. Measurements of plasma AVP are 
currently of no value in differentiating among the three 
types of hyponatremia since the abnormalities are simi-
lar. In patients who fulfill the clinical criteria for type 
III (euvolemic) hyponatremia, morning plasma cortisol 
should also be measured to exclude secondary adrenal 
insufficiency. If it is normal and there is no history of 
nausea/vomiting, the diagnosis of SIAD is confirmed 
and a careful search for occult lung cancer or other 
common causes of the syndrome (Table 3-2) should be 
undertaken. If an activating mutation of the V2 recep-
tor gene is suspected, plasma AVP should be measured 
while the hyponatremia and antidiuresis are present. If it 
is undetectable, DNA should be collected for analysis of 
the V2 receptor gene.
Treatment	
Hyponatremia
The management of hyponatremia differs depending 
not only on the type but also on the severity and dura-
tion of symptoms. In a patient with SIAD and few symp-
toms, the objective is to reduce body water gradually 
by restricting total fluid intake to less than the sum of 
urinary and insensible losses. Because the water derived 
from food (300–700 mL/d) usually approximates basal 
insensible losses in adults, total discretionary intake 
(all liquids) should be at least 500 mL less than urinary 
output. If achievable, this usually reduces body water 
and increases serum sodium by about 1–2% per day.  
If the symptoms or signs of water intoxication are more 
severe, the hyponatremia can be corrected more rap-
idly by supplementing the fluid restriction with IV infu-
sion of hypertonic (3%) saline. This treatment also has 
the advantage of correcting the sodium deficiency that 
is partly responsible for the hyponatremia in SIAD and 
produces a solute diuresis that serves to remove some 
of the excess water. However, if plasma sodium is raised 
too rapidly or too much and the hyponatremia has 
been present for >24–48 hours, it also has the poten-
tial to produce central pontine myelinolysis, an acute, 
potentially fatal neurologic syndrome characterized by 
quadriparesis, ataxia, and abnormal extraocular move-
ments. The risk of this complication can be minimized 
by observing several precautions: 3% saline should be 
infused at a rate ≥0.05 mL/kg body weight per min; the 
effect should be monitored continuously by STAT mea-
surements of serum sodium at least once every 2 hours; 
and the infusion should be stopped as soon as serum 
sodium increases by 12 mmol/L or to 130 mmol/L,
 
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis
61
whichever comes first. Urinary output should be moni-
tored continuously since SIAD can remit spontaneously 
at any time, resulting in an acute water diuresis that 
greatly accelerates the rate of rise in serum sodium pro-
duced by fluid restriction and 3% saline infusion.
In chronic SIAD, the hyponatremia can be corrected 
by treatment with demeclocycline, 150–300 mg PO 
tid or qid, or fludrocortisone, 0.05–0.2 mg PO bid. The 
effect of the demeclocycline manifests in 7–14 days 
and is due to production of a reversible form of neph-
rogenic DI. Potential side effects include phototoxicity 
and azotemia. The effect of fludrocortisone also requires 
1–2 weeks and is partly due to increased retention of 
sodium and possibly inhibition of thirst. It also increases 
urinary potassium excretion, which may require replace-
ment through dietary adjustments or supplements and 
may induce hypertension, occasionally necessitating 
discontinuation of the treatment.
Nonpeptide AVP antagonists that block the antidi-
uretic effect of AVP have been used experimentally to 
treat SIAD. They produce a dose-dependent increase in 
urinary free-water excretion, that, if combined with a 
modest restriction of fluid intake, reduces body water 
and corrects the hyponatremia. The antagonists appear 
to have no adverse side effects, but, like hypertonic 
saline, they probably carry the risk of inducing osmotic 
demyelinization if the hyponatremia is corrected too 
rapidly. One of them, a combined V2/V1a antagonist 
(Conivaptan), has been approved for short-term in- 
hospital IV treatment of SIAD and the hyponatremia  
of congestive heart failure. It is a substrate and inhibitor of 
cyto­chrome P450 and should not be used in conjunction 
with other drugs metabolized by these pathways. Other 
V2 receptor antagonists are currently in phase III trials.
In type I hyponatremia, fluid restriction is also appro-
priate and somewhat effective if it can be maintained. 
However, infusion of hypertonic saline is contraindi-
cated because it further increases total body sodium 
and edema and may precipitate cardiovascular decom-
pensation. Preliminary studies with antagonists of V2 
receptors indicate that they are almost as effective in 
type I hyponatremia as they are in SIAD.
In type II hyponatremia, the defect in AVP secretion 
and water balance usually can be corrected easily and 
quickly by stopping the loss of sodium and water and/
or replacing the deficits by mouth or IV infusion of nor-
mal or hypertonic saline. As with the treatment of other 
forms of hyponatremia, care must be taken to ensure 
that plasma sodium does not increase too rapidly. Fluid 
restriction and administration of AVP antagonists are 
contraindicated in type II as they would only aggravate 
the underlying volume depletion and could result in 
hemodynamic collapse.
In euvolemic hyponatremia due to protracted nausea 
and vomiting or isolated glucocorticoid deficiency (type 
III), all abnormalities can be corrected quickly and com-
pletely by giving an antiemetic or stress doses of hydro-
cortisone. As with other treatments, care must be taken 
to ensure that serum sodium does not rise too quickly 
or too far.
Global Perspectives  The incidence, 
clinical characteristics, etiology, pathophysiology, 
differential diagnosis, and treatments of fluid 
and electrolyte disorders in tropical and nonindustrial-
ized countries differ in some respects from those in the 
United States and other industrialized parts of the 
world. Hyponatremia, for example, appears to be more 
common and is more likely to be due to infectious dis-
eases such as cholera, shigellosis, and other diarrheal 
disorders. In these circumstances, hyponatremia is prob-
ably due to gastrointestinal losses of salt and water 
(hypovolemia type II), but other abnormalities, includ-
ing undefined infectious toxins, also may contribute. 
The causes of DI are similar worldwide except in regions 
where malaria and venoms from snake or insect bites 
are more common.
 J. Larry Jameson  ■   Anthony P. Weetman 
62
 The thyroid gland produces two related hormones, 
thyroxine (T 4 ) and triiodothyronine (T 3 )  ( Fig. 4-1 ) . 
Acting through thyroid hormone receptors α and β, 
these hormones play a critical role in cell differentiation 
during development and help maintain thermogenic and 
metabolic homeostasis in the adult. Autoimmune disor-
ders of the thyroid gland can stimulate overproduction 
of thyroid hormones ( thyrotoxicosis ) or cause glandular 
destruction and hormone defi ciency ( hypothyroidism ).
In addition, benign nodules and various forms of thyroid 
cancer are relatively common and amenable to detec-
tion by physical examination. 
 anatomy and deVelopment 
 The thyroid (Greek  thyreos , shield, plus  eidos , form) 
consists of two lobes connected by an isthmus. It is 
located anterior to the trachea between the cricoid car-
tilage and the suprasternal notch. The normal thyroid is 
12–20 g in size, highly vascular, and soft in consistency. 
Four parathyroid glands, which produce parathyroid 
 DISORDERS OF THE THYROID GLAND 
 chapteR 4 
hormone , are located posterior to each pole of the thy-
roid. The recurrent laryngeal nerves traverse the lat-
eral borders of the thyroid gland and must be identifi ed 
during thyroid surgery to avoid injury and vocal cord 
paralysis. 
 The thyroid gland develops from the fl oor of the 
primitive pharynx during the third week of gestation. 
The developing gland migrates along the thyroglossal 
duct to reach its fi nal location in the neck. This feature 
accounts for the rare ectopic location of thyroid tissue 
at the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid) as well as the 
occurrence of thyroglossal duct cysts along this devel-
opmental tract. Thyroid hormone synthesis normally 
begins at about 11 weeks’ gestation. 
 Neural crest derivatives from the ultimobranchial 
body give rise to thyroid medullary C cells that produce 
calcitonin, a calcium-lowering hormone. The C cells 
are interspersed throughout the thyroid gland, although 
their density is greatest in the juncture of the upper 
one-third and lower two-thirds of the gland. Calcitonin 
plays a minimal role in calcium homeostasis in humans 
but the C cells are important because of their involve-
ment in medullary thyroid cancer. 
Thyroxine (T4)
3,5,3',5'-Tetraiodothyronine
Triiodothyronine (T3)
3,5,3'-Triiodothyronine
Deiodinase 1 or 2
(5'-Deiodination)
Deiodinase 3>2
(5-Deiodination)
Reverse T3 (rT3)
3,3',5'-Triiodothyronine
O
CH2
NH2
3
5
3'
5'
CH
HO
I
I
I
I
COOH
O
CH2
NH2
CH
HO
I
I
I
COOH
O
CH2
NH2
CH
HO
I
I
I
COOH
 Figure 4-1 
structures of thyroid hormones. Thyroxine (T 4 ) 
contains four iodine atoms. Deiodination leads to 
production of the potent hormone triiodothyronine 
(T 3 ), or the inactive hormone reverse T 3 . 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
63
Thyroid gland development is orchestrated by the 
coordinated expression of several developmental tran-
scription factors. Thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1, 
TTF-2, and paired homeobox-8 (PAX-8) are expressed 
selectively, but not exclusively, in the thyroid gland. In 
combination, they dictate thyroid cell development and 
the induction of thyroid-specific genes such as thyroglob-
ulin (Tg), thyroid peroxidase (TPO), the sodium iodide 
symporter (Na+/I, NIS), and the thyroid-stimulating hor-
mone receptor (TSH-R). Mutations in these develop-
mental transcription factors or their downstream target 
genes are rare causes of thyroid agenesis or dyshormono-
genesis, though the causes of most forms of congenital 
hypothyroidism remain unknown (Table 4-1). Because 
congenital hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 1 in 
4000 newborns, neonatal screening is now performed in 
most industrialized countries (see below). Transplacental 
passage of maternal thyroid hormone occurs before the 
fetal thyroid gland begins to function and provides par-
tial hormone support to a fetus with congenital hypothy-
roidism. Early thyroid hormone replacement in newborns 
with congenital hypothyroidism prevents potentially 
severe developmental abnormalities.
The thyroid gland consists of numerous spherical fol-
licles composed of thyroid follicular cells that surround 
secreted colloid, a proteinaceous fluid containing large 
amounts of thyroglobulin, the protein precursor of thy-
roid hormones (Fig. 4-2). The thyroid follicular cells 
are polarized—the basolateral surface is apposed to the 
bloodstream and an apical surface faces the follicular 
lumen. Increased demand for thyroid hormone is reg-
ulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which 
binds to its receptor on the basolateral surface of the 
follicular cells, leading to Tg reabsorption from the follic-
ular lumen, and proteolysis within the cytoplasm, yield-
ing thyroid hormones for secretion into the bloodstream.
Regulation of the Thyroid Axis
TSH, secreted by the thyrotrope cells of the anterior 
pituitary, plays a pivotal role in control of the thyroid 
axis and serves as the most useful physiologic marker 
of thyroid hormone action. TSH is a 31-kDa hor-
mone composed of α and β subunits; the α subunit is 
common to the other glycoprotein hormones [lutein-
izing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)], whereas the TSH β 
subunit is unique to TSH. The extent and nature of 
carbohydrate modification are modulated by thyrotropin- 
releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation and influence the 
biologic activity of the hormone.
Table 4-1
Genetic Causes of Congenital Hypothyroidism
Defective Gene Protein
Inheritance
Consequences
PROP-1
Autosomal recessive
Combined pituitary hormone  
deficiencies with preservation of 
adrenocorticotropic hormone
PIT-1
Autosomal recessive
Autosomal dominant
Combined deficiencies of growth  
hormone, prolactin, thyroid- 
stimulating hormone (TSH)
TSHβ
Autosomal recessive
TSH deficiency
TTF-1 (TITF-1)
Autosomal dominant
Variable thyroid hypoplasia,  
choreoathetosis, pulmonary  
problems
TTF-2 (FOXE-1)
Autosomal recessive
Thyroid agenesis, choanal atresia, 
spiky hair
PAX-8
Autosomal dominant
Thyroid dysgenesis
TSH-receptor
Autosomal recessive
Resistance to TSH
Gsα (Albright hereditary osteodystrophy)
Autosomal dominant
Resistance to TSH
Na+/I− symporter
Autosomal recessive
Inability to transport iodide
THOX2
Autosomal dominant
Organification defect
Thyroid peroxidase
Autosomal recessive
Defective organification of iodide
Thyroglobulin
Autosomal recessive
Defective synthesis of thyroid  
hormone
Pendrin
Autosomal recessive
Pendred syndrome: sensorineural 
deafness and partial organification 
defect in thyroid
Dehalogenase 1
Autosomal recessive
Loss of iodide reutilization
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
64
+
+
–
–
Hypothalamus
TRH
I-
TSH
Pituitary
Thyroid
Peripheral
actions
Follicular
cell
Thyroid follicle
Iodination
Tg
Tg
Tg-MIT
DIT
+ I-
I-
cAMP
TSH-R
Basal
Apical
T3 T4
T3
T4
NIS
TPO
C
o
u
p
l
i
n
g
 
Figure 4-2
Regulation of thyroid hormone synthesis. Left. Thyroid 
hormones T4 and T3 feed back to inhibit hypothalamic pro-
duction of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and pituitary 
production of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). TSH stimu-
lates thyroid gland production of T4 and T3. Right. Thyroid 
follicles are formed by thyroid epithelial cells surrounding 
proteinaceous colloid, which contains thyroglobulin. Follicu-
lar cells, which are polarized, synthesize thyroglobulin and 
carry out thyroid hormone biosynthesis (see text for details). 
TSH-R, thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor; Tg, thyroglob-
ulin; NIS, sodium iodide symporter; TPO, thyroid peroxidase; 
DIT, diiodotyrosine; MIT, monoiodotyrosine.
The thyroid axis is a classic example of an endocrine 
feedback loop. Hypothalamic TRH stimulates pituitary 
production of TSH, which, in turn, stimulates thyroid 
hormone synthesis and secretion. Thyroid hormones, 
acting predominantly through thyroid hormone recep-
tor β2 (TRβ2), feed back to inhibit TRH and TSH 
production (Fig. 4-2). The “set-point” in this axis is 
established by TSH. TRH is the major positive regu-
lator of TSH synthesis and secretion. Peak TSH secre-
tion occurs ∼15 min after administration of exogenous 
TRH. Dopamine, glucocorticoids, and somatostatin 
suppress TSH but are not of major physiologic impor-
tance except when these agents are administered in 
pharmacologic doses. Reduced levels of thyroid hor-
mone increase basal TSH production and enhance 
TRH-mediated stimulation of TSH. High thyroid 
hormone levels rapidly and directly suppress TSH gene 
expression secretion and inhibit TRH stimulation of 
TSH, indicating that thyroid hormones are the domi-
nant regulator of TSH production. Like other pitu-
itary hormones, TSH is released in a pulsatile manner 
and exhibits a diurnal rhythm; its highest levels occur 
at night. However, these TSH excursions are modest 
in comparison to those of other pituitary hormones, in 
part, because TSH has a relatively long plasma half-life 
(50 minutes). Consequently, single measurements of 
TSH are adequate for assessing its circulating level. TSH 
is measured using immunoradiometric assays that are 
highly sensitive and specific. These assays readily distin-
guish between normal and suppressed TSH values; thus, 
TSH can be used for the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism 
(low TSH) as well as hypothyroidism (high TSH).
Thyroid Hormone Synthesis, 
Metabolism, and Action
Thyroid Hormone Synthesis
Thyroid hormones are derived from Tg, a large iodinated 
glycoprotein. After secretion into the thyroid follicle, 
Tg is iodinated on tyrosine residues that are subse-
quently coupled via an ether linkage. Reuptake of Tg 
into the thyroid follicular cell allows proteolysis and the 
release of newly synthesized T4 and T3.
Iodine metabolism and transport
Iodide uptake is a critical first step in thyroid hormone 
synthesis. Ingested iodine is bound to serum proteins, 
particularly albumin. Unbound iodine is excreted in 
the urine. The thyroid gland extracts iodine from the 
circulation in a highly efficient manner. For example, 
10–25% of radioactive tracer (e.g., 123I) is taken up 
by the normal thyroid gland over 24 hours; this value 
can rise to 70–90% in Graves’ disease. Iodide uptake is 
mediated by NIS, which is expressed at the basolateral 
membrane of thyroid follicular cells. NIS is most highly 
expressed in the thyroid gland, but low levels are pres-
ent in the salivary glands, lactating breast, and placenta. 
The iodide transport mechanism is highly regulated, 
allowing adaptation to variations in dietary supply. Low 
iodine levels increase the amount of NIS and stimulate 
uptake, whereas high iodine levels suppress NIS expres-
sion and uptake. The selective expression of NIS in the 
thyroid allows isotopic scanning, treatment of hyperthy-
roidism, and ablation of thyroid cancer with radioisotopes 
of iodine, without significant effects on other organs. 
Mutation of the NIS gene is a rare cause of congenital 
hypothyroidism, underscoring its importance in thyroid 
hormone synthesis. Another iodine transporter, pen-
drin, is located on the apical surface of thyroid cells and 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
65
mediates iodine efflux into the lumen. Mutation of the 
pendrin gene causes Pendred syndrome, a disorder charac-
terized by defective organification of iodine, goiter, and 
sensorineural deafness.
Iodine deficiency is prevalent in many moun-
tainous regions and in central Africa, central 
South America, and northern Asia (Fig. 4-3). 
Europe remains mildly iodine deficient, and health sur-
veys indicate that iodine intake has been falling in the 
United States and Australia. The World Health Orga-
nization (WHO) estimates that about 2 billion people 
are iodine deficient, based on urinary excretion data. In 
areas of relative iodine deficiency, there is an increased 
prevalence of goiter and, when deficiency is severe, 
hypothyroidism and cretinism. Cretinism is characterized
by mental and growth retardation and occurs when 
children who live in iodine-deficient regions are not 
treated with iodine or thyroid hormone to restore nor-
mal thyroid hormone levels during early life. These 
children are often born to mothers with iodine defi-
ciency, and it is likely that maternal thyroid hormone 
deficiency worsens the condition. Concomitant sele-
nium deficiency may also contribute to the neurologic 
manifestations of cretinism. Iodine supplementation 
of salt, bread, and other food substances has markedly 
reduced the prevalence of cretinism. Unfortunately, 
how­ever, iodine deficiency remains the most com-
mon cause of preventable mental deficiency, often 
because of societal resistance to food additives or the 
cost of supplementation. In addition to overt cretin-
ism, mild iodine deficiency can lead to subtle reduction 
of IQ. Oversupply of iodine, through supplements or 
foods enriched in iodine (e.g., shellfish, kelp), is associ-
ated with an increased incidence of autoimmune thy-
roid disease. The recommended average daily intake 
of iodine is 150–250 μg/d for adults, 90–120 μg/d 
for children, and 250 μg/d for pregnant and lactating 
women. Urinary iodine is >10 μg/dL in iodine-suffi-
cient populations.
Organification, coupling, storage, release
After iodide enters the thyroid, it is trapped and trans-
ported to the apical membrane of thyroid follicular cells, 
where it is oxidized in an organification reaction that 
involves TPO and hydrogen peroxide. The reactive 
iodine atom is added to selected tyrosyl residues within 
Tg, a large (660-kDa) dimeric protein that consists of 
2769 amino acids. The iodotyrosines in Tg are then 
coupled via an ether linkage in a reaction that is also 
catalyzed by TPO. Either T4 or T3 can be produced 
by this reaction, depending on the number of iodine 
atoms present in the iodotyrosines. After coupling, Tg 
is taken back into the thyroid cell, where it is processed 
in lysosomes to release T4 and T3. Uncoupled mono- 
and diiodotyrosines (MIT, DIT) are deiodinated by the 
enzyme dehalogenase, thereby recycling any iodide that 
is not converted into thyroid hormones.
Disorders of thyroid hormone synthesis are rare 
causes of congenital hypothyroidism. The vast major-
ity of these disorders are due to recessive mutations in 
TPO or Tg, but defects have also been identified in 
Status unknown
Mild deficiency
Moderate-severe deficiency
Sufficiency
Likely sufficiency
Likely excess
Excess
Likely deficiency
Figure 4-3
Worldwide iodine nutrition. Data are from the WHO and the International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders 
(http://indorgs.virginia.edu/iccidd/mi/cidds.html ).
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
66
the TSH-R, NIS, pendrin, hydrogen peroxide gen-
eration, and dehalogenase. Because of the biosynthetic 
defect, the gland is incapable of synthesizing adequate 
amounts of hormone, leading to increased TSH and a 
large goiter.
TSH action
TSH regulates thyroid gland function through the 
TSH-R, a seven-transmembrane G protein–coupled 
receptor (GPCR). The TSH-R is coupled to the α 
subunit of stimulatory G protein (Gsα), which acti-
vates adenylyl cyclase, leading to increased production 
of cyclic AMP. TSH also stimulates phosphatidylinosi-
tol turnover by activating phospholipase C. The func-
tional role of the TSH-R is exemplified by the conse-
quences of naturally occurring mutations. Recessive 
loss-of-function mutations cause thyroid hypoplasia and 
congenital hypothyroidism. Dominant gain-of-function 
mutations cause sporadic or familial hyperthyroidism 
that is characterized by goiter, thyroid cell hyperpla-
sia, and autonomous function. Most of these activat-
ing mutations occur in the transmembrane domain of 
the receptor. They mimic the conformational changes 
induced by TSH binding or the interactions of thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulins (TSI) in Graves’ disease. 
Activating TSH-R mutations also occur as somatic 
events, leading to clonal selection and expansion of the 
affected thyroid follicular cell and autonomously func-
tioning thyroid nodules (see below).
Other factors that influence hormone 
synthesis and release
Although TSH is the dominant hormonal regula-
tor of thyroid gland growth and function, a variety of 
growth factors, most produced locally in the thyroid 
gland, also influence thyroid hormone synthesis. These 
include insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), epidermal 
growth factor, transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), 
endothelins, and various cytokines. The quantitative 
roles of these factors are not well understood, but they 
are important in selected disease states. In acromegaly, 
for example, increased levels of growth hormone and 
IGF-1 are associated with goiter and predisposition to 
multinodular goiter (MNG). Certain cytokines and 
interleukins (ILs) produced in association with autoim-
mune thyroid disease induce thyroid growth, whereas 
others lead to apoptosis. Iodine deficiency increases thy-
roid blood flow and upregulates the NIS, stimulating 
more efficient iodine uptake. Excess iodide transiently 
inhibits thyroid iodide organification, a phenomenon 
known as the Wolff-Chaikoff effect. In individuals with a 
normal thyroid, the gland escapes from this inhibitory 
effect and iodide organification resumes; the suppressive 
action of high iodide may persist, however, in patients 
with underlying autoimmune thyroid disease.
Thyroid Hormone Transport  
and Metabolism
Serum binding proteins
T4 is secreted from the thyroid gland in about twenty-
fold excess over T3 (Table 4-2). Both hormones are 
bound to plasma proteins, including thyroxine-binding 
globulin (TBG), transthyretin (TTR, formerly known 
as thyroxine-binding prealbumin, or TBPA), and albu-
min. The plasma-binding proteins increase the pool of 
circulating hormone, delay hormone clearance, and may 
modulate hormone delivery to selected tissue sites. The 
concentration of TBG is relatively low (1–2 mg/dL), 
but because of its high affinity for thyroid hormones 
(T4 > T3), it carries about 80% of the bound hormones. 
Albumin has relatively low affinity for thyroid hor-
mones but has a high plasma concentration (∼3.5 g/dL), 
and it binds up to 10% of T4 and 30% of T3. TTR car-
ries about 10% of T4 but little T3.
When the effects of the various binding proteins are 
combined, approximately 99.98% of T4 and 99.7% of 
T3 are protein bound. Because T3 is less tightly bound 
than T4, the fraction of unbound T3 is greater than 
unbound T4, but there is less unbound T3 in the cir-
culation because it is produced in smaller amounts and 
cleared more rapidly than T4. The unbound or “free” 
concentrations of the hormones are ∼2 × 10−11 M for 
T4 and ∼6 × 10−12 M for T3, which roughly correspond 
to the thyroid hormone receptor binding constants for 
these hormones (see below). The unbound hormone is 
Table 4-2
Characteristics of Circulating T4 and T3
Hormone Property
T4
T3
Serum concentrations
  Total hormone
8 μg/dL
0.14 μg/dL
Fraction of total hormone 
in the free form
0.02%
0.3%
Free (unbound) hormone
21 × 10−12 M
6 × 10−12 M
Serum half-life
7 d
0.75 d
Fraction directly from the 
thyroid
100%
20%
Production rate, including 
peripheral conversion
90 μg/d
32 μg/d
Intracellular hormone fraction
∼20%
∼70%
Relative metabolic potency
0.3
1
Receptor binding
10−10 M
10−11 M
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
67
Table 4-3
Conditions Associated With Euthyroid Hyperthyroxinemia
Disorder
Cause
Transmission
Characteristics
Familial dysalbuminemic 
hyperthyroxinemia (FDH)
Albumin mutations, usually 
R218H
AD
Increased T4
Normal unbound T4
Rarely increased T3
TBG
  Familial excess
Increased TBG production
XL
Increased total T4, T3
Normal unbound T4, T3
  Acquired excess
Medications (estrogen),  
pregnancy, cirrhosis, hepatitis
Acquired
Increased total T4, T3
Normal unbound T4, T3
Transthyretina
  Excess
Islet tumors
Acquired
Usually normal T4, T3
  Mutations
Increased affinity for T4 or T3
AD
Increased total T4, T3
Normal unbound T4, T3
Medications: propranolol, 
ipodate, iopanoic acid, 
amiodarone
Decreased T4 → T3 conversion
Acquired
Increased T4
Decreased T3
Normal or increased TSH
Sick euthyroid syndrome
Acute illness, especially  
psychiatric disorders
Acquired
Transiently increased unbound T4
Decreased TSH
T4 and T3 may also be decreased 
(see text)
Resistance to thyroid  
hormone (RTH)
Thyroid hormone receptor β 
mutations
AD
Increased unbound T4, T3
Normal or increased TSH
Some patients clinically thyrotoxic
aAlso known as thyroxine-binding prealbumin, TBPA.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; TBG, thyroxine-binding globulin; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; XL, X-linked.
thought to be biologically available to tissues. Nonethe-
less, the homeostatic mechanisms that regulate the thy-
roid axis are directed toward maintenance of normal 
concentrations of unbound hormones.
Abnormalities of thyroid hormone  
binding proteins
A number of inherited and acquired abnormalities affect 
thyroid hormone binding proteins. X-linked TBG defi-
ciency is associated with very low levels of total T4 and 
T3. However, because unbound hormone levels are 
normal, patients are euthyroid, and TSH levels are nor-
mal. It is important to recognize this disorder to avoid 
efforts to normalize total T4 levels, as this leads to thy-
rotoxicosis and is futile because of rapid hormone clear-
ance in the absence of TBG. TBG levels are elevated 
by estrogen, which increases sialylation and delays TBG 
clearance. Consequently, in women who are preg-
nant or taking estrogen-containing contraceptives, ele-
vated TBG increases total T4 and T3 levels; however, 
unbound T4 and T3 levels are normal. These features 
are part of the explanation for why women with hypo-
thyroidism require increased amounts of l-thyroxine 
replacement as TBG levels are increased by pregnancy 
or estrogen treatment. Mutations in TBG, TTR, and 
albumin may increase the binding affinity for T4 and/or 
T3 and cause disorders known as euthyroid hyperthyrox-
inemia or familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia (FDH) 
(Table 4-3). These disorders result in increased total 
T4 and/or T3, but unbound hormone levels are normal. 
The familial nature of the disorders, and the fact that 
TSH levels are normal rather than suppressed, should 
suggest this diagnosis. Unbound hormone levels (ideally 
measured by dialysis) are normal in FDH. The diagnosis 
can be confirmed by using tests that measure the affini-
ties of radiolabeled hormone binding to specific trans-
port proteins or by performing DNA sequence analyses 
of the abnormal transport protein genes.
Certain medications, such as salicylates and salsalate, 
can displace thyroid hormones from circulating binding 
proteins. Although these drugs transiently perturb the 
thyroid axis by increasing free thyroid hormone levels, 
TSH is suppressed until a new steady state is reached, 
thereby restoring euthyroidism. Circulating factors asso-
ciated with acute illness may also displace thyroid 
hormone from binding proteins (see “Sick Euthyroid 
Syndrome,” below).
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
68
Deiodinases
T4 may be thought of as a precursor for the more potent 
T3. T4 is converted to T3 by the deiodinase enzymes 
(Fig. 4-1). Type I deiodinase, which is located primar-
ily in thyroid, liver, and kidneys, has a relatively low 
affinity for T4. Type II deiodinase has a higher affin-
ity for T4 and is found primarily in the pituitary gland, 
brain, brown fat, and thyroid gland. Expression of type 
II deiodinase allows it to regulate T3 concentrations 
locally, a property that may be important in the context 
of levothyroxine (T4) replacement. Type II deiodinase 
is also regulated by thyroid hormone; hypothyroidism 
induces the enzyme, resulting in enhanced T4 → T3 
conversion in tissues such as brain and pituitary. T4 → 
T3 conversion is impaired by fasting, systemic illness or 
acute trauma, oral contrast agents, and a variety of medi-
cations (e.g., propylthiouracil, propranolol, amiodarone, 
glucocorticoids). Type III deiodinase inactivates T4 and 
T3 and is the most important source of reverse T3 (rT3). 
Massive hemangiomas that express type III deiodinase 
are a rare cause of hypothyroidism in infants.
Thyroid Hormone Action
Thyroid hormone transport
Circulating thyroid hormones enter cells by passive dif-
fusion and via specific transporters such as the mono-
carboxylate 8 (MCT8) transporter. Mutations in the 
MCT8 gene have been identified in patients with 
X-linked psychomotor retardation and thyroid function 
abnormalities (low T4, high T3, and high TSH). After 
entering cells, thyroid hormones act primarily through 
nuclear receptors, although they also have nongenomic 
actions through stimulating plasma membrane and 
mitochondrial enzymatic responses.
Nuclear thyroid hormone receptors
Thyroid hormones bind with high affinity to nuclear 
thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) α and β. Both TRα and 
TRβ are expressed in most tissues, but their relative 
expression levels vary among organs; TRα is particu-
larly abundant in brain, kidneys, gonads, muscle, and 
heart, whereas TRβ expression is relatively high in the 
pituitary and liver. Both receptors are variably spliced 
to form unique isoforms. The TRβ2 isoform, which 
has a unique amino terminus, is selectively expressed in 
the hypothalamus and pituitary, where it plays a role in 
feedback control of the thyroid axis (see above). The 
TRα2 isoform contains a unique carboxy terminus that 
precludes thyroid hormone binding; it may function to 
block the action of other TR isoforms.
The TRs contain a central DNA-binding domain 
and a C-terminal ligand-binding domain. They bind to 
specific DNA sequences, termed thyroid response elements 
(TREs), in the promoter regions of target genes 
(Fig. 4-4). The receptors bind as homodimers or, 
more commonly, as heterodimers with retinoic acid X 
receptors (RXRs) (Chap. 1). The activated receptor can 
either stimulate gene transcription (e.g., myosin heavy 
chain α) or inhibit transcription (e.g., TSH β-subunit 
gene), depending on the nature of the regulatory ele-
ments in the target gene.
Thyroid hormones (T3 and T4) bind with similar 
affinities to TRα and TRβ. However, structural dif-
ferences in the ligand-binding domains provide the 
potential for developing receptor-selective agonists or 
antagonists. T3 is bound with 10–15 times greater affin-
ity than T4, which explains its increased hormonal 
potency. Though T4 is produced in excess of T3, recep-
tors are occupied mainly by T3, reflecting T4 → T3 
conversion by peripheral tissues, greater T3 bioavail-
ability in the plasma, and receptors’ greater affinity for 
T3. After binding to TRs, thyroid hormone induces 
conformational changes in the receptors that modify its 
interactions with accessory transcription factors. Impor-
tantly, in the absence of thyroid hormone binding, the 
aporeceptors bind to co-repressor proteins that inhibit 
gene transcription. Hormone binding dissociates the 
co-repressors and allows the recruitment of coactiva-
tors that enhance transcription. The discovery of TR 
interactions with co-repressors explains the fact that 
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Gene expression
Gene
TRE
RXR TR
CoR
T3
T3
T4
T3
CoA
CoA
1
2
3
4
Figure 4-4
Mechanism of thyroid hormone receptor action. The thy-
roid hormone receptor (TR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) 
form heterodimers that bind specifically to thyroid hormone 
response elements (TREs) in the promoter regions of target 
genes. In the absence of hormone, TR binds co-repressor 
(CoR) proteins that silence gene expression. The numbers 
refer to a series of ordered reactions that occur in response to 
thyroid hormone: (1) T4 or T3 enters the nucleus; (2) T3 binding 
dissociates CoR from TR; (3) coactivators (CoA) are recruited 
to the T3-bound receptor; (4) gene expression is altered.
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
69
TR silences gene expression in the absence of hormone 
binding. Consequently, hormone deficiency has a pro-
found effect on gene expression because it causes gene 
repression as well as loss of hormone-induced stimula-
tion. This concept has been corroborated by the find-
ing that targeted deletion of the TR genes in mice has 
a less-pronounced phenotypic effect than hormone 
deficiency.
Thyroid hormone resistance
Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is an autosomal 
dominant disorder characterized by elevated thyroid 
hormone levels and inappropriately normal or elevated 
TSH. Individuals with RTH do not, in general, exhibit 
signs and symptoms that are typical of hypothyroidism 
because hormone resistance is partial and is compen-
sated by increased levels of thyroid hormone. The clini-
cal features of RTH can include goiter, attention deficit 
disorder, mild reduction in IQ, delayed skeletal matura-
tion, tachycardia, and impaired metabolic responses to 
thyroid hormone.
RTH is caused by mutations in the TRβ receptor 
gene. These mutations, located in restricted regions of 
the ligand-binding domain, cause loss of receptor func-
tion. However, because the mutant receptors retain the 
capacity to dimerize with RXRs, bind to DNA, and 
recruit co-repressor proteins, they function as antago-
nists of the remaining normal TRβ and TRα recep-
tors. This property, referred to as “dominant negative” 
activity, explains the autosomal dominant mode of 
transmission. The diagnosis is suspected when unbound 
thyroid hormone levels are increased without suppres-
sion of TSH. Similar hormonal abnormalities are found 
in other affected family members, although the TRβ 
mutation arises de novo in about 20% of patients. DNA 
sequence analysis of the TRβ gene provides a defini-
tive diagnosis. RTH must be distinguished from other 
causes of euthyroid hyperthyroxinemia (e.g., FDH) and 
inappropriate secretion of TSH by TSH-secreting pitu-
itary adenomas (Chap. 2). In most patients, no treatment 
is indicated; the importance of making the diagnosis is 
to avoid inappropriate treatment of mistaken hyperthy-
roidism and to provide genetic counseling.
Physical Examination
In addition to the examination of the thyroid itself, the 
physical examination should include a search for signs 
of abnormal thyroid function and the extrathyroidal fea-
tures of ophthalmopathy and dermopathy (see below). 
Examination of the neck begins by inspecting the seated 
patient from the front and side and noting any surgical 
scars, obvious masses, or distended veins. The thyroid 
can be palpated with both hands from behind or while 
facing the patient, using the thumbs to palpate each 
lobe. It is best to use a combination of these methods, 
especially when nodules are small. The patient’s neck 
should be slightly flexed to relax the neck muscles. After 
locating the cricoid cartilage, the isthmus can be iden-
tified and followed laterally to locate either lobe (nor-
mally, the right lobe is slightly larger than the left). By 
asking the patient to swallow sips of water, thyroid con-
sistency can be better appreciated as the gland moves 
beneath the examiner’s fingers.
Features to be noted include thyroid size, consis-
tency, nodularity, and any tenderness or fixation. An 
estimate of thyroid size (normally 12–20 g) should be 
made, and a drawing is often the best way to record 
findings. However, ultrasound is the method of choice 
when it is important to determine thyroid size accu-
rately. The size, location, and consistency of any nodules 
should also be defined. A bruit over the gland indicates 
increased vascularity, as occurs in hyperthyroidism. If 
the lower borders of the thyroid lobes are not clearly 
felt, a goiter may be retrosternal. Large retrosternal goi-
ters can cause venous distention over the neck and dif-
ficulty breathing, especially when the arms are raised 
(Pemberton’s sign). With any central mass above the 
thyroid, the tongue should be extended, as thyroglos-
sal cysts then move upward. The thyroid examination is 
not complete without assessment for lymphadenopathy 
in the supraclavicular and cervical regions of the neck.
Laboratory Evaluation
Measurement of thyroid hormones
The enhanced sensitivity and specificity of TSH assays 
have greatly improved laboratory assessment of thyroid 
function. Because TSH levels change dynamically in 
response to alterations of T4 and T3, a logical approach 
to thyroid testing is to first determine whether TSH is 
suppressed, normal, or elevated. With rare exceptions 
(see below), a normal TSH level excludes a primary 
abnormality of thyroid function. This strategy depends 
on the use of immunochemiluminometric assays 
(ICMAs) for TSH that are sensitive enough to discrimi-
nate between the lower limit of the reference range and 
the suppressed values that occur with thyrotoxicosis. 
Extremely sensitive (fourth-generation) assays can detect 
TSH levels ≤0.004 mU/L, but, for practical purposes, 
assays sensitive to ≤0.1 mU/L are sufficient. The wide-
spread availability of the TSH ICMA has rendered the 
TRH stimulation test obsolete, because the failure of 
TSH to rise after an intravenous bolus of 200–400 μg TRH 
has the same implications as a suppressed basal TSH mea-
sured by ICMA.
The finding of an abnormal TSH level must be fol-
lowed by measurements of circulating thyroid hormone 
levels to confirm the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism 
(suppressed TSH) or hypothyroidism (elevated TSH). 
Radioimmunoassays are widely available for serum total 
T4 and total T3. T4 and T3 are highly protein bound, 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
70
and numerous factors (illness, medications, genetic fac-
tors) can influence protein binding. It is useful, there-
fore, to measure the free, or unbound, hormone levels, 
which correspond to the biologically available hormone 
pool. Two direct methods are used to measure unbound 
thyroid hormones: (1) unbound thyroid hormone compe-
tition with radiolabeled T4 (or an analogue) for binding 
to a solid-phase antibody, and (2) physical separation of 
the unbound hormone fraction by ultracentrifugation or 
equilibrium dialysis. Though early unbound hormone 
immunoassays suffered from artifacts, newer assays cor-
relate well with the results of the more technically 
demanding and expensive physical separation methods. 
An indirect method to estimate unbound thyroid hor-
mone levels is to calculate the free T3 or free T4 index 
from the total T4 or T3 concentration and the thyroid 
hormone binding ratio (THBR). The latter is derived from
the T3-resin uptake test, which determines the distribution
of radiolabeled T3 between an absorbent resin and 
the unoccupied thyroid hormone–binding proteins in the 
sample. The binding of the labeled T3 to the resin is 
increased when there is reduced unoccupied protein 
binding sites (e.g., TBG deficiency) or increased total 
thyroid hormone in the sample; it is decreased under 
the opposite circumstances. The product of THBR and 
total T3 or T4 provides the free T3 or T4 index. In effect, the
index corrects for anomalous total hormone values caused 
by abnormalities in hormone-protein binding.
Total thyroid hormone levels are elevated when TBG 
is increased due to estrogens (pregnancy, oral contra-
ceptives, hormone therapy, tamoxifen), and decreased 
when TBG binding is reduced (androgens, nephrotic 
syndrome). Genetic disorders and acute illness can also 
cause abnormalities in thyroid hormone–binding pro-
teins, and various drugs [phenytoin, carbamazepine, 
salicylates, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)] can interfere with thyroid hormone binding. 
Because unbound thyroid hormone levels are normal 
and the patient is euthyroid in all of these circumstances, 
assays that measure unbound hormone are preferable to 
those for total thyroid hormones.
For most purposes, the unbound T4 level is sufficient 
to confirm thyrotoxicosis, but 2–5% of patients have 
only an elevated T3 level (T3 toxicosis). Thus, unbound 
T3 levels should be measured in patients with a sup-
pressed TSH but normal unbound T4 levels.
There are several clinical conditions in which the use 
of TSH as a screening test may be misleading, particu-
larly without simultaneous unbound T4 determinations. 
Any severe nonthyroidal illness can cause abnormal TSH 
levels (see below). Although hypothyroidism is the most 
common cause of an elevated TSH level, rare causes 
include a TSH-secreting pituitary tumor (Chap. 2), thy-
roid hormone resistance, and assay artifact. Conversely, 
a suppressed TSH level, particularly <0.1 mU/L, usually 
indicates thyrotoxicosis but may also be seen during the 
first trimester of pregnancy (due to hCG secretion), after 
treatment of hyperthyroidism (because TSH can remain 
suppressed for several months), and in response to cer-
tain medications (e.g., high doses of glucocorticoids or 
dopamine). Importantly, secondary hypothyroidism, 
caused by hypothalamic-pituitary disease, is associated 
with a variable (low to high-normal) TSH level, which 
is inappropriate for the low T4 level. Thus, TSH should 
not be used as an isolated laboratory test to assess thyroid func-
tion in patients with suspected or known pituitary disease.
Tests for the end-organ effects of thyroid hormone 
excess or depletion, such as estimation of basal meta-
bolic rate, tendon reflex relaxation rates, or serum cho-
lesterol, are not useful as clinical determinants of thyroid 
function.
Tests to determine the etiology of  
thyroid dysfunction
Autoimmune thyroid disease is detected most easily by 
measuring circulating antibodies against TPO and Tg. 
As antibodies to Tg alone are uncommon, it is reason-
able to measure only TPO antibodies. About 5–15% of 
euthyroid women and up to 2% of euthyroid men have 
thyroid antibodies; such individuals are at increased risk 
of developing thyroid dysfunction. Almost all patients 
with autoimmune hypothyroidism, and up to 80% of 
those with Graves’ disease, have TPO antibodies, usually 
at high levels.
TSI are antibodies that stimulate the TSH-R in 
Graves’ disease. They can be measured in bioassays or 
indirectly in assays for TSH-binding inhibiting immu-
noglobulins (TBII) that detect antibody binding to the 
receptor. The main use of these assays is to predict neo-
natal thyrotoxicosis caused by high maternal levels of 
TSI in the last trimester of pregnancy.
Serum Tg levels are increased in all types of thyrotox-
icosis except thyrotoxicosis factitia caused by self-admin-
istration of thyroid hormone. Tg levels are particularly 
increased in thyroiditis, reflecting thyroid tissue destruc-
tion and release of Tg. The main role for Tg measure-
ment, however, is in the follow-up of thyroid cancer 
patients. After total thyroidectomy and radioablation, 
Tg levels should be undetectable; in the absence of anti-
Tg antibodies, measurable levels indicate incomplete 
ablation or recurrent cancer.
Radioiodine uptake and thyroid scanning
The thyroid gland selectively transports radioisotopes of 
iodine (123I, 125I, 131I) and 99mTc pertechnetate, allowing 
thyroid imaging and quantitation of radioactive tracer 
fractional uptake.
Nuclear imaging of Graves’ disease is characterized 
by an enlarged gland and increased tracer uptake that is 
distributed homogeneously. Toxic adenomas appear as 
focal areas of increased uptake, with suppressed tracer 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
71
Table 4-4
Causes of Hypothyroidism
Primary
Autoimmune hypothyroidism: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, atrophic thyroiditis
Iatrogenic: 131I treatment, subtotal or total thyroidectomy, external irradiation of neck for lymphoma or cancer
Drugs: iodine excess (including iodine-containing contrast media and amiodarone), lithium, antithyroid drugs, p-aminosalicylic 
acid, interferon-α and other cytokines, aminoglutethimide, sunitinib
Congenital hypothyroidism: absent or ectopic thyroid gland, dyshormonogenesis, TSH-R mutation
Iodine deficiency
Infiltrative disorders: amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, scleroderma, cystinosis, Riedel’s thyroiditis
Overexpression of type 3 deiodinase in infantile hemangioma
Transient
Silent thyroiditis, including postpartum thyroiditis
Subacute thyroiditis
Withdrawal of thyroxine treatment in individuals with an intact thyroid
After 131I treatment or subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves’ disease
Secondary
Hypopituitarism: tumors, pituitary surgery or irradiation, infiltrative disorders, Sheehan’s syndrome, trauma, genetic forms of 
combined pituitary hormone deficiencies
Isolated TSH deficiency or inactivity
Bexarotene treatment
Hypothalamic disease: tumors, trauma, infiltrative disorders, idiopathic
Abbreviations: TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; TSH-R, TSH receptor.
uptake in the remainder of the gland. In toxic MNG, 
the gland is enlarged—often with distorted architec-
ture—and there are multiple areas of relatively increased 
or decreased tracer uptake. Subacute thyroiditis is asso-
ciated with very low uptake because of follicular cell 
damage and TSH suppression. Thyrotoxicosis factitia is 
also associated with low uptake.
Although the use of fine-needle aspiration (FNA) 
biopsy has diminished the use of thyroid scans in the 
evaluation of solitary thyroid nodules, the functional 
features of thyroid nodules have some prognostic signif-
icance. So-called cold nodules, which have diminished 
tracer uptake, are usually benign. However, these nod-
ules are more likely to be malignant (∼5–10%) than so-
called hot nodules, which are almost never malignant.
Thyroid scanning is also used in the follow-up of 
thyroid cancer. After thyroidectomy and ablation using 
131I, there is diminished radioiodine uptake in the thy-
roid bed, allowing the detection of metastatic thyroid 
cancer deposits that retain the ability to transport iodine. 
Whole-body scans using 111–185 MBq (3–5 mCi) 131I 
are typically performed after thyroid hormone with-
drawal to raise the TSH level or after the administration 
of recombinant human TSH.
Thyroid ultrasound
Ultrasonography is used increasingly to assist in the diag-
nosis of nodular thyroid disease, a reflection of the limi-
tations of the physical examination and improvements 
in ultrasound technology. Using 10-MHz instruments, 
spatial resolution and image quality are excellent, allow-
ing the detection of nodules and cysts >3 mm. In addi-
tion to detecting thyroid nodules, ultrasound is useful for 
monitoring nodule size and for the aspiration of nod-
ules or cystic lesions. Ultrasound-guided FNA biopsy of 
thyroid lesions lowers the rate of inadequate sampling. 
Ultrasonography is also used in the evaluation of recur-
rent thyroid cancer, including possible spread to cervical 
lymph nodes.
Hypothyroidism
Iodine deficiency remains the most common cause of 
hypothyroidism worldwide. In areas of iodine suffi-
ciency, autoimmune disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) 
and iatrogenic causes (treatment of hyperthyroidism) are 
most common (Table 4-4).
Congenital Hypothyroidism
Prevalence
Hypothyroidism occurs in about 1 in 4000 newborns. 
It may be transient, especially if the mother has TSH-R 
blocking antibodies or has received antithyroid drugs, 
but permanent hypothyroidism occurs in the majority. 
Neonatal hypothyroidism is due to thyroid gland dysgen-
esis in 80–85%, and to inborn errors of thyroid hormone 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
72
synthesis in 10–15%, and is TSH-R antibody mediated 
in 5% of affected newborns. The developmental abnor-
malities are twice as common in girls. Mutations that 
cause congenital hypothyroidism are being increas-
ingly identified, but the vast majority remain idiopathic 
(Table 4-1).
Clinical manifestations
The majority of infants appear normal at birth, and <10% 
are diagnosed based on clinical features, which include 
prolonged jaundice, feeding problems, hypotonia, 
enlarged tongue, delayed bone maturation, and umbili-
cal hernia. Importantly, permanent neurologic damage 
results if treatment is delayed. Typical features of adult 
hypothyroidism may also be present (Table 4-5). Other 
congenital malformations, especially cardiac, are four 
times more common in congenital hypothyroidism.
Diagnosis and treatment
Because of the severe neurologic consequences of 
untreated congenital hypothyroidism, neonatal screen-
ing programs have been established. These are gen-
erally based on measurement of TSH or T4 levels in 
heel-prick blood specimens. When the diagnosis is con-
firmed, T4 is instituted at a dose of 10–15 μg/kg per 
day, and the dose is adjusted by close monitoring of 
TSH levels. T4 requirements are relatively great during 
the first year of life, and a high circulating T4 level is 
usually needed to normalize TSH. Early treatment with 
T4 results in normal IQ levels, but subtle neurodevelop-
mental abnormalities may occur in those with the most 
severe hypothyroidism at diagnosis or when treatment is 
delayed or suboptimal.
Autoimmune Hypothyroidism
Classification
Autoimmune hypothyroidism may be associated with 
a goiter (Hashimoto’s, or goitrous thyroiditis) or, at the 
later stages of the disease, minimal residual thyroid tis-
sue (atrophic thyroiditis). Because the autoimmune pro-
cess gradually reduces thyroid function, there is a phase 
of compensation when normal thyroid hormone levels 
are maintained by a rise in TSH. Though some patients 
may have minor symptoms, this state is called sub-
clinical hypothyroidism. Later, unbound T4 levels fall and 
TSH levels rise further; symptoms become more read-
ily apparent at this stage (usually TSH >10 mIU/L), 
which is referred to as clinical hypothyroidism or overt 
hypothyroidism.
Prevalence
The mean annual incidence rate of autoimmune hypo-
thyroidism is up to 4 per 1000 women and 1 per 1000 men. 
It is more common in certain populations, such as 
the Japanese, probably because of genetic factors and 
chronic exposure to a high-iodine diet. The mean age 
at diagnosis is 60 years, and the prevalence of overt 
hypothyroidism increases with age. Subclinical hypo-
thyroidism is found in 6–8% of women (10% over the 
age of 60) and 3% of men. The annual risk of devel-
oping clinical hypothyroidism is about 4% when sub-
clinical hypothyroidism is associated with positive TPO 
antibodies.
Pathogenesis
In Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, there is a marked lympho-
cytic infiltration of the thyroid with germinal center 
formation, atrophy of the thyroid follicles accompanied 
by oxyphil metaplasia, absence of colloid, and mild to 
moderate fibrosis. In atrophic thyroiditis, the fibrosis 
is much more extensive, lymphocyte infiltration is less 
pronounced, and thyroid follicles are almost completely 
absent. Atrophic thyroiditis likely represents the end 
stage of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis rather than a distinct 
disorder.
As with most autoimmune disorders, susceptibility to 
autoimmune hypothyroidism is determined by a com-
bination of genetic and environmental factors, and the 
risk of either autoimmune hypothyroidism or Graves’ 
disease is increased among siblings. HLA-DR polymor-
phisms are the best documented genetic risk factors for 
autoimmune hypothyroidism, especially HLA-DR3, 
-DR4, and -DR5 in Caucasians. A weak association also 
exists between polymorphisms in CTLA-4, a T cell–
regulatory gene, and autoimmune hypothyroidism. Both 
of these genetic associations are shared by other auto-
immune diseases, which may explain the relationship 
Table 4-5
Signs and Symptoms of Hypothyroidism 
(Descending Order of Frequency)
Symptoms
Tiredness, weakness
Dry skin
Feeling cold
Hair loss
Difficulty concentrating and 
poor memory
Constipation
Weight gain with poor 
appetite
Dyspnea
Hoarse voice
Menorrhagia (later  
oligomenorrhea or  
amenorrhea)
Paresthesia
Impaired hearing
Signs
Dry, coarse skin; cool 
peripheral extremities
Puffy face, hands, and feet 
(myxedema)
Diffuse alopecia
Bradycardia
Peripheral edema
Delayed tendon reflex 
relaxation
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Serous cavity effusions
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
73
between autoimmune hypothyroidism and other autoim-
mune diseases, especially type 1 diabetes mellitus, Addi-
son’s disease, pernicious anemia, and vitiligo (Chap. 23). 
HLA-DR and CTLA-4 polymorphisms account for 
approximately half of the genetic susceptibility to auto-
immune hypothyroidism. Other contributory loci remain 
to be identified. A gene on chromosome 21 may be 
responsible for the association between autoimmune 
hypothyroidism and Down syndrome. The female pre-
ponderance of thyroid autoimmunity is most likely due 
to sex steroid effects on the immune response, but an X 
chromosome–related genetic factor is also possible and 
may account for the high frequency of autoimmune 
hypothyroidism in Turner’s syndrome. Environmen-
tal susceptibility factors are poorly defined at present. 
A high iodine intake may increase the risk of autoim-
mune hypothyroidism by immunologic effects or direct 
thyroid toxicity. There is no convincing evidence for a 
role of infection except for the congenital rubella syn-
drome, in which there is a high frequency of autoim-
mune hypothyroidism. Viral thyroiditis does not induce 
subsequent autoimmune thyroid disease.
The thyroid lymphocytic infiltrate in autoimmune 
hypothyroidism is composed of activated CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cells as well as B cells. Thyroid cell destruction 
is primarily mediated by the CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, 
which destroy their targets by either perforin-induced 
cell necrosis or granzyme B–induced apoptosis. In addi-
tion, local T-cell production of cytokines, such as tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF), IL-1, and interferon γ (IFN-γ), 
may render thyroid cells more susceptible to apopto-
sis mediated by death receptors, such as Fas, which are 
activated by their respective ligands on T cells. These 
cytokines also impair thyroid cell function directly and 
induce the expression of other proinflammatory mole-
cules by the thyroid cells themselves, such as cytokines, 
HLA class I and class II molecules, adhesion molecules, 
CD40, and nitric oxide. Administration of high con-
centrations of cytokines for therapeutic purposes (espe-
cially IFN-α) is associated with increased autoimmune 
thyroid disease, possibly through mechanisms similar to 
those in sporadic disease.
Antibodies to TPO and Tg are clinically useful 
markers of thyroid autoimmunity, but any pathogenic 
effect is restricted to a secondary role in amplifying an 
ongoing autoimmune response. TPO antibodies fix 
complement, and complement membrane-attack com-
plexes are present in the thyroid in autoimmune hypo-
thyroidism. However, transplacental passage of Tg 
or TPO antibodies has no effect on the fetal thyroid, 
which suggests that T cell–mediated injury is required 
to initiate autoimmune damage to the thyroid.
Up to 20% of patients with autoimmune hypothy-
roidism have antibodies against the TSH-R, which, 
in contrast to TSI, do not stimulate the receptor but 
prevent the binding of TSH. These TSH-R–blocking 
antibodies, therefore, cause hypothyroidism and, especially 
in Asian patients, thyroid atrophy. Their transplacental 
passage may induce transient neonatal hypothyroidism. 
Rarely, patients have a mixture of TSI- and TSH-R–
blocking antibodies, and thyroid function can oscillate 
between hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism as one 
or the other antibody becomes dominant. Predicting 
the course of disease in such individuals is difficult, and 
they require close monitoring of thyroid function. Bio-
assays can be used to document that TSH-R–blocking 
antibodies reduce the cyclic AMP–inducing effect of 
TSH on cultured TSH-R–expressing cells, but these 
assays are difficult to perform. TBII assays that measure 
the binding of antibodies to the receptor by competi-
tion with radiolabeled TSH do not distinguish between 
TSI- and TSH-R–blocking antibodies, but a positive 
result in a patient with spontaneous hypothyroidism is 
strong evidence for the presence of blocking antibodies. 
The use of these assays does not generally alter clinical 
management, although it may be useful to confirm the 
cause of transient neonatal hypothyroidism.
Clinical manifestations
The main clinical features of hypothyroidism are sum-
marized in Table 4-5. The onset is usually insidious, 
and the patient may become aware of symptoms only 
when euthyroidism is restored. Patients with Hashimo-
to’s thyroiditis may present because of goiter rather than 
symptoms of hypothyroidism. The goiter may not be 
large, but it is usually irregular and firm in consistency. 
It is often possible to palpate a pyramidal lobe, normally 
a vestigial remnant of the thyroglossal duct. Rarely is 
uncomplicated Hashimoto’s thyroiditis associated with 
pain.
Patients with atrophic thyroiditis or the late stage 
of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis present with symptoms and 
signs of hypothyroidism. The skin is dry, and there is 
decreased sweating, thinning of the epidermis, and 
hyperkeratosis of the stratum corneum. Increased der-
mal glycosaminoglycan content traps water, giving rise 
to skin thickening without pitting (myxedema). Typical 
features include a puffy face with edematous eyelids and 
nonpitting pretibial edema (Fig. 4-5). There is pallor, 
often with a yellow tinge to the skin due to carotene 
accumulation. Nail growth is retarded, and hair is dry, 
brittle, difficult to manage, and falls out easily. In addi-
tion to diffuse alopecia, there is thinning of the outer 
third of the eyebrows, although this is not a specific sign 
of hypothyroidism.
Other common features include constipation and 
weight gain (despite a poor appetite). In contrast to 
popular perception, the weight gain is usually mod-
est and due mainly to fluid retention in the myxede-
matous tissues. Libido is decreased in both sexes, 
and there may be oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea in 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
74
long-standing disease, but menorrhagia is also common. 
Fertility is reduced, and the incidence of miscarriage is 
increased. Prolactin levels are often modestly increased 
(Chap.  2) and may contribute to alterations in libido 
and fertility and cause galactorrhea.
Myocardial contractility and pulse rate are reduced, 
leading to a reduced stroke volume and bradycardia. 
Increased peripheral resistance may be accompanied 
by hypertension, particularly diastolic. Blood flow is 
diverted from the skin, producing cool extremities. 
Pericardial effusions occur in up to 30% of patients but 
rarely compromise cardiac function. Though alterations 
in myosin heavy chain isoform expression have been 
documented, cardiomyopathy is unusual. Fluid may also 
accumulate in other serous cavities and in the middle 
ear, giving rise to conductive deafness. Pulmonary func-
tion is generally normal, but dyspnea may be caused by 
pleural effusion, impaired respiratory muscle function, 
diminished ventilatory drive, or sleep apnea.
Carpal tunnel and other entrapment syndromes are 
common, as is impairment of muscle function with stiff-
ness, cramps, and pain. On examination, there may be 
slow relaxation of tendon reflexes and pseudomyoto-
nia. Memory and concentration are impaired. Experi-
mentally, PET scans examining glucose metabolism in 
hypothyroid subjects show lower regional activity in the 
amygdala, hippocampus, and perigenual anterior cin-
gulated cortex, among other regions, and this activity 
corrects after thyroxine replacement. Rare neurologic 
problems include reversible cerebellar ataxia, dementia, 
psychosis, and myxedema coma. Hashimoto’s encephalop-
athy has been defined as a steroid-responsive syndrome 
associated with TPO antibodies, myoclonus, and slow-
wave activity on electroencephalography, but the rela-
tionship with thyroid autoimmunity or hypothyroidism 
is not established. The hoarse voice and occasionally 
clumsy speech of hypothyroidism reflect fluid accumu-
lation in the vocal cords and tongue.
The features described above are the consequence of 
thyroid hormone deficiency. However, autoimmune 
hypothyroidism may be associated with signs or symp-
toms of other autoimmune diseases, particularly vitiligo, 
pernicious anemia, Addison’s disease, alopecia areata, 
and type 1 diabetes mellitus. Less-common associations 
include celiac disease, dermatitis herpetiformis, chronic 
active hepatitis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), myasthenia gravis, and Sjögren’s 
syndrome. Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, which 
usually occurs in Graves’ disease (see below), occurs in 
about 5% of patients with autoimmune hypothyroidism.
Autoimmune hypothyroidism is uncommon in chil-
dren and usually presents with slow growth and delayed 
facial maturation. The appearance of permanent teeth 
is also delayed. Myopathy, with muscle swelling, is 
more common in children than in adults. In most cases, 
puberty is delayed, but precocious puberty sometimes 
occurs. There may be intellectual impairment if the 
onset is before 3 years and the hormone deficiency is 
severe.
Laboratory evaluation
A summary of the investigations used to determine the 
existence and cause of hypothyroidism is provided in 
Fig. 4-6. A normal TSH level excludes primary (but 
not secondary) hypothyroidism. If the TSH is elevated, 
an unbound T4 level is needed to confirm the pres-
ence of clinical hypothyroidism, but T4 is inferior to 
TSH when used as a screening test, because it will not 
detect subclinical hypothyroidism. Circulating unbound 
T3 levels are normal in about 25% of patients, reflect-
ing adaptive deiodinase responses to hypothyroidism. T3 
measurements are, therefore, not indicated.
Once clinical or subclinical hypothyroidism is con-
firmed, the etiology is usually easily established by dem-
onstrating the presence of TPO antibodies, which are 
present in >90% of patients with autoimmune hypothy-
roidism. TBII can be found in 10–20% of patients, but 
these determinations are not needed routinely. If there 
is any doubt about the cause of a goiter associated with 
hypothyroidism, FNA biopsy can be used to confirm 
the presence of autoimmune thyroiditis. Other abnor-
mal laboratory findings in hypothyroidism may include 
increased creatine phosphokinase, elevated cholesterol 
and triglycerides, and anemia (usually normocytic or 
Figure 4-5
Facial appearance in hypothyroidism. Note puffy eyes and 
thickened skin.
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
75
Measure unbound T4
Measure unbound T4
Mild
  hypothyroidism
Measure TSH
Elevated
Normal
Normal
Primary
  hypothyroidism
Low
Autoimmune
  hypothyroidism
Rule out other
  causes of
  hypothyroidism
T4 treatment
TPOAb+ or
  symptomatic
TPOAb–, no
symptoms
Annual follow-up
T4 treatment
TPOAb+
TPOAb–
Pituitary disease suspected?
No further
  tests
Normal
Yes
Rule out drug effects, sick
  euthyroid syndrome,
  then evaluate anterior
  pituitary function
No further
  tests
No
Low
EVALUATION OF HYPOTHYROIDISM
macrocytic). Except when accompanied by iron defi-
ciency, the anemia and other abnormalities gradually 
resolve with thyroxine replacement.
Differential diagnosis
An asymmetric goiter in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis may be 
confused with a multinodular goiter or thyroid carci-
noma, in which thyroid antibodies may also be present. 
Ultrasound can be used to show the presence of a soli-
tary lesion or a multinodular goiter rather than the het-
erogeneous thyroid enlargement typical of Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis. FNA biopsy is useful in the investigation of 
focal nodules. Other causes of hypothyroidism are dis-
cussed below and in Table 4-4, but rarely cause diag-
nostic confusion.
Other Causes of Hypothyroidism
Iatrogenic hypothyroidism is a common cause of hypothy-
roidism and can often be detected by screening before 
symptoms develop. In the first 3–4 months after radio-
iodine treatment, transient hypothyroidism may occur 
due to reversible radiation damage. Low-dose thyrox-
ine treatment can be withdrawn if recovery occurs. 
Because TSH levels are suppressed by hyperthyroid-
ism, unbound T4 levels are a better measure of thyroid 
function than TSH in the months following radioiodine 
treatment. Mild hypothyroidism after subtotal thyroid-
ectomy may also resolve after several months, as the 
gland remnant is stimulated by increased TSH levels.
Iodine deficiency is responsible for endemic goi-
ter and cretinism but is an uncommon cause of adult 
hypothyroidism unless the iodine intake is very low or 
there are complicating factors, such as the consump-
tion of thiocyanates in cassava or selenium deficiency. 
Though hypothyroidism due to iodine deficiency can 
be treated with thyroxine, public health measures to 
improve iodine intake should be advocated to elimi-
nate this problem. Iodized salt or bread or a single bolus 
of oral or intramuscular iodized oil have all been used 
successfully.
Paradoxically, chronic iodine excess can also induce 
goiter and hypothyroidism. The intracellular events 
that account for this effect are unclear, but individuals 
with autoimmune thyroiditis are especially susceptible. 
Iodine excess is responsible for the hypothyroidism that 
occurs in up to 13% of patients treated with amiodarone 
(see below). Other drugs, particularly lithium, may also 
cause hypothyroidism. Transient hypothyroidism caused 
by thyroiditis is discussed below.
Secondary hypothyroidism is usually diagnosed in the 
context of other anterior pituitary hormone deficien-
cies; isolated TSH deficiency is very rare (Chap. 2). 
TSH levels may be low, normal, or even slightly 
increased in secondary hypothyroidism; the latter is 
due to secretion of immunoactive but bioinactive 
forms of TSH. The diagnosis is confirmed by detect-
ing a low unbound T4 level. The goal of treatment is 
to maintain T4 levels in the upper half of the reference 
range, because TSH levels cannot be used to monitor 
therapy.
Figure 4-6
Evaluation of hypothyroidism. TPOAb+, thyroid peroxidase antibodies present; TPOAb–, thyroid peroxidase antibodies not 
present; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
76
Treatment	
Hypothyroidism
Clinical Hypothyroidism  If there is no 
residual thyroid function, the daily replacement dose 
of levothyroxine is usually 1.6 μg/kg body weight (typi-
cally 100–150 μg). In many patients, however, lower 
doses suffice until residual thyroid tissue is destroyed. 
In patients who develop hypothyroidism after the treat-
ment of Graves’ disease, there is often underlying auton-
omous function, necessitating lower replacement doses 
(typically 75–125 μg/d).
Adult patients under 60 without evidence of heart 
disease may be started on 50–100 μg levothyroxine (T4) 
daily. The dose is adjusted on the basis of TSH levels, 
with the goal of treatment being a normal TSH, ideally 
in the lower half of the reference range. TSH responses 
are gradual and should be measured about two months 
after instituting treatment or after any subsequent 
change in levothyroxine dosage. The clinical effects of 
levothyroxine replacement are slow to appear. Patients 
may not experience full relief from symptoms until 
3–6 months after normal TSH levels are restored. Adjust-
ment of levothyroxine dosage is made in 12.5- or 25-μg 
increments if the TSH is high; decrements of the same 
magnitude should be made if the TSH is suppressed. 
Patients with a suppressed TSH of any cause, including 
T4 overtreatment, have an increased risk of atrial fibrilla-
tion and reduced bone density.
Although dessicated animal thyroid preparations 
(thyroid extract USP) are available, they are not recom-
mended because the ratio of T3 to T4 is nonphysiologic. 
The use of levothyroxine combined with liothyronine 
(triiodothyronine, T3) has been investigated, but benefit 
has not been confirmed in prospective studies. There 
is no place for liothyronine alone as long-term replace-
ment, because the short half-life necessitates three or 
four daily doses and is associated with fluctuating T3 
levels.
Once full replacement is achieved and TSH levels 
are stable, follow-up measurement of TSH is recom-
mended at annual intervals and may be extended to 
every 2–3 years if a normal TSH is maintained over sev-
eral years. It is important to ensure ongoing adherence, 
however, as patients do not feel any symptomatic differ-
ence after missing a few doses of levothyroxine, and this 
sometimes leads to self-discontinuation.
In patients of normal body weight who are tak-
ing ≥200 μg of levothyroxine per day, an elevated TSH 
level is often a sign of poor adherence to treatment. 
This is also the likely explanation for fluctuating TSH 
levels, despite a constant levothyroxine dosage. Such 
patients often have normal or high unbound T4 levels, 
despite an elevated TSH, because they remember to 
take medication for a few days before testing; this is suf-
ficient to normalize T4, but not TSH levels. It is important
to consider variable adherence, because this pattern of 
thyroid function tests is otherwise suggestive of disor-
ders associated with inappropriate TSH secretion (Table 
4-3). Because T4 has a long half-life (7 days), patients 
who miss a dose can be advised to take two doses of 
the skipped tablets at once. Other causes of increased 
levothyroxine requirements must be excluded, particu-
larly malabsorption (e.g., celiac disease, small-bowel 
surgery), estrogen therapy, and drugs that interfere with 
T4 absorption or clearance such as cholestyramine, fer-
rous sulfate, calcium supplements, lovastatin, aluminum 
hydroxide, rifampicin, amiodarone, carbamazepine, and 
phenytoin.
Subclinical Hypothyroidism  By defini-
tion, subclinical hypothyroidism refers to biochemical 
evidence of thyroid hormone deficiency in patients who 
have few or no apparent clinical features of hypothy-
roidism. There are no universally accepted recommen-
dations for the management of subclinical hypothy-
roidism, but the most recently published guidelines do 
not recommend routine treatment when TSH levels are 
below 10 mU/L. It is important to confirm that any ele-
vation of TSH is sustained over a 3-month period before 
treatment is given. As long as excessive treatment is 
avoided, there is no risk in correcting a slightly increased 
TSH. Moreover, there is a risk that patients will progress 
to overt hypothyroidism, particularly when the TSH level 
is elevated and TPO antibodies are present. Treatment 
is administered by starting with a low dose of levothy-
roxine (25–50 μg/d) with the goal of normalizing TSH. If 
thyroxine is not given, thyroid function should be evalu-
ated annually.
Special 
Treatment 
Considerations 
Rarely, levothyroxine replacement is associated with 
pseudotumor cerebri in children. Presentation appears 
to be idiosyncratic and occurs months after treatment 
has begun. Women with a history or high risk of hypo-
thyroidism should ensure that they are euthyroid prior 
to conception and during early pregnancy as maternal 
hypothyroidism may adversely affect fetal neural devel-
opment and cause preterm delivery. The presence of 
thyroid autoantibodies alone, in a euthyroid patient, is 
also associated with preterm delivery, and outcome may 
be improved by levothyroxine treatment. Thyroid func-
tion should be evaluated immediately after pregnancy 
is confirmed and at the beginning of the second and 
third trimesters. The dose of levothyroxine may need to 
be increased by ≥50% during pregnancy and returned 
to previous levels after delivery. Elderly patients may 
require 20% less thyroxine than younger patients. In the 
elderly, especially patients with known coronary artery 
disease, the starting dose of levothyroxine is 12.5–25 μg/d 
with similar increments every 2–3 months until TSH 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
77
is normalized. In some patients, it may be impossible to 
achieve full replacement despite optimal antianginal 
treatment. Emergency surgery is generally safe in patients
with untreated hypothyroidism, although routine sur-
gery in a hypothyroid patient should be deferred until 
euthyroidism is achieved.
Myxedema coma still has a high mortality rate, 
despite intensive treatment. Clinical manifestations 
include reduced level of consciousness, sometimes 
associated with seizures, as well as the other features 
of hypothyroidism (Table 4-5). Hypothermia can reach 
23°C (74°F). There may be a history of treated hypo-
thyroidism with poor compliance, or the patient may 
be previously undiagnosed. Myxedema coma almost 
always occurs in the elderly and is usually precipitated 
by factors that impair respiration, such as drugs (espe-
cially sedatives, anesthetics, antidepressants), pneu-
monia, congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, or cerebrovascular accidents. 
Sepsis should also be suspected. Exposure to cold may 
also be a risk factor. Hypoventilation, leading to hypoxia 
and hypercapnia, plays a major role in pathogenesis; 
hypoglycemia and dilutional hyponatremia also contrib-
ute to the development of myxedema coma.
Levothyroxine can initially be administered as a sin-
gle IV bolus of 500 μg, which serves as a loading dose. 
Although further levothyroxine is not strictly neces-
sary for several days, it is usually continued at a dose of 
50–100 μg/d. If suitable IV preparation is not available, 
the same initial dose of levothyroxine can be given by 
nasogastric tube (though absorption may be impaired 
in myxedema). An alternative is to give liothyronine (T3) 
intravenously or via nasogastric tube, in doses ranging 
from 10 to 25 μg every 8–12 h. This treatment has been 
advocated because T4 → T3 conversion is impaired in 
myxedema coma. However, excess liothyronine has the 
potential to provoke arrhythmias. Another option is to 
combine levothyroxine (200 μg) and liothyronine (25 μg) 
as a single, initial IV bolus followed by daily treatment 
with levothyroxine (50–100 μg/d) and liothyronine 
(10 μg every 8 h).
Supportive therapy should be provided to correct 
any associated metabolic disturbances. External warm-
ing is indicated only if the temperature is <30°C, as it 
can result in cardiovascular collapse. Space blankets 
should be used to prevent further heat loss. Parenteral 
hydrocortisone (50 mg every 6 h) should be admin-
istered, because there is impaired adrenal reserve in 
profound hypothyroidism. Any precipitating factors 
should be treated, including the early use of broad-
spectrum antibiotics, pending the exclusion of infec-
tion. Ventilatory support with regular blood gas analysis 
is usually needed during the first 48 hours. Hypertonic 
saline or IV glucose may be needed if there is severe 
hyponatremia or hypoglycemia; hypotonic IV fluids
should be avoided because they may exacerbate water 
retention secondary to reduced renal perfusion and 
inappropriate vasopressin secretion. The metabolism of 
most medications is impaired, and sedatives should be 
avoided if possible or used in reduced doses. Medica-
tion blood levels should be monitored, when available, 
to guide dosage.
Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis is defined as the state of thyroid hormone 
excess and is not synonymous with hyperthyroidism, 
which is the result of excessive thyroid function. How-
ever, the major etiologies of thyrotoxicosis are hyper-
thyroidism caused by Graves’ disease, toxic MNG, and 
toxic adenomas. Other causes are listed in Table 4-6.
Graves’ Disease
Epidemiology
Graves’ disease accounts for 60–80% of thyrotoxicosis. 
The prevalence varies among populations, reflecting 
genetic factors and iodine intake (high iodine intake is 
associated with an increased prevalence of Graves’ dis-
ease). Graves’ disease occurs in up to 2% of women but 
Table 4-6
Causes of Thyrotoxicosis
Primary hyperthyroidism
Graves’ disease
Toxic multinodular goiter
Toxic adenoma
Functioning thyroid carcinoma metastases
Activating mutation of the TSH receptor
Activating mutation of Gsα (McCune-Albright syndrome)
Struma ovarii
Drugs: iodine excess (Jod-Basedow phenomenon)
Thyrotoxicosis without hyperthyroidism
Subacute thyroiditis
Silent thyroiditis
Other causes of thyroid destruction: amiodarone, radia-
tion, infarction of adenoma
Ingestion of excess thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis facti-
tia) or thyroid tissue
Secondary hyperthyroidism
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma
Thyroid hormone resistance syndrome: occasional 
patients may have features of thyrotoxicosis
Chorionic gonadotropin-secreting tumorsa
Gestational thyrotoxicosisa
aCirculating TSH levels are low in these forms of secondary hyper-
thyroidism.
Abbreviation: TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
78
is one-tenth as frequent in men. The disorder rarely 
begins before adolescence and typically occurs between 
20 and 50 years of age; it also occurs in the elderly.
Pathogenesis
As in autoimmune hypothyroidism, a combination of 
environmental and genetic factors, including polymor-
phisms in HLA-DR, CTLA-4, CD25, PTPN22 (a T- 
cell regulatory gene) and TSH-R, contribute to Graves’ 
disease susceptibility. The concordance for Graves’ dis-
ease in monozygotic twins is 20–30%, compared to <5% 
in dizygotic twins. Indirect evidence suggests that stress 
is an important environmental factor, presumably oper-
ating through neuroendocrine effects on the immune 
system. Smoking is a minor risk factor for Graves’ dis-
ease and a major risk factor for the development of 
ophthalmopathy. Sudden increases in iodine intake 
may precipitate Graves’ disease, and there is a threefold 
increase in the occurrence of Graves’ disease in the post-
partum period. Graves’ disease may occur during the 
immune reconstitution phase after highly active antiret-
roviral therapy (HAART) or alemtuzumab treatment.
The hyperthyroidism of Graves’ disease is caused by 
TSI that are synthesized in the thyroid gland as well as 
in bone marrow and lymph nodes. Such antibodies can 
be detected by bioassays or by using the more widely 
available TBII assays. The presence of TBII in a patient 
with thyrotoxicosis implies the existence of TSI, and 
these assays are useful in monitoring pregnant Graves’ 
patients in whom high levels of TSI can cross the pla-
centa and cause neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Other thyroid 
autoimmune responses, similar to those in autoimmune 
hypothyroidism (see above), occur concurrently in 
patients with Graves’ disease. In particular, TPO anti-
bodies occur in up to 80% of cases and serve as a readily 
measurable marker of autoimmunity. Because the coex-
isting thyroiditis can also affect thyroid function, there 
is no direct correlation between the level of TSI and 
thyroid hormone levels in Graves’ disease. In the long 
term, spontaneous autoimmune hypothyroidism may 
develop in up to 15% of patients with Graves’ disease.
Cytokines appear to play a major role in thyroid-
associated ophthalmopathy. There is infiltration of the 
extraocular muscles by activated T cells; the release 
of cytokines such as IFN-γ, TNF, and IL-1 results in 
fibroblast activation and increased synthesis of glycos-
aminoglycans that trap water, thereby leading to charac-
teristic muscle swelling. Late in the disease, there is irre-
versible fibrosis of the muscles. Orbital fibroblasts may 
be particularly sensitive to cytokines, perhaps explain-
ing the anatomic localization of the immune response. 
Though the pathogenesis of thyroid-associated oph-
thalmopathy remains unclear, there is mounting evi-
dence that the TSH-R may be a shared autoantigen that 
is expressed in the orbit; this would explain the close 
association with autoimmune thyroid disease. Increased 
fat is an additional cause of retrobulbar tissue expansion. 
The increase in intraorbital pressure can lead to propto-
sis, diplopia, and optic neuropathy
Clinical manifestations
Signs and symptoms include features that are common 
to any cause of thyrotoxicosis (Table 4-7) as well as 
those specific for Graves’ disease. The clinical presenta-
tion depends on the severity of thyrotoxicosis, the dura-
tion of disease, individual susceptibility to excess thyroid 
hormone, and the patient’s age. In the elderly, features 
of thyrotoxicosis may be subtle or masked, and patients 
may present mainly with fatigue and weight loss, a con-
dition known as apathetic thyrotoxicosis.
Thyrotoxicosis may cause unexplained weight loss, 
despite an enhanced appetite, due to the increased met-
abolic rate. Weight gain occurs in 5% of patients, how-
ever, because of increased food intake. Other prominent 
features include hyperactivity, nervousness, and irritabil-
ity, ultimately leading to a sense of easy fatigability in 
some patients. Insomnia and impaired concentration are 
common; apathetic thyrotoxicosis may be mistaken for 
depression in the elderly. Fine tremor is a frequent finding, 
best elicited by having patients stretch out their fingers 
while feeling the fingertips with the palm. Common 
neurologic manifestations include hyperreflexia, muscle 
wasting, and proximal myopathy without fasciculation. 
Chorea is rare. Thyrotoxicosis is sometimes associated 
with a form of hypokalemic periodic paralysis; this dis-
order is particularly common in Asian males with thy-
rotoxicosis, but it occurs in other ethnic groups as well.
The most common cardiovascular manifestation is 
sinus tachycardia, often associated with palpitations, occa-
sionally caused by supraventricular tachycardia. The high 
Table 4-7
Signs and Symptoms of Thyrotoxicosis 
(Descending Order of Frequency)
Symptoms
Hyperactivity, irritability, 
dysphoria
Heat intolerance and 
sweating
  Palpitations
  Fatigue and weakness
Weight loss with 
increased appetite
  Diarrhea
  Polyuria
Oligomenorrhea, loss of 
libido
Signsa
Tachycardia; atrial  
fibrillation in the elderly
  Tremor
  Goiter
  Warm, moist skin
Muscle weakness,  
proximal myopathy
  Lid retraction or lag
  Gynecomastia
aExcludes the signs of ophthalmopathy and dermopathy specific for 
Graves’ disease.
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
79
cardiac output produces a bounding pulse, widened pulse 
pressure, and an aortic systolic murmur and can lead to 
worsening of angina or heart failure in the elderly or 
those with preexisting heart disease. Atrial fibrillation is 
more common in patients >50 years of age. Treatment 
of the thyrotoxic state alone converts atrial fibrillation 
to normal sinus rhythm in about half of patients, sug-
gesting the existence of an underlying cardiac problem 
in the remainder.
The skin is usually warm and moist, and the patient 
may complain of sweating and heat intolerance, particu-
larly during warm weather. Palmar erythema, onychol-
ysis, and, less commonly, pruritus, urticaria, and diffuse 
hyperpigmentation may be evident. Hair texture may 
become fine, and a diffuse alopecia occurs in up to 40% 
of patients, persisting for months after restoration of 
euthyroidism. Gastrointestinal transit time is decreased, 
leading to increased stool frequency, often with diar-
rhea and occasionally mild steatorrhea. Women fre-
quently experience oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea; in 
men, there may be impaired sexual function and, rarely, 
gynecomastia. The direct effect of thyroid hormones 
on bone resorption leads to osteopenia in long-standing 
thyrotoxicosis; mild hypercalcemia occurs in up to 20% 
of patients, but hypercalciuria is more common. There 
is a small increase in fracture rate in patients with a pre-
vious history of thyrotoxicosis.
In Graves’ disease, the thyroid is usually diffusely 
enlarged to two to three times its normal size. The con-
sistency is firm, but less so than in MNG. There may be 
a thrill or bruit due to the increased vascularity of the 
gland and the hyperdynamic circulation.
Lid retraction, causing a staring appearance, can 
occur in any form of thyrotoxicosis and is the result 
of sympathetic overactivity. However, Graves’ dis-
ease is associated with specific eye signs that comprise 
Graves’ ophthalmopathy (Fig. 4-7A). This condition is 
also called thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, as it occurs 
in the absence of Graves’ disease in 10% of patients. 
Most of these individuals have autoimmune hypothy-
roidism or thyroid antibodies. The onset of Graves’ 
ophthalmopathy occurs within the year before or after 
the diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis in 75% of patients but 
can sometimes precede or follow thyrotoxicosis by 
several years, accounting for some cases of euthyroid 
ophthalmopathy.
Some patients with Graves’ disease have little clini-
cal evidence of ophthalmopathy. However, the enlarged 
extraocular muscles typical of the disease, and other 
subtle features, can be detected in almost all patients 
when investigated by ultrasound or CT imaging of 
the orbits. Unilateral signs are found in up to 10% of 
patients. The earliest manifestations of ophthalmopa-
thy are usually a sensation of grittiness, eye discomfort, 
and excess tearing. About one-third of patients have 
proptosis, best detected by visualization of the sclera 
between the lower border of the iris and the lower 
eyelid, with the eyes in the primary position. Proptosis 
can be measured using an exophthalmometer. In severe 
cases, proptosis may cause corneal exposure and dam-
age, especially if the lids fail to close during sleep. Peri-
orbital edema, scleral injection, and chemosis are also 
frequent. In 5–10% of patients, the muscle swelling is 
so severe that diplopia results, typically, but not exclu-
sively, when the patient looks up and laterally. The 
most serious manifestation is compression of the optic 
nerve at the apex of the orbit, leading to papilledema, 
peripheral field defects, and, if left untreated, permanent 
loss of vision.
Many scoring systems have been used to gauge the 
extent and activity of the orbital changes in Graves’ dis-
ease. The “NO SPECS” scheme is an acronym derived 
from the following eye changes:
0 = No signs or symptoms
1 = Only signs (lid retraction or lag), no symptoms
2 = Soft-tissue involvement (periorbital edema)
3 = Proptosis (>22 mm)
4 = Extraocular muscle involvement (diplopia)
5 = Corneal involvement
6 = Sight loss
Although useful as a mnemonic, the NO SPECS 
scheme is inadequate to describe the eye disease fully, 
Figure 4-7
Features of Graves’ disease. A. Ophthalmopathy in Graves’ 
disease; lid retraction, periorbital edema, conjunctival injec-
tion, and proptosis are marked. B. Thyroid dermopathy over 
the lateral aspects of the shins. C. Thyroid acropachy.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
80
and patients do not necessarily progress from one class 
to another. When Graves’ eye disease is active and 
severe, referral to an ophthalmologist is indicated and 
objective measurements are needed, such as lid-fissure 
width; corneal staining with fluorescein; and evaluation 
of extraocular muscle function (e.g., Hess chart), intra-
ocular pressure and visual fields, acuity, and color vision.
Thyroid dermopathy occurs in <5% of patients with 
Graves’ disease (Fig. 4-7B), almost always in the pres-
ence of moderate or severe ophthalmopathy. Although 
most frequent over the anterior and lateral aspects 
of the lower leg (hence the term pretibial myxedema), 
skin changes can occur at other sites, particularly after 
trauma. The typical lesion is a noninflamed, indurated 
plaque with a deep pink or purple color and an “orange 
skin” appearance. Nodular involvement can occur, and 
the condition can rarely extend over the whole lower 
leg and foot, mimicking elephantiasis. Thyroid acropachy 
refers to a form of clubbing found in <1% of patients 
with Graves’ disease (Fig. 4-7C). It is so strongly asso-
ciated with thyroid dermopathy that an alternative cause 
of clubbing should be sought in a Graves’ patient with-
out coincident skin and orbital involvement.
Laboratory evaluation
Investigations used to determine the existence and 
cause of thyrotoxicosis are summarized in Fig. 4-8. In 
Graves’ disease, the TSH level is suppressed and total 
and unbound thyroid hormone levels are increased. 
In 2–5% of patients (and more in areas of borderline 
iodine intake), only T3 is increased (T3 toxicosis). The 
converse state of T4 toxicosis, with elevated total and 
unbound T4 and normal T3 levels, is occasionally seen 
when hyperthyroidism is induced by excess iodine, pro-
viding surplus substrate for thyroid hormone synthesis. 
Measurement of TPO antibodies or TBII may be use-
ful if the diagnosis is unclear clinically but is not needed 
routinely. Associated abnormalities that may cause diag-
nostic confusion in thyrotoxicosis include elevation of 
bilirubin, liver enzymes, and ferritin. Microcytic anemia 
and thrombocytopenia may occur.
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis of Graves’ disease is straightforward in a 
patient with biochemically confirmed thyrotoxicosis, 
diffuse goiter on palpation, ophthalmopathy, and often 
Primary
  thyrotoxicosis
Features of
  Graves’ diseasea?
T3 toxicosis
Subclinical
  hyperthyroidism
TSH low, unbound
  T4 high
Measure TSH, unbound T4
Yes
No
Normal
Measure
  unbound T3
TSH normal or increased,
  high unbound T4
TSH-secreting
  pituitary adenoma
  or thyroid hormone
  resistance syndrome
Follow up in
  6-12 weeks
High
Graves’ disease
Multinodular goiter or toxic adenomab?
Yes
No
Toxic nodular hyperthyroidism
Low radionuclide uptake?
Yes
No
Destructive thyroiditis, iodine excess
  or excess thyroid hormone
Rule out other causes including stimulation
  by chorionic gonadotropin
TSH low, unbound
  T4 normal
TSH and unbound
  T4 normal
No further tests
EVALUATION OF THYROTOXICOSIS
Figure 4-8
Evaluation of thyrotoxicosis. 
aDiffuse goiter, positive 
TPO antibodies, ophthalmopathy, dermopathy; bCan be 
confirmed by radionuclide scan. TSH, thyroid-stimulating 
hormone.
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
81
a personal or family history of autoimmune disorders. 
For patients with thyrotoxicosis who lack these features, 
the most reliable diagnostic method is to measure TBII 
or TSI. An alternative is to undertake a radionuclide 
(99mTc, 123I, or 131I) scan of the thyroid, which will dis-
tinguish the diffuse, high uptake of Graves’ disease from 
nodular thyroid disease, destructive thyroiditis, ectopic 
thyroid tissue, and factitious thyrotoxicosis. In second-
ary hyperthyroidism due to a TSH-secreting pituitary 
tumor, there is also a diffuse goiter. The presence of a 
nonsuppressed TSH level and the finding of a pituitary 
tumor on CT or MRI scan readily identify such patients.
Clinical features of thyrotoxicosis can mimic cer-
tain aspects of other disorders, including panic attacks, 
mania, pheochromocytoma, and weight loss associated 
with malignancy. The diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis can 
be easily excluded if the TSH and unbound T4 and T3 
levels are normal. A normal TSH also excludes Graves’ 
disease as a cause of diffuse goiter.
Clinical course
Clinical features generally worsen without treatment; 
mortality was 10–30% before the introduction of satis-
factory therapy. Some patients with mild Graves’ dis-
ease experience spontaneous relapses and remissions. 
Rarely, there may be fluctuation between hypo- and 
hyperthyroidism due to changes in the functional activ-
ity of TSH-R antibodies. About 15% of patients who 
enter remission after treatment develop hypothyroidism 
10–15 years later as a result of the destructive autoim-
mune process.
The clinical course of ophthalmopathy does not fol-
low that of the thyroid disease. Ophthalmopathy typi-
cally worsens over the initial 3–6 months, followed 
by a plateau phase over the next 12–18 months, with 
spontaneous improvement, particularly in the soft tis-
sue changes. However, the course is more fulminant 
in up to 5% of patients, requiring intervention in the 
acute phase if there is optic nerve compression or cor-
neal ulceration. Diplopia may appear late in the disease 
due to fibrosis of the extraocular muscles. Some studies 
suggest that radioiodine treatment for hyperthyroidism 
worsens the eye disease in a small proportion of patients 
(especially smokers). Antithyroid drugs or surgery have 
no adverse effects on the clinical course of ophthal-
mopathy. Thyroid dermopathy, when it occurs, usu-
ally appears 1–2 years after the development of Graves’ 
hyperthyroidism; it may improve spontaneously.
Treatment	
Graves’ Disease
The hyperthyroidism of Graves’ disease is treated by 
reducing thyroid hormone synthesis, using antithyroid 
drugs, or reducing the amount of thyroid tissue with 
radioiodine (131I) treatment or by thyroidectomy. Anti-
thyroid drugs are the predominant therapy in many 
centers in Europe and Japan, whereas radioiodine is 
more often the first line of treatment in North Amer-
ica. These differences reflect the fact that no single 
approach is optimal, and that patients may require mul-
tiple treatments to achieve remission.
The main antithyroid drugs are the thionamides, such 
as propylthiouracil, carbimazole, and the active metab-
olite of the latter, methimazole. All inhibit the func-
tion of TPO, reducing oxidation and organification of 
iodide. These drugs also reduce thyroid antibody levels 
by mechanisms that remain unclear, and they appear 
to enhance rates of remission. Propylthiouracil inhibits 
deiodination of T4 → T3. However, this effect is of minor 
benefit, except in the most severe thyrotoxicosis, and is 
offset by the much shorter half-life of this drug (90 min) 
compared to methimazole (6 h).
There are many variations of antithyroid drug regi-
mens. The initial dose of carbimazole or methimazole is 
usually 10–20 mg every 8 or 12 h, but once-daily dosing 
is possible after euthyroidism is restored. Propylthioura-
cil is given at a dose of 100–200 mg every 6–8 h, and 
divided doses are usually given throughout the course. 
Lower doses of each drug may suffice in areas of low 
iodine intake. The starting dose of antithyroid drugs can 
be gradually reduced (titration regimen) as thyrotoxi-
cosis improves. Alternatively, high doses may be given 
combined with levothyroxine supplementation (block-
replace regimen) to avoid drug-induced hypothyroid-
ism. Initial reports suggesting superior remission rates 
with the block-replace regimen have not been repro-
duced in several other trials. The titration regimen is 
often preferred to minimize the dose of antithyroid drug 
and provide an index of treatment response.
Thyroid function tests and clinical manifestations 
are reviewed 3–4 weeks after starting treatment, and 
the dose is titrated based on unbound T4 levels. Most 
patients do not achieve euthyroidism until 6–8 weeks 
after treatment is initiated. TSH levels often remain 
suppressed for several months and therefore do not 
provide a sensitive index of treatment response. The 
usual daily maintenance doses of antithyroid drugs in 
the titration regimen are 2.5–10 mg of carbimazole or 
methimazole and 50–100 mg of propylthiouracil. In the 
block-replace regimen, the initial dose of antithyroid 
drug is held constant, and the dose of levothyroxine is 
adjusted to maintain normal unbound T4 levels. When 
TSH suppression is alleviated, TSH levels can also be 
used to monitor therapy.
Maximum remission rates (up to 30–50% in some pop-
ulations) are achieved by 18–24 months for the titration 
regimen and by 6 months for the block-replace regimen.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
82
For unclear reasons, remission rates appear to vary 
in different geographic regions. Patients with severe 
hyperthyroidism and large goiters are most likely to 
relapse when treatment stops, but outcomes are dif-
ficult to predict. All patients should be followed closely 
for relapse during the first year after treatment and at 
least annually thereafter.
The common side effects of antithyroid drugs are 
rash, urticaria, fever, and arthralgia (1–5% of patients). 
These may resolve spontaneously or after substitut-
ing an alternative antithyroid drug. Rare but major side 
effects include hepatitis; an SLE-like syndrome; and, 
most important, agranulocytosis (<1%). It is essential 
that antithyroid drugs are stopped and not restarted if 
a patient develops major side effects. Written instruc-
tions should be provided regarding the symptoms of 
possible agranulocytosis (e.g., sore throat, fever, mouth 
ulcers) and the need to stop treatment pending a com-
plete blood count to confirm that agranulocytosis is not 
present. It is not useful to monitor blood counts pro-
spectively, because the onset of agranulocytosis is idio-
syncratic and abrupt.
Propranolol (20–40 mg every 6 h) or longer-acting 
beta blockers such as atenolol, may be helpful to con-
trol adrenergic symptoms, especially in the early stages 
before antithyroid drugs take effect. Beta blockers are 
also useful in patients with thyrotoxic periodic paraly-
sis, pending correction of thyrotoxicosis. The need for 
anticoagulation with coumadin should be considered 
in all patients with atrial fibrillation. If digoxin is used, 
increased doses are often needed in the thyrotoxic 
state.
Radioiodine causes progressive destruction of thyroid 
cells and can be used as initial treatment or for relapses 
after a trial of antithyroid drugs. There is a small risk of 
thyrotoxic crisis (see below) after radioiodine, which can 
be minimized by pretreatment with antithyroid drugs 
for at least a month before treatment. Antecedent treat-
ment with antithyroid drugs should be considered for 
all elderly patients or for those with cardiac problems to 
deplete thyroid hormone stores before administration 
of radioiodine. Carbimazole or methimazole must be 
stopped at least 2 days before radioiodine administra-
tion to achieve optimum iodine uptake. Propylthiouracil 
has a prolonged radioprotective effect and should be 
stopped several weeks before radioiodine is given, or a 
larger dose of radioiodine will be necessary.
Efforts to calculate an optimal dose of radioiodine 
that achieves euthyroidism without a high incidence 
of relapse or progression to hypothyroidism have not 
been successful. Some patients inevitably relapse after 
a single dose because the biologic effects of radiation 
vary between individuals, and hypothyroidism cannot 
be uniformly avoided even using accurate dosimetry.  
A practical strategy is to give a fixed dose based on clinical 
features, such as the severity of thyrotoxicosis, the size 
of the goiter (increases the dose needed), and the level 
of radioiodine uptake (decreases the dose needed). 131I 
dosage generally ranges between 185 MBq (5 mCi) to 
555 MBq (15 mCi). Incomplete treatment or early relapse 
is more common in males and in patients <40 years of 
age. Many authorities favor an approach aimed at thy-
roid ablation (as opposed to euthyroidism), given that 
levothyroxine replacement is straightforward, and most 
patients ultimately progress to hypothyroidism over 
5–10 years, frequently with some delay in the diagnosis 
of hypothyroidism.
Certain radiation safety precautions are necessary in 
the first few days after radioiodine treatment, but the 
exact guidelines vary depending on local protocols. In 
general, patients need to avoid close, prolonged con-
tact with children and pregnant women for several days 
because of possible transmission of residual isotope and 
excessive exposure to radiation emanating from the 
gland. Rarely, there may be mild pain due to radiation 
thyroiditis 1–2 weeks after treatment. Hyperthyroidism 
can persist for 2–3 months before radioiodine takes full 
effect. For this reason, β-adrenergic blockers or antithy-
roid drugs can be used to control symptoms during this 
interval. Persistent hyperthyroidism can be treated with 
a second dose of radioiodine, usually 6 months after the 
first dose. The risk of hypothyroidism after radioiodine 
depends on the dosage but is at least 10–20% in the first 
year and 5% per year thereafter. Patients should be 
informed of this possibility before treatment and require 
close follow-up during the first year and annual thyroid 
function testing.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding are absolute contra-
indications to radioiodine treatment, but patients can 
conceive safely 6 months after treatment. The presence 
of severe ophthalmopathy requires caution, and some 
authorities advocate the use of prednisone, 40 mg/d, 
at the time of radioiodine treatment, tapered over 
2–3 months to prevent exacerbation of ophthalmopathy. 
The overall risk of cancer after radioiodine treatment 
in adults is not increased. Although many physicians 
avoid radioiodine in children and adolescents because 
of the theoretical risks of malignancy, emerging evi-
dence suggests that radioiodine can be used safely in 
older children.
Subtotal or near-total thyroidectomy is an option for 
patients who relapse after antithyroid drugs and they 
prefer this treatment to radioiodine. Some experts rec-
ommend surgery in young individuals, particularly 
when the goiter is very large. Careful control of thyro-
toxicosis with antithyroid drugs, followed by potassium 
iodide (3 drops SSKI orally tid), is needed prior to sur-
gery to avoid thyrotoxic crisis and to reduce the vascu-
larity of the gland. The major complications of surgery—
bleeding, laryngeal edema, hypoparathyroidism, and
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
83
damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerves—are unusual 
when the procedure is performed by highly experi-
enced surgeons. Recurrence rates in the best series are 
<2%, but the rate of hypothyroidism is only slightly less 
than that following radioiodine treatment.
The titration regimen of antithyroid drugs should be 
used to manage Graves’ disease in pregnancy, as block-
ing doses of these drugs produce fetal hypothyroidism. 
Propylthiouracil is usually used because of relatively 
low transplacental transfer and its ability to block T4 → 
T3 conversion. Also, carbimazole and methimazole have 
been associated with rare cases of fetal aplasia cutis and 
other defects, such as choanal atresia. The lowest effec-
tive dose of propylthiouracil should be given, and it is 
often possible to stop treatment in the last trimester 
because TSI tend to decline in pregnancy. Nonetheless, 
the transplacental transfer of these antibodies rarely 
causes fetal or neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Poor intrauter-
ine growth, a fetal heart rate of >160 beats/min, and 
high levels of maternal TSI in the last trimester may 
herald this complication. Antithyroid drugs given to 
the mother can be used to treat the fetus and may be 
needed for 1–3 months after delivery, until the maternal 
antibodies disappear from the baby’s circulation. The 
postpartum period is a time of major risk for relapse of 
Graves’ disease. Breast-feeding is safe with low doses of 
antithyroid drugs. Graves’ disease in children is usually 
managed with antithyroid drugs, often given as a pro-
longed course of the titration regimen. Surgery or radio-
iodine may be indicated for severe disease.
Thyrotoxic crisis, or thyroid storm, is rare and presents 
as a life-threatening exacerbation of hyperthyroidism, 
accompanied by fever, delirium, seizures, coma, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, and jaundice. The mortality rate due to 
cardiac failure, arrhythmia, or hyperthermia is as high 
as 30%, even with treatment. Thyrotoxic crisis is usu-
ally precipitated by acute illness (e.g., stroke, infection, 
trauma, diabetic ketoacidosis), surgery (especially on the 
thyroid), or radioiodine treatment of a patient with par-
tially treated or untreated hyperthyroidism. Management 
requires intensive monitoring and supportive care, 
identification and treatment of the precipitating cause, 
and measures that reduce thyroid hormone synthesis. 
Large doses of propylthiouracil (600 mg loading dose 
and 200–300 mg every 6 h) should be given orally or 
by nasogastric tube or per rectum; the drug’s inhibi-
tory action on T4 → T3 conversion makes it the anti-
thyroid drug of choice. One hour after the first dose of 
propylthiouracil, stable iodide is given to block thyroid 
hormone synthesis via the Wolff-Chaikoff effect (the 
delay allows the antithyroid drug to prevent the excess 
iodine from being incorporated into new hormone). 
A saturated solution of potassium iodide (5 drops SSKI 
every 6 h), or ipodate or iopanoic acid (500  mg per 
12  h), may be given orally. (Sodium iodide, 0.25 g IV
every 6 h, is an alternative but is not generally avail-
able.) Propranolol should also be given to reduce tachy-
cardia and other adrenergic manifestations (40–60 mg 
PO every 4 h; or 2 mg IV every 4 h). Although other 
β-adrenergic blockers can be used, high doses of pro-
pranolol decrease T4 → T3 conversion, and the doses 
can be easily adjusted. Caution is needed to avoid acute 
negative inotropic effects, but controlling the heart rate 
is important, as some patients develop a form of high-
output heart failure. Additional therapeutic measures 
include glucocorticoids (e.g., dexamethasone, 2 mg 
every 6 h), antibiotics if infection is present, cooling, 
oxygen, and intravenous fluids.
Ophthalmopathy requires no active treatment when 
it is mild or moderate, because there is usually sponta-
neous improvement. General measures include meticu-
lous control of thyroid hormone levels, cessation of 
smoking, and an explanation of the natural history of 
ophthalmopathy. Discomfort can be relieved with arti-
ficial tears (e.g., 1% methylcellulose), eye ointment, and 
the use of dark glasses with side frames. Periorbital 
edema may respond to a more upright sleeping posi-
tion or a diuretic. Corneal exposure during sleep can 
be avoided by using patches or taping the eyelids shut. 
Minor degrees of diplopia improve with prisms fitted to 
spectacles. Severe ophthalmopathy, with optic nerve 
involvement or chemosis resulting in corneal damage, 
is an emergency requiring joint management with an 
ophthalmologist. Short-term benefit can be gained in 
about two-thirds of patients by the use of high-dose 
glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone, 40–80 mg daily), 
sometimes combined with cyclosporine. Glucocorti-
coid doses are tapered by 5 mg every 2 weeks, but the 
taper often results in reemergence of congestive symp-
toms. Pulse therapy with IV methylprednisolone (e.g., 
500–1000 mg of methylprednisolone in 250 mL of saline 
infused over 2 h daily for 1 week) followed by an oral 
regimen is also used. When glucocorticoids are ineffec-
tive, orbital decompression can be achieved by remov-
ing bone from any wall of the orbit, thereby allowing 
displacement of fat and swollen extraocular muscles. 
The transantral route is used most often, because it 
requires no external incision. Proptosis recedes an aver-
age of 5 mm, but there may be residual or even wors-
ened diplopia. Once the eye disease has stabilized, 
surgery may be indicated for relief of diplopia and cor-
rection of the appearance. External beam radiotherapy 
of the orbits has been used for many years, but the 
efficacy of this therapy remains unclear, and it is best 
reserved for those who have failed or are not candidates 
for glucocorticoid therapy.
Thyroid dermopathy does not usually require treat-
ment, but it can cause cosmetic problems or interfere 
with the fit of shoes. Surgical removal is not indicated. 
If necessary, treatment consists of topical, high-potency 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
84
glucocorticoid ointment under an occlusive dressing. 
Octreotide may be beneficial in some cases.
Other 
Causes 
of 
Thyrotoxicosis 
Destructive thyroiditis (subacute or silent thyroiditis) 
typically presents with a short thyrotoxic phase due to 
the release of preformed thyroid hormones and catabo-
lism of Tg (see “Subacute Thyroiditis,” below). True hyper-
thyroidism is absent, as demonstrated by a low radionu-
clide uptake. Circulating Tg levels are usually increased. 
Other causes of thyrotoxicosis with low or absent thy-
roid radionuclide uptake include thyrotoxicosis facti-
tia, iodine excess, and, rarely, ectopic thyroid tissue, 
particularly teratomas of the ovary (struma ovarii); and 
functional metastatic follicular carcinoma. Whole-body 
radionuclide studies can demonstrate ectopic thyroid 
tissue, and thyrotoxicosis factitia can be distinguished 
from destructive thyroiditis by the clinical features 
and low levels of Tg. Amiodarone treatment is associ-
ated with thyrotoxicosis in up to 10% of patients, par-
ticularly in areas of low iodine intake (see below).
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma is a rare cause of 
thyrotoxicosis. It can be identified by the presence  
of an inappropriately normal or increased TSH level 
in a patient with hyperthyroidism, diffuse goiter, and 
elevated T4 and T3 levels (Chap. 2). Elevated levels of 
the α-subunit of TSH, released by the TSH-secreting 
adenoma, support this diagnosis, which can be con-
firmed by demonstrating the pituitary tumor on MRI or 
CT scan. A combination of transsphenoidal surgery, sella 
irradiation, and octreotide may be required to normalize 
TSH, because many of these tumors are large and locally 
invasive at the time of diagnosis. Radioiodine or antithy-
roid drugs can be used to control thyrotoxicosis.
Thyrotoxicosis caused by toxic MNG and hyperfunc-
tioning solitary nodules is discussed below.
Thyroiditis
A clinically useful classification of thyroiditis is based on 
the onset and duration of disease (Table 4-8).
Acute Thyroiditis
Acute thyroiditis is rare and due to suppurative infec-
tion of the thyroid. In children and young adults, the 
most common cause is the presence of a piriform sinus, 
a remnant of the fourth branchial pouch that connects 
the oropharynx with the thyroid. Such sinuses are 
predominantly left-sided. A long-standing goiter and 
degeneration in a thyroid malignancy are risk factors 
in the elderly. The patient presents with thyroid pain, 
often referred to the throat or ears, and a small, tender 
goiter that may be asymmetric. Fever, dysphagia, and 
erythema over the thyroid are common, as are systemic 
symptoms of a febrile illness and lymphadenopathy.
The differential diagnosis of thyroid pain includes sub-
acute or, rarely, chronic thyroiditis; hemorrhage into a 
cyst; malignancy including lymphoma; and, rarely, ami-
odarone-induced thyroiditis or amyloidosis. However, 
the abrupt presentation and clinical features of acute 
thyroiditis rarely cause confusion. The erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate (ESR) and white cell count are usually 
increased, but thyroid function is normal. FNA biopsy 
shows infiltration by polymorphonuclear leukocytes; 
culture of the sample can identify the organism. Cau-
tion is needed in immunocompromised patients as fun-
gal, mycobacterial, or Pneumocystis thyroiditis can occur 
in this setting. Antibiotic treatment is guided initially by 
Gram stain and, subsequently, by cultures of the FNA 
biopsy. Surgery may be needed to drain an abscess, 
which can be localized by CT scan or ultrasound. Tracheal 
obstruction, septicemia, retropharyngeal abscess, medi-
astinitis, and jugular venous thrombosis may complicate 
acute thyroiditis but are uncommon with prompt use of 
antibiotics.
Subacute Thyroiditis
This is also termed de Quervain’s thyroiditis, granuloma-
tous thyroiditis, or viral thyroiditis. Many viruses have been 
implicated, including mumps, coxsackie, influenza, ade-
noviruses, and echoviruses, but attempts to identify the 
virus in an individual patient are often unsuccessful and 
do not influence management. The diagnosis of sub-
acute thyroiditis is often overlooked because the symp-
toms can mimic pharyngitis. The peak incidence occurs 
Table 4-8
Causes of Thyroiditis
Acute
Bacterial infection: especially Staphylococcus, 
Streptococcus, and Enterobacter
Fungal infection: Aspergillus, Candida, Coccidioides, 
Histoplasma, and Pneumocystis
Radiation thyroiditis after 131I treatment
  Amiodarone (may also be subacute or chronic)
Subacute
Viral (or granulomatous) thyroiditis
Silent thyroiditis (including postpartum thyroiditis)
Mycobacterial infection
Chronic
Autoimmunity: focal thyroiditis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 
atrophic thyroiditis
Riedel’s thyroiditis
Parasitic thyroiditis: echinococcosis, strongyloidiasis,  
cysticercosis
Traumatic: after palpation
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
85
Clinical Phases
0
Time (weeks)
50
ESR
TSH (mU/L)
UT4 (pmol/L)
5
0.5
0.01
6
Thyrotoxic
Hypothyroid
Recovery
12
18
40
30
10
0
20
ESR (mm/h)
100
0
50
UT4
TSH
at 30–50 years, and women are affected three times 
more frequently than men.
Pathophysiology
The thyroid shows a characteristic patchy inflamma-
tory infiltrate with disruption of the thyroid follicles and 
multinucleated giant cells within some follicles. The fol-
licular changes progress to granulomas accompanied by 
fibrosis. Finally, the thyroid returns to normal, usually 
several months after onset. During the initial phase of 
follicular destruction, there is release of Tg and thyroid 
hormones, leading to increased circulating T4 and T3 
and suppression of TSH (Fig. 4-9). During this destruc-
tive phase, radioactive iodine uptake is low or unde-
tectable. After several weeks, the thyroid is depleted 
of stored thyroid hormone and a phase of hypothy-
roidism typically occurs, with low unbound T4 (and 
sometimes T3) and moderately increased TSH levels. 
Radioactive iodine uptake returns to normal or is 
even increased as a result of the rise in TSH. Finally, 
thyroid hormone and TSH levels return to normal as 
the disease subsides.
Clinical manifestations
The patient usually presents with a painful and enlarged 
thyroid, sometimes accompanied by fever. There 
may be features of thyrotoxicosis or hypothyroid-
ism, depending on the phase of the illness. Malaise and 
symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection may 
precede the thyroid-related features by several weeks. 
In other patients, the onset is acute, severe, and without 
obvious antecedent. The patient typically complains of 
a sore throat, and examination reveals a small goiter that 
is exquisitely tender. Pain is often referred to the jaw or 
ear. Complete resolution is the usual outcome, but per-
manent hypothyroidism can occur, particularly in those 
with coincidental thyroid autoimmunity. A prolonged 
course over many months, with one or more relapses, 
occurs in a small percentage of patients.
Laboratory evaluation
As depicted in Fig. 4-9, thyroid function tests character-
istically evolve through three distinct phases over about 
6 months: (1) thyrotoxic phase, (2) hypothyroid phase, 
and (3) recovery phase. In the thyrotoxic phase, T4 and 
T3 levels are increased, reflecting their discharge from 
the damaged thyroid cells, and TSH is suppressed. The 
T4/T3 ratio is greater than in Graves’ disease or thy-
roid autonomy, in which T3 is often disproportionately 
increased. The diagnosis is confirmed by a high ESR 
and low radioiodine uptake. The white blood cell count 
may be increased, and thyroid antibodies are negative. 
If the diagnosis is in doubt, FNA biopsy may be useful, 
particularly to distinguish unilateral involvement from 
bleeding into a cyst or neoplasm.
Treatment	
Subacute Thyroiditis
Relatively large doses of aspirin (e.g., 600 mg every 4–6 h) 
or NSAIDs are sufficient to control symptoms in many 
cases. If this treatment is inadequate, or if the patient 
has marked local or systemic symptoms, glucocorticoids 
should be given. The usual starting dose is 40–60 mg 
prednisone, depending on severity. The dose is gradu-
ally tapered over 6–8 weeks, in response to improve-
ment in symptoms and the ESR. If a relapse occurs during 
glucocorticoid withdrawal, treatment should be started 
again and withdrawn more gradually. In these patients, 
it is useful to wait until the radioactive iodine uptake 
normalizes before stopping treatment. Thyroid function 
should be monitored every 2–4 weeks using TSH and 
unbound T4 levels. Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis improve 
spontaneously but may be ameliorated by β-adrenergic 
blockers; antithyroid drugs play no role in treatment of 
the thyrotoxic phase. Levothyroxine replacement may 
be needed if the hypothyroid phase is prolonged, but 
doses should be low enough (50 to 100 μg daily) to allow 
TSH-mediated recovery.
Silent Thyroiditis
Painless thyroiditis, or “silent” thyroiditis, occurs in patients 
with underlying autoimmune thyroid disease. It has 
Figure 4-9
Clinical course of subacute thyroiditis. The release of thy-
roid hormones is initially associated with a thyrotoxic phase 
and suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). A hypo-
thyroid phase then ensues, with low T4 and TSH levels that 
are initially low but gradually increase. During the recovery 
phase, increased TSH levels combined with resolution of 
thyroid follicular injury leads to normalization of thyroid func-
tion, often several months after the beginning of the illness. 
ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FT4, free or unbound T4.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
86
a clinical course similar to that of subacute thyroiditis, 
except that there is little or no thyroid tenderness. The 
condition occurs in up to 5% of women 3–6 months 
after pregnancy and is then termed postpartum thyroiditis. 
Typically, patients have a brief phase of thyrotoxico-
sis lasting 2–4 weeks, followed by hypothyroidism for 
4–12 weeks, and then resolution; often, however, only 
one phase is apparent. The condition is associated with 
the presence of TPO antibodies antepartum, and it is 
three times more common in women with type 1 dia-
betes mellitus. As in subacute thyroiditis, the radioac-
tive iodine uptake is initially suppressed. In addition 
to the painless goiter, silent thyroiditis can be distin-
guished from subacute thyroiditis by a normal ESR and 
the presence of TPO antibodies. Glucocorticoid treat-
ment is not indicated for silent thyroiditis. Severe thy-
rotoxic symptoms can be managed with a brief course 
of propranolol, 20–40 mg three or four times daily. 
Thyroxine replacement may be needed for the hypothy-
roid phase but should be withdrawn after 6–9 months, 
as recovery is the rule. Annual follow-up thereafter is 
recommended, because a proportion of these individu-
als develop permanent hypothyroidism. The condition 
may recur in subsequent pregnancies.
Drug-Induced Thyroiditis
Patients receiving cytokines such as IFN-α or IL-2 may 
develop painless thyroiditis. IFN-α, which is used to 
treat chronic hepatitis B or C and hematologic and skin 
malignancies, causes thyroid dysfunction in up to 5% 
of treated patients. It has been associated with painless 
thyroiditis, hypothyroidism, and Graves’ disease, and is 
most common in women with TPO antibodies prior to 
treatment. For discussion of amiodarone, see “Amioda-
rone Effects on Thyroid Function,” later.
Chronic Thyroiditis
Focal thyroiditis is present in 20–40% of euthyroid 
autopsy cases and is associated with serologic evidence 
of autoimmunity, particularly the presence of TPO 
antibodies. These antibodies are 4–10 times more com-
mon in otherwise healthy women than men. The most 
common clinically apparent cause of chronic thyroid-
itis is Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, an autoimmune disorder 
that often presents as a firm or hard goiter of variable 
size (see above). Riedel’s thyroiditis is a rare disorder that 
typically occurs in middle-aged women. It presents 
with an insidious, painless goiter with local symptoms 
due to compression of the esophagus, trachea, neck 
veins, or recurrent laryngeal nerves. Dense fibrosis dis-
rupts normal gland architecture and can extend outside 
the thyroid capsule. Despite these extensive histologic 
changes, thyroid dysfunction is uncommon. The goiter 
is hard, nontender, often asymmetric, and fixed, leading 
to suspicion of a malignancy. Diagnosis requires open 
biopsy as FNA biopsy is usually inadequate. Treatment 
is directed to surgical relief of compressive symptoms. 
Tamoxifen may also be beneficial. There is an associa-
tion between Riedel’s thyroiditis and idiopathic fibro-
sis at other sites (retroperitoneum, mediastinum, biliary 
tree, lung, and orbit).
Sick Euthyroid Syndrome
Any acute, severe illness can cause abnormalities of cir-
culating TSH or thyroid hormone levels in the absence 
of underlying thyroid disease, making these measure-
ments potentially misleading. The major cause of these 
hormonal changes is the release of cytokines such as 
IL-6. Unless a thyroid disorder is strongly suspected, the 
routine testing of thyroid function should be avoided in 
acutely ill patients.
The most common hormone pattern in sick euthy-
roid syndrome (SES) is a decrease in total and unbound 
T3 levels (low T3 syndrome) with normal levels of T4 
and TSH. The magnitude of the fall in T3 correlates 
with the severity of the illness. T4 conversion to T3 via 
peripheral deiodination is impaired, leading to increased 
reverse T3 (rT3). Despite this effect, decreased clearance 
rather than increased production is the major basis for 
increased rT3. Also, T4 is alternately metabolized to the 
hormonally inactive T3 sulfate. It is generally assumed 
that this low T3 state is adaptive, because it can be 
induced in normal individuals by fasting. Teleologi-
cally, the fall in T3 may limit catabolism in starved or ill 
patients.
Very sick patients may exhibit a dramatic fall in total 
T4 and T3 levels (low T4 syndrome). This state has a 
poor prognosis. A key factor in the fall in T4 levels is 
altered binding to TBG. T4 assays usually demonstrate 
a normal unbound T4 level in such patients, depending 
on the assay method used. Fluctuation in TSH levels also 
creates challenges in the interpretation of thyroid func-
tion in sick patients. TSH levels may range from <0.1 
to >20 mIU/L; these alterations reverse after recovery, 
confirming the absence of underlying thyroid disease. A 
rise in cortisol or administration of glucocorticoids may 
provide a partial explanation for decreased TSH levels. 
The exact mechanisms underlying the subnormal TSH 
seen in 10% of sick patients and the increased TSH seen 
in 5% remain unclear but may be mediated by cytokines 
including IL-12 and IL-18.
Any severe illness can induce changes in thyroid hor-
mone levels, but certain disorders exhibit a distinctive 
pattern of abnormalities. Acute liver disease is associ-
ated with an initial rise in total (but not unbound) T3 
and T4 levels, due to TBG release; these levels become 
subnormal with progression to liver failure. A transient 
increase in total and unbound T4 levels, usually with a 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
87
normal T3 level, is seen in 5–30% of acutely ill psychi-
atric patients. TSH values may be transiently low, nor-
mal, or high in these patients. In the early stage of HIV 
infection, T3 and T4 levels rise, even if there is weight 
loss. T3 levels fall with progression to AIDS, but TSH 
usually remains normal. Renal disease is often accompa-
nied by low T3 concentrations, but with normal rather 
than increased rT3 levels, due to an unknown factor that 
increases uptake of rT3 into the liver.
The diagnosis of SES is challenging. Historic infor-
mation may be limited, and patients often have multi-
ple metabolic derangements. Useful features to consider 
include previous history of thyroid disease and thyroid 
function tests, evaluation of the severity and time course 
of the patient’s acute illness, documentation of medica-
tions that may affect thyroid function or thyroid hor-
mone levels, and measurements of rT3 together with 
unbound thyroid hormones and TSH. The diagno-
sis of SES is frequently presumptive, given the clinical 
context and pattern of laboratory values; only resolu-
tion of the test results with clinical recovery can clearly 
establish this disorder. Treatment of SES with thyroid 
hormone (T4 and/or T3) is controversial, but most 
authorities recommend monitoring the patient’s thyroid 
function tests during recovery, without administering 
thyroid hormone, unless there is historic or clinical evi-
dence suggestive of hypothyroidism. Sufficiently large 
randomized controlled trials using thyroid hormone are 
unlikely to resolve this therapeutic controversy in the 
near future, because clinical presentations and outcomes 
are highly variable.
Amiodarone Effects  
on Thyroid Function
Amiodarone is a commonly used type III antiarrhyth-
mic agent. It is structurally related to thyroid hormone 
and contains 39% iodine by weight. Thus, typical doses 
of amiodarone (200 mg/d) are associated with very high 
iodine intake, leading to greater than fortyfold increases 
in plasma and urinary iodine levels. Moreover, because 
amiodarone is stored in adipose tissue, high iodine levels 
persist for >6 months after discontinuation of the drug. 
Amiodarone inhibits deiodinase activity, and its metab-
olites function as weak antagonists of thyroid hormone 
action. Amiodarone has the following effects on thy-
roid function: (1) acute, transient suppression of thyroid 
function; (2) hypothyroidism in patients susceptible to 
the inhibitory effects of a high iodine load; and (3) thy-
rotoxicosis that may be caused by either a Jod-Basedow 
effect from the iodine load, in the setting of MNG or 
incipient Graves’ disease, or a thyroiditis-like condition.
The initiation of amiodarone treatment is associ-
ated with a transient decrease of T4 levels, reflect-
ing the inhibitory effect of iodine on T4 release. Soon 
thereafter, most individuals escape from iodide-dependent 
suppression of the thyroid (Wolff-Chaikoff effect), and 
the inhibitory effects on deiodinase activity and thyroid 
hormone receptor action become predominant. These 
events lead to the following pattern of thyroid func-
tion tests: increased T4, decreased T3, increased rT3, 
and a transient TSH increase (up to 20 mIU/L). TSH 
levels normalize or are slightly suppressed within 1–3 
months.
The incidence of hypothyroidism from amiodarone 
varies geographically, apparently correlating with iodine 
intake. Hypothyroidism occurs in up to 13% of amioda-
rone-treated patients in iodine-replete countries, such as 
the United States, but is less common (<6% incidence) 
in areas of lower iodine intake, such as Italy or Spain. 
The pathogenesis appears to involve an inability of the 
thyroid gland to escape from the Wolff-Chaikoff effect 
in autoimmune thyroiditis. Consequently, amiodarone-
associated hypothyroidism is more common in women 
and individuals with positive TPO antibodies. It is usu-
ally unnecessary to discontinue amiodarone for this side 
effect, because levothyroxine can be used to normal-
ize thyroid function. TSH levels should be monitored, 
because T4 levels are often increased for the reasons 
described above.
The management of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxi-
cosis (AIT) is complicated by the fact that there are dif-
ferent causes of thyrotoxicosis and because the increased 
thyroid hormone levels exacerbate underlying arrhyth-
mias and coronary artery disease. Amiodarone treatment 
causes thyrotoxicosis in 10% of patients living in areas 
of low iodine intake and in 2% of patients in regions of 
high iodine intake. There are two major forms of AIT, 
although some patients have features of both. Type 1 
AIT is associated with an underlying thyroid abnormal-
ity (preclinical Graves’ disease or nodular goiter). Thy-
roid hormone synthesis becomes excessive as a result of 
increased iodine exposure (Jod-Basedow phenomenon). 
Type 2 AIT occurs in individuals with no intrinsic thy-
roid abnormalities and is the result of drug-induced 
lysosomal activation leading to destructive thyroiditis 
with histiocyte accumulation in the thyroid; the inci-
dence rises as cumulative amiodarone dosage increases. 
Mild forms of type 2 AIT can resolve spontaneously or 
can occasionally lead to hypothyroidism. Color-flow 
Doppler thyroid scanning shows increased vascularity 
in type 1 AIT but decreased vascularity in type 2 AIT. 
Thyroid scintiscans are difficult to interpret in this set-
ting because the high endogenous iodine levels dimin-
ish tracer uptake. However, the presence of normal or 
rarely increased uptake favors type 1 AIT.
In AIT, the drug should be stopped, if possible, 
although this is often impractical because of the under-
lying cardiac disorder. Discontinuation of amiodarone 
will not have an acute effect because of its storage and 
prolonged half-life. High doses of antithyroid drugs 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
88
can be used in type 1 AIT but are often ineffective. In 
type 2 AIT, oral contrast agents, such as sodium ipodate 
(500 mg/d) or sodium tyropanoate (500 mg, 1–2 doses/d), 
rapidly reduce T4 and T3 levels, decrease T4 → T3 con-
version, and may block tissue uptake of thyroid hor-
mones. Potassium perchlorate, 200 mg every 6 h, has 
been used to reduce thyroidal iodide content. Perchlo-
rate treatment has been associated with agranulocytosis, 
though the risk appears relatively low with short-term 
use. Glucocorticoids, as administered for subacute thy-
roiditis, have modest benefit in type 2 AIT. Lithium 
blocks thyroid hormone release and can also pro-
vide some benefit. Near-total thyroidectomy rapidly 
decreases thyroid hormone levels and may be the most 
effective long-term solution if the patient can undergo 
the procedure safely.
Thyroid Function in Pregnancy
Five factors alter thyroid function in pregnancy: 
(1) the transient increase in hCG during the first tri-
mester, which stimulates the TSH-R; (2) the estrogen-
induced rise in TBG during the first trimester, which is 
sustained during pregnancy; (3) alterations in the immune 
system, leading to the onset, exacerbation, or amelioration 
of an underlying autoimmune thyroid disease (see above); 
(4) increased thyroid hormone metabolism by the pla-
centa; and (5) increased urinary iodide excretion, which 
can cause impaired thyroid hormone production in areas 
of marginal iodine sufficiency. Women with a precarious 
iodine intake (<50 μg/d) are most at risk of developing 
a goiter during pregnancy, and iodine supplementation 
should be considered to prevent maternal and fetal hypo-
thyroidism and the development of neonatal goiter.
The rise in circulating hCG levels during the first tri-
mester is accompanied by a reciprocal fall in TSH that 
persists into the middle of pregnancy. This appears to 
reflect weak binding of hCG, which is present at very 
high levels, to the TSH-R. Rare individuals have been 
described with variant TSH-R sequences that enhance 
hCG binding and TSH-R activation. Human chori-
onic gonadotropin-induced changes in thyroid function 
can result in transient gestational hyperthyroidism and/
or hyperemesis gravidarum, a condition characterized by 
severe nausea and vomiting and risk of volume deple-
tion. Antithyroid drugs are rarely needed, and parenteral 
fluid replacement usually suffices until the condition 
resolves.
Maternal hypothyroidism occurs in 2–3% of women 
of child-bearing age and is associated with increased risk 
of developmental delay in the offspring. Consequently, 
TSH screening for hypothyroidism is indicated in early 
pregnancy and should be considered in women who are 
planning pregnancy, particularly if they have a goiter or 
strong family history of autoimmune thyroid disease. Thyroid 
hormone requirements are increased by 25–50 μg/d 
during pregnancy.
Goiter and Nodular  
Thyroid Disease
Goiter refers to an enlarged thyroid gland. Biosynthetic 
defects, iodine deficiency, autoimmune disease, and 
nodular diseases can each lead to goiter, though by dif-
ferent mechanisms. Biosynthetic defects and iodine 
deficiency are associated with reduced efficiency of 
thyroid hormone synthesis, leading to increased TSH, 
which stimulates thyroid growth as a compensatory 
mechanism to overcome the block in hormone syn-
thesis. Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis are 
also associated with goiter. In Graves’ disease, the goi-
ter results mainly from the TSH-R–mediated effects 
of TSI. The goitrous form of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis 
occurs because of acquired defects in hormone synthe-
sis, leading to elevated levels of TSH and its consequent 
growth effects. Lymphocytic infiltration and immune 
system–induced growth factors also contribute to thyroid 
enlargement in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Nodular disease 
is characterized by the disordered growth of thyroid 
cells, often combined with the gradual development of 
fibrosis. Because the management of goiter depends on the 
etiology, the detection of thyroid enlargement on phys-
ical examination should prompt further evaluation to 
identify its cause.
Nodular thyroid disease is common, occurring in 
about 3–7% of adults when assessed by physical exami-
nation. Using more sensitive techniques, such as ultra-
sound, it is present in >25% of adults. Thyroid nodules 
may be solitary or multiple, and they may be functional 
or nonfunctional.
Diffuse Nontoxic (Simple) Goiter
Etiology and pathogenesis
When diffuse enlargement of the thyroid occurs in the 
absence of nodules and hyperthyroidism, it is referred 
to as a diffuse nontoxic goiter. This is sometimes called 
simple goiter, because of the absence of nodules, or colloid 
goiter, because of the presence of uniform follicles that 
are filled with colloid. Worldwide, diffuse goiter is most 
commonly caused by iodine deficiency and is termed 
endemic goiter when it affects >5% of the population. In 
nonendemic regions, sporadic goiter occurs, and the cause 
is usually unknown. Thyroid enlargement in teenag-
ers is sometimes referred to as juvenile goiter. In general, 
goiter is more common in women than men, probably 
because of the greater prevalence of underlying autoim-
mune disease and the increased iodine demands associ-
ated with pregnancy.
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
89
In iodine-deficient areas, thyroid enlargement reflects 
a compensatory effort to trap iodide and produce suf-
ficient hormone under conditions in which hormone 
synthesis is relatively inefficient. Somewhat surprisingly, 
TSH levels are usually normal or only slightly increased, 
suggesting increased sensitivity to TSH or activation 
of other pathways that lead to thyroid growth. Iodide 
appears to have direct actions on thyroid vasculature and 
may indirectly affect growth through vasoactive sub-
stances such as endothelins and nitric oxide. Endemic 
goiter is also caused by exposure to environmental goi-
trogens such as cassava root, which contains a thiocya-
nate; vegetables of the Cruciferae family (known as cru-
ciferous vegetables) (e.g., brussels sprout, cabbage, and 
cauliflower); and milk from regions where goitrogens 
are present in grass. Though relatively rare, inherited 
defects in thyroid hormone synthesis lead to a diffuse 
nontoxic goiter. Abnormalities at each step in hormone 
synthesis, including iodide transport (NIS), Tg synthesis, 
organification and coupling (TPO), and the regenera-
tion of iodide (dehalogenase), have been described.
Clinical Manifestations  
and Diagnosis
If thyroid function is preserved, most goiters are asymp-
tomatic. Spontaneous hemorrhage into a cyst or nod-
ule may cause the sudden onset of localized pain and 
swelling. Examination of a diffuse goiter reveals a sym-
metrically enlarged, nontender, generally soft gland 
without palpable nodules. Goiter is defined, some-
what arbitrarily, as a lateral lobe with a volume greater 
than the thumb of the individual being examined. If 
the thyroid is markedly enlarged, it can cause tracheal 
or esophageal compression. These features are unusual, 
however, in the absence of nodular disease and fibro-
sis. Substernal goiter may obstruct the thoracic inlet. Pem-
berton’s sign refers to symptoms of faintness with evi-
dence of facial congestion and external jugular venous 
obstruction when the arms are raised above the head, a 
maneuver that draws the thyroid into the thoracic inlet. 
Respiratory flow measurements and CT or MRI should 
be used to evaluate substernal goiter in patients with 
obstructive signs or symptoms.
Thyroid function tests should be performed in all 
patients with goiter to exclude thyrotoxicosis or hypo-
thyroidism. It is not unusual, particularly in iodine 
deficiency, to find a low total T4, with normal T3 and 
TSH, reflecting enhanced T4 → T3 conversion. A low 
TSH with a normal free T3 and free T4, particularly in 
older patients, suggests the possibility of thyroid auton-
omy or undiagnosed Graves’ disease, and is termed sub-
clinical thyrotoxicosis. The benefit of treatment (typically 
with radioiodine) in subclinical thyrotoxicosis, versus 
follow-up and implementing treatment if free T3 or free 
T4 levels become abnormal, is unclear, but treatment is 
increasingly recommended in the elderly to reduce the 
risk of atrial fibrillation and bone loss. TPO antibod-
ies may be useful to identify patients at increased risk of 
autoimmune thyroid disease. Low urinary iodine levels 
(<10 μg/dL) support a diagnosis of iodine deficiency. 
Thyroid scanning is not generally necessary but will 
reveal increased uptake in iodine deficiency and most 
cases of dyshormonogenesis. Ultrasound is not gener-
ally indicated in the evaluation of diffuse goiter unless a 
nodule is palpable on physical examination.
Treatment	
Diffuse Nontoxic (Simple) Goiter
Iodine or thyroid hormone replacement induces vari-
able regression of goiter in iodine deficiency, depend-
ing on how long it has been present and the degree of 
fibrosis that has developed. Because of the possibility of 
underlying thyroid autonomy, caution should be exer-
cised when instituting suppressive thyroxine therapy 
in patients with goiter, particularly if the baseline TSH 
is in the low to normal range. In younger patients, the 
dose of levothyroxine can be started at 100 mg/d and 
adjusted to suppress the TSH into the low to normal, 
but detectable, range. Treatment of elderly patients 
should be initiated at 50 mg/d. The efficacy of suppres-
sive treatment is greater in younger patients and for 
those with soft goiters. Significant regression is usually 
seen within 3–6 months of treatment; after this time, it 
is unlikely to occur. In older patients and in those with 
some degree of nodular disease or fibrosis, fewer than 
one-third demonstrate significant shrinkage of the goiter. 
Surgery is rarely indicated for diffuse goiter. Exceptions 
include documented evidence of tracheal compression 
or obstruction of the thoracic outlet, which are more 
likely to be associated with substernal multinodular goi-
ters (see below). Subtotal or near-total thyroidectomy 
for these or cosmetic reasons should be performed by 
an experienced surgeon to minimize complication rates. 
Surgery should be followed by replacement with levo-
thyroxine, with the aim of keeping the TSH level at the 
lower end of the reference range to prevent regrowth 
of the goiter. Radioiodine reduces goiter size by about 
50% in the majority of patients over 6–12 months. It is 
rarely associated with transient acute swelling of the 
thyroid, which is usually inconsequential unless there 
is severe tracheal narrowing. If they are not treated 
with levothyroxine, patients should be followed after 
radioiodine treatment for the possible development of 
hypothyroidism.
Nontoxic Multinodular Goiter
Etiology and pathogenesis
Depending on the population studied, MNG occurs 
in up to 12% of adults. MNG is more common in 
women than men and increases in prevalence with age. 
It is more common in iodine-deficient regions but also 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
90
occurs in regions of iodine sufficiency, reflecting multi-
ple genetic, autoimmune, and environmental influences 
on the pathogenesis.
There is typically wide variation in nodule size. His-
tology reveals a spectrum of morphologies ranging from 
hypercellular regions to cystic areas filled with colloid. 
Fibrosis is often extensive, and areas of hemorrhage or 
lymphocytic infiltration may be seen. Using molecular 
techniques, most nodules within a MNG are polyclonal 
in origin, suggesting a hyperplastic response to locally 
produced growth factors and cytokines. TSH, which 
is usually not elevated, may play a permissive or con-
tributory role. Monoclonal lesions also occur within a 
MNG, reflecting mutations in genes that confer a selec-
tive growth advantage to the progenitor cell.
Clinical manifestations
Most patients with nontoxic MNG are asymptomatic 
and euthyroid. MNG typically develops over many 
years and is detected on routine physical examination or 
when an individual notices an enlargement in the neck. 
If the goiter is large enough, it can ultimately lead to 
compressive symptoms including difficulty swallowing, 
respiratory distress (tracheal compression), or plethora 
(venous congestion), but these symptoms are uncom-
mon. Symptomatic MNGs are usually extraordinarily 
large and/or develop fibrotic areas that cause compres-
sion. Sudden pain in a MNG is usually caused by hem-
orrhage into a nodule but should raise the possibility of 
invasive malignancy. Hoarseness, reflecting laryngeal 
nerve involvement, also suggests malignancy.
Diagnosis
On examination, thyroid architecture is distorted, and 
multiple nodules of varying size can be appreciated. 
Because many nodules are deeply embedded in thyroid 
tissue or reside in posterior or substernal locations, it is 
not possible to palpate all nodules. A TSH level should 
be measured to exclude subclinical hyper- or hypothy-
roidism, but thyroid function is usually normal. Tracheal 
deviation is common, but compression must usually 
exceed 70% of the tracheal diameter before there is sig-
nificant airway compromise. Pulmonary function testing 
can be used to assess the functional effects of compres-
sion and to detect tracheomalacia, which characteristi-
cally causes inspiratory stridor. CT or MRI can be used 
to evaluate the anatomy of the goiter and the extent of 
substernal extension, which is often much greater than 
is apparent on physical examination. A barium swal-
low may reveal the extent of esophageal compression. 
The risk of malignancy in MNG is similar to that in soli-
tary nodules. Ultrasonography can be used to identify 
which nodules should be biopsied, including large, domi-
nant nodules or those with sonographic characteristics 
suggestive of malignancy (e.g., microcalcifications, 
hypoechogenicity, increased vascularity).
Treatment	
Nontoxic Multinodular Goiter
Most nontoxic MNGs can be managed conservatively. 
T4 suppression is rarely effective for reducing goiter 
size and introduces the risk of subclinical or overt thy-
rotoxicosis, particularly if there is underlying autonomy 
or if it develops during treatment. If levothyroxine is 
used, it should be started at low doses (50 μg) and 
advanced gradually while monitoring the TSH level 
to avoid excessive suppression. Contrast agents and 
other iodine-containing substances should be avoided 
because of the risk of inducing the Jod-Basedow effect, 
characterized by enhanced thyroid hormone produc-
tion by autonomous nodules. Radioiodine is used with 
increasing frequency because it can decrease goiter size 
and may selectively ablate regions of autonomy. Dos-
age of 131I depends on the size of the goiter and radio-
iodine uptake but is usually about 3.7 MBq (0.1 mCi) 
per gram of tissue, corrected for uptake [typical dose 
370–1070 MBq (10 to 29 mCi)]. Repeat treatment may 
be needed and effectiveness may be increased by con-
current administration of recombinant TSH. It is pos-
sible to achieve a 40–50% reduction in goiter size in 
most patients. Earlier concerns about radiation-induced 
thyroid swelling and tracheal compression have dimin-
ished; studies have shown this complication to be rare. 
When acute compression occurs, glucocorticoid treat-
ment or surgery may be needed. Radiation-induced 
hypothyroidism is less common than after treatment for 
Graves’ disease. However, posttreatment autoimmune 
thyrotoxicosis may occur in up to 5% of patients treated 
for nontoxic MNG. Surgery remains highly effective but 
is not without risk, particularly in older patients with 
underlying cardiopulmonary disease.
Toxic Multinodular Goiter
The pathogenesis of toxic MNG appears to be similar 
to that of nontoxic MNG; the major difference is the 
presence of functional autonomy in toxic MNG. The 
molecular basis for autonomy in toxic MNG remains 
unknown. As in nontoxic goiters, many nodules are 
polyclonal, while others are monoclonal and vary in 
their clonal origins. Genetic abnormalities known to 
confer functional autonomy, such as activating TSH-R 
or Gsα mutations (see below), are not usually found in 
the autonomous regions of toxic MNG goiter.
In addition to features of goiter, the clinical presen-
tation of toxic MNG includes subclinical hyperthy-
roidism or mild thyrotoxicosis. The patient is usually 
elderly and may present with atrial fibrillation or palpita-
tions, tachycardia, nervousness, tremor, or weight loss. 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
91
Recent exposure to iodine, from contrast dyes or other 
sources, may precipitate or exacerbate thyrotoxicosis. 
The TSH level is low. The T4 level may be normal or 
minimally increased; T3 is often elevated to a greater 
degree than T4. Thyroid scan shows heterogeneous 
uptake with multiple regions of increased and decreased 
uptake; 24-hour uptake of radioiodine may not be 
increased.
Treatment	
Toxic Multinodular Goiter
The management of toxic MNG is challenging. Antithy-
roid drugs, often in combination with beta blockers, 
can normalize thyroid function and address clinical fea-
tures of thyrotoxicosis. This treatment, however, often 
stimulates the growth of the goiter, and in contrast to 
Graves’ disease, spontaneous remission does not occur. 
Radioiodine can be used to treat areas of autonomy as 
well as to decrease the mass of the goiter. Usually, how-
ever, some degree of autonomy remains, presumably 
because multiple autonomous regions emerge as soon 
as others are treated. Nonetheless, a trial of radioiodine 
should be considered before subjecting patients, many 
of whom are elderly, to surgery. Surgery provides defini-
tive treatment of underlying thyrotoxicosis as well as 
goiter. Patients should be rendered euthyroid using an 
antithyroid drug before operation.
Hyperfunctioning Solitary Nodule
A solitary, autonomously functioning thyroid nodule 
is referred to as toxic adenoma. The pathogenesis of this 
disorder has been unraveled by demonstrating the func-
tional effects of mutations that stimulate the TSH-R 
signaling pathway. Most patients with solitary hyper-
functioning nodules have acquired somatic, activating 
mutations in the TSH-R (Fig. 4-10). These muta-
tions, located primarily in the receptor transmembrane 
domain, induce constitutive receptor coupling to GSα, 
increasing cyclic AMP levels and leading to enhanced 
thyroid follicular cell proliferation and function. Less 
commonly, somatic mutations are identified in GSα. 
These mutations, which are similar to those seen in 
McCune-Albright syndrome (Chap. 10) or in a sub-
set of somatotrope adenomas (Chap. 2), impair GTP 
hydrolysis, also causing constitutive activation of the 
cyclic AMP signaling pathway. In most series, activat-
ing mutations in either the TSH-R or the GSα subunit 
genes are identified in >90% of patients with solitary 
hyperfunctioning nodules.
Thyrotoxicosis is usually mild. The disorder is sug-
gested by the presence of the thyroid nodule, which 
is generally large enough to be palpable, and by the 
absence of clinical features suggestive of Graves’ dis-
ease or other causes of thyrotoxicosis. A thyroid scan 
Transmembrane
domains
Activating mutations
4
7
5
6
Cell growth, differentiation
Hormone synthesis
GSα
AC
cyclic AMP
TSH-R
Extracellular domain
provides a definitive diagnostic test, demonstrating focal 
uptake in the hyperfunctioning nodule and diminished 
uptake in the remainder of the gland, as activity of the 
normal thyroid is suppressed.
Treatment	
Hyperfunctioning Solitary Nodule
Radioiodine ablation is usually the treatment of choice. 
Because normal thyroid function is suppressed, 131I is 
concentrated in the hyperfunctioning nodule with 
minimal uptake and damage to normal thyroid tissue. 
Relatively large radioiodine doses [e.g., 370–1110 MBq  
(10–29.9 mCi)131I] have been shown to correct thyrotoxi-
cosis in about 75% of patients within 3 months. Hypothy-
roidism occurs in <10% of those patients over the next 
5 years. Surgical resection is also effective and is usually 
limited to enucleation of the adenoma or lobectomy, 
thereby preserving thyroid function and minimizing risk 
of hypoparathyroidism or damage to the recurrent laryn-
geal nerves. Medical therapy using antithyroid drugs 
and beta blockers can normalize thyroid function but is 
not an optimal long-term treatment. Using ultrasound 
guidance, repeated ethanol injections, or percutaneous
Figure 4-10
Activating mutations of the TSH-R. Mutations (✸) that acti-
vate the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSH-R) reside 
mainly in transmembrane 5 and intracellular loop 3, though 
mutations have occurred in a variety of different locations. 
The effect of these mutations is to induce conformational 
changes that mimic TSH binding, thereby leading to coupling 
to stimulatory G protein (GSα) and activation of adenylate 
cyclase (AC), an enzyme that generates cyclic AMP.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
92
radiofrequency thermal ablation have been used suc-
cessfully in some centers to ablate hyperfunctioning 
nodules, and these techniques have also been used 
to reduce the size of nonfunctioning thyroid nodules.
Benign Neoplasms
The various types of benign thyroid nodules are listed in 
Table 4-9. These lesions are common (5–10% adults), 
particularly when assessed by sensitive techniques such as 
ultrasound. The risk of malignancy is very low for macro-
follicular adenomas and normofollicular adenomas. Microfollicular, 
trabecular, and Hürthle cell variants raise greater concern, 
and the histology is more difficult to interpret. About 
one-third of palpable nodules are thyroid cysts. These may 
be recognized by their ultrasound appearance or based 
on aspiration of large amounts of pink or straw-colored 
fluid (colloid). Many are mixed cystic/solid lesions, in 
which case it is desirable to aspirate cellular components 
under ultrasound or harvest cells after cytospin of cyst 
fluid. Cysts frequently recur, even after repeated aspira-
tion, and may require surgical excision if they are large 
or if the cytology is suspicious. Sclerosis has been used 
with variable success but is often painful and may be 
complicated by infiltration of the sclerosing agent.
The treatment approach for benign nodules is similar 
to that for MNG. TSH suppression with levothyroxine 
decreases the size of about 30% of nodules and may pre-
vent further growth. If a nodule has not decreased in 
size after 6–12 months of suppressive therapy, treatment 
should be discontinued because little benefit is likely to 
accrue from long-term treatment; the risk of iatrogenic 
subclinical thyrotoxicosis should also be considered.
Thyroid Cancer
Thyroid carcinoma is the most common malignancy of 
the endocrine system. Malignant tumors derived from 
the follicular epithelium are classified according to his-
tologic features. Differentiated tumors, such as papillary 
thyroid cancer (PTC) or follicular thyroid cancer (FTC), 
are often curable, and the prognosis is good for patients 
identified with early-stage disease. In contrast, anaplastic 
thyroid cancer (ATC) is aggressive, responds poorly to 
treatment, and is associated with a bleak prognosis.
The incidence of thyroid cancer (∼9/100,000 per 
year) increases with age, plateauing after about age 50 
(Fig. 4-11). Age is also an important prognostic factor—
thyroid cancer at a young age (<20) or in older per-
sons (>45) is associated with a worse prognosis. Thy-
roid cancer is twice as common in women as men, but 
male gender is associated with a worse prognosis. Addi-
tional important risk factors include a history of child-
hood head or neck irradiation, large nodule size (≥4 cm), 
evidence for local tumor fixation or invasion into lymph 
nodes, and the presence of metastases (Table 4-10).
Several unique features of thyroid cancer facilitate its 
management: (1) thyroid nodules are readily palpable, 
allowing early detection and biopsy by FNA; (2) iodine 
radioisotopes can be used to diagnose (123I) and treat 
(131I) differentiated thyroid cancer, reflecting the unique 
uptake of this anion by the thyroid gland; and (3) serum 
markers allow the detection of residual or recurrent dis-
ease, including the use of Tg levels for PTC and FTC 
and calcitonin for medullary thyroid cancer (MTC).
Classification
Thyroid neoplasms can arise in each of the cell types 
that populate the gland, including thyroid follicular 
cells, calcitonin-producing C cells, lymphocytes, and 
stromal and vascular elements, as well as metastases from 
Table 4-9
Classification of Thyroid Neoplasms
Benign
Follicular epithelial cell adenomas
  Macrofollicular (colloid)
  Normofollicular (simple)
  Microfollicular (fetal)
  Trabecular (embryonal)
  Hürthle cell variant (oncocytic)
Malignant
Approximate 
Prevalence, %
Follicular epithelial cell
  Well-differentiated carcinomas
    Papillary carcinomas
      Pure papillary
      Follicular variant
      Diffuse sclerosing variant
      Tall cell, columnar cell variants
80–90
    Follicular carcinomas
      Minimally invasive
      Widely invasive
      Hürthle cell carcinoma  
      (oncocytic)
      Insular carcinoma
  Undifferentiated (anaplastic)  
  carcinomas
5–10
C cell (calcitonin producing)
  Medullary thyroid cancer
    Sporadic
    Familial
    MEN 2
<10
Other malignancies
  Lymphomas
  Sarcomas
  Metastases
  Others
1–2
Abbreviation: MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
93
Table 4-11
Thyroid Cancer Classificationa
Papillary or follicular thyroid cancers
<45 years
>45 years
  Stage I
Any T, any N, M0
T1, N0, M0
  Stage II
Any T, any N, M1
T2 or T3, N0, M0
  Stage III
—
T4, N0, M0
Any T, N1, M0
  Stage IV
—
Any T, any N, M1
Anaplastic thyroid cancer
  Stage IV
All cases are 
stage IV
Medullary thyroid cancer
  Stage I
T1, N0, M0
  Stage II
T2–T4, N0, M0
  Stage III
Any T, N1, M0
  Stage IV
Any T, any N, M1
aCriteria include: T, the size and extent of the primary tumor (T1 ≤ 1 cm; 
1 cm < T2 ≤ 4 cm; T3 > 4 cm; T4 direct invasion through the thy-
roid capsule); N, the absence (N0) or presence (N1) of regional node 
involvement; M, the absence (M0) or presence (M1) of metastases.
Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for 
thyroid cancers using the TNM classification.
other sites (Table 4-9). The American Joint Committee 
on Cancer (AJCC) has designated a staging system using 
the TNM classification (Table 4-11). Several other 
classification and staging systems are also widely used, 
some of which place greater emphasis on histologic fea-
tures or risk factors such as age or gender.
Pathogenesis and Genetic Basis
Radiation
Early studies of the pathogenesis of thyroid cancer 
focused on the role of external radiation, which predis-
poses to chromosomal breaks, leading to genetic rear-
rangements and loss of tumor-suppressor genes. Exter-
nal radiation of the mediastinum, face, head, and neck 
region was administered in the past to treat an array of 
conditions, including acne and enlargement of the thy-
mus, tonsils, and adenoids. Radiation exposure increases 
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
20
40
Age (year)
Rate per 100,000/year
60
80
Table 4-10
Risk Factors for Thyroid Carcinoma in 
Patients With Thyroid Nodule
History of head and neck irradiation
Age <20 or >45 years
Bilateral disease
Increased nodule size (>4 cm)
New or enlarging neck mass
Male gender
Family history of thyroid cancer or MEN 2
Vocal cord paralysis, hoarse voice
Nodule fixed to adjacent structures
Extrathyroidal extension
Suspected lymph node involvement
Iodine deficiency (follicular cancer)
Abbreviation: MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.
the risk of benign and malignant thyroid nodules, is 
associated with multicentric cancers, and shifts the 
incidence of thyroid cancer to an earlier age group. 
Radiation from nuclear fallout also increases the risk 
of thyroid cancer. Children seem more predisposed to 
the effects of radiation than adults. Of note, radiation 
derived from 131I therapy appears to contribute minimal 
increased risk of thyroid cancer.
TSH and growth factors
Many differentiated thyroid cancers express TSH recep-
tors and therefore remain responsive to TSH. This 
observation provides the rationale for T4 suppression of 
TSH in patients with thyroid cancer. Residual expres-
sion of TSH receptors also allows TSH-stimulated 
uptake of 131I therapy (see below).
Oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes
Thyroid cancers are monoclonal in origin, consistent 
with the idea that they originate as a consequence of 
mutations that confer a growth advantage to a single cell. 
In addition to increased rates of proliferation, some thy-
roid cancers exhibit impaired apoptosis and features that 
enhance invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Thyroid 
neoplasms have been analyzed for a variety of genetic 
alterations, but without clear evidence of an ordered 
acquisition of somatic mutations as they progress from 
the benign to the malignant state. On the other hand, cer-
tain mutations are relatively specific for thyroid neopla-
sia, some of which correlate with histologic classification 
(Table 4-12).
Figure 4-11
Age-associated incidence (—♦—) and mortality (—•—) 
rates for invasive thyroid cancer. (Adapted from LAG 
Ries et al [eds]: SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1973–1996, 
Bethesda, National Cancer Institute, 1999.)
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
94
Table 4-12
Genetic Alterations in Thyroid Neoplasia
Gene/Protein
Type of Gene
Chromosomal 
Location
Genetic 
Abnormality
Tumor
TSH receptor
GPCR receptor
14q31
Point mutations
Toxic adenoma, differentiated 
carcinomas
GSα
G protein
20q13.2
Point mutations
Toxic adenoma, differentiated 
carcinomas
RET/PTC
Receptor tyrosine kinase
10q11.2
Rearrangements
PTC1: (inv(10)
q11.2q21)
PTC2: (t(10;17)
(q11.2;q23))
PTC3: ELE1/TK
PTC
RET
Receptor tyrosine kinase
10q11.2
Point mutations
MEN 2, medullary thyroid cancer
BRAF
MEK kinase
7q24
Point mutations, 
rearrangements
PTC, ATC
TRK
Receptor tyrosine kinase
1q23-24
Rearrangements
Multinodular goiter, papillary 
thyroid cancer
RAS
Signal transducing p21
Hras 11p15.5Kras 
12p12.1; Nras 
1p13.2
Point mutations
Differentiated thyroid carcinoma, 
adenomas
p53
Tumor suppressor, cell 
cycle control, apoptosis
17p13
Point mutations
Deletion, insertion
Anaplastic cancer
APC
Tumor suppressor,  
adenomatous polyposis 
coli gene
5q21-q22
Point mutations
Anaplastic cancer, also associ-
ated with familial polyposis coli
p16 (MTS1, 
CDKN2A)
Tumor suppressor, cell 
cycle control
9p21
Deletions
Differentiated carcinomas
p21/WAF
Tumor suppressor, cell 
cycle control
6p21.2
Overexpression
Anaplastic cancer
MET
Receptor tyrosine kinase
7q31
Overexpression
Follicular thyroid cancer
c-MYC
Receptor tyrosine kinase
8q24.12-13
Overexpression
Differentiated carcinoma
PTEN
Phosphatase
10q23
Point mutations
PTC in Cowden’s syndrome 
(multiple hamartomas, breast 
tumors, gastrointestinal polyps, 
thyroid tumors)
CTNNB1
β-Catenin
3p22
Point mutations
Anaplastic cancer
Loss of hetero-
zygosity (LOH)
?Tumor suppressors
3p; 11q13, other 
loci
Deletions
Differentiated thyroid carcino-
mas, anaplastic cancer
PAX8-PPARγ 1
Transcription factor 
Nuclear receptor fusion
t(2;3)(q13;p25)
Translocation
Follicular adenoma or carcinoma
Abbreviations: APC, adenomatous polyposis coli; BRAF, v-raf homologue, B1; CDKN2A, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A; c-MYC, cellular 
homologue of myelocytomatosis virus proto-oncogene; ELE1/TK, RET-activating gene ele1/tyrosine kinase; GPCR, G protein–coupled recep-
tor; GSα, G-protein stimulating α-subunit; MEK, mitogen extracellular signal-regulated kinase; MEN 2, multiple endocrine neoplasia-2; MET, met 
proto-oncogene (hepatocyte growth factor receptor); MTS, multiple tumor suppressor; p53, p53 tumor suppressor gene; PAX8, paired domain 
transcription factor; PPARγ1, peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor γ1; PTC, papillary thyroid cancer; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homo-
logue; RAS, rat sarcoma proto-oncogene; RET, rearranged during transfection proto-oncogene; TRK, tyrosine kinase receptor; TSH, thyroid-
stimulating hormone; p21, p21 tumor suppressor; WAF, wild-type p53 activated fragment.
Source: Adapted with permission from P Kopp, JL Jameson, in JL Jameson (ed): Principles of Molecular Medicine. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, 
1998.
As described above, activating mutations of the 
TSH-R and the GSα subunit are associated with auton-
omously functioning nodules. Though these mutations 
induce thyroid cell growth, this type of nodule is almost 
always benign.
Activation of the RET-RAS-BRAF signaling pathway 
is seen in most PTCs, though the types of mutations are 
heterogeneous. A variety of rearrangements involving 
the RET gene on chromosome 10 brings this recep-
tor tyrosine kinase under the control of other promoters, 
leading to receptor overexpression. RET rearrange-
ments occur in 20–40% of PTCs in different series 
and were observed with increased frequency in tumors 
developing after the Chernobyl radiation accident. 
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
95
Rearrangements in PTC have also been observed for 
another tyrosine kinase gene, TRK1, which is located 
on chromosome 1. To date, the identification of PTC 
with RET or TRK1 rearrangements has not proven 
useful for predicting prognosis or treatment responses. 
BRAF mutations appear to be the most common 
genetic alteration in PTC. These mutations activate the 
kinase, which stimulates the mitogen-activated protein 
MAP kinase (MAPK) cascade. RAS mutations, which 
also stimulate the MAPK cascade, are found in about 
20–30% of thyroid neoplasms, including both PTC and 
FTC. Of note, simultaneous RET, BRAF, and RAS 
mutations do not occur in the same tumor, suggest-
ing that activation of the MAPK cascade is critical for 
tumor development, independent of the step that initi-
ates the cascade.
RAS mutations also occur in FTCs. In addition, a 
rearrangement of the thyroid developmental transcrip-
tion factor PAX8 with the nuclear receptor PPARγ is 
identified in a significant fraction of FTCs. Loss of het-
erozygosity of 3p or 11q, consistent with deletions of 
tumor-suppressor genes, is also common in FTCs.
Most of the mutations seen in differentiated thy-
roid cancers have also been detected in ATCs. BRAF 
mutations are seen in up to 50% of ATCs. Mutations 
in CTNNB1, which encodes β-catenin, occur in about 
two-thirds of ATCs, but not in PTC or FTC. Muta-
tions of the tumor suppressor p53 also play an important 
role in the development of ATC. Because p53 plays a 
role in cell cycle surveillance, DNA repair, and apop-
tosis, its loss may contribute to the rapid acquisition of 
genetic instability as well as poor treatment responses 
(Table 4-12).
The role of molecular diagnostics in the clinical man-
agement of thyroid cancer is under investigation. In 
principle, analyses of specific mutations might aid in 
classification, prognosis, or choice of treatment. How-
ever, there is no clear evidence to date that this infor-
mation alters clinical decision making.
MTC, when associated with multiple endocrine neo-
plasia (MEN) type 2, harbors an inherited mutation of 
the RET gene. Unlike the rearrangements of RET seen 
in PTC, the mutations in MEN 2 are point mutations 
that induce constitutive activity of the tyrosine kinase 
(Chap. 23). MTC is preceded by hyperplasia of the C cells, 
raising the likelihood that as-yet-unidentified “second 
hits” lead to cellular transformation. A subset of sporadic 
MTC contain somatic mutations that activate RET.
Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Papillary
PTC is the most common type of thyroid cancer, 
accounting for 70–90% of well-differentiated thyroid 
malignancies. Microscopic PTC is present in up to 25% 
of thyroid glands at autopsy, but most of these lesions 
are very small (several millimeters) and are not clinically 
significant. Characteristic cytologic features of PTC 
help make the diagnosis by FNA or after surgical resec-
tion; these include psammoma bodies, cleaved nuclei 
with an “orphan-Annie” appearance caused by large 
nucleoli, and the formation of papillary structures.
PTC tends to be multifocal and to invade locally 
within the thyroid gland as well as through the thyroid 
capsule and into adjacent structures in the neck. It has 
a propensity to spread via the lymphatic system but can 
metastasize hematogenously as well, particularly to bone 
and lung. Because of the relatively slow growth of the 
tumor, a significant burden of pulmonary metastases 
may accumulate, sometimes with remarkably few symp-
toms. The prognostic implication of lymph node spread 
is debated. Lymph node involvement by thyroid cancer 
can be well tolerated but appears to increase the risk of 
recurrence and mortality, particularly in older patients. 
The staging of PTC by the TNM system is outlined in 
Table 4-11. Most papillary cancers are identified in the 
early stages (>80% stages I or II) and have an excellent 
prognosis, with survival curves similar to expected sur-
vival (Fig. 4-12A). Mortality is markedly increased in 
stage IV disease (distant metastases), but this group com-
prises only about 1% of patients. The treatment of PTC 
is described below.
Follicular
The incidence of FTC varies widely in different parts 
of the world; it is more common in iodine-deficient 
regions. FTC is difficult to diagnose by FNA because 
the distinction between benign and malignant follicu-
lar neoplasms rests largely on evidence of invasion into 
vessels, nerves, or adjacent structures. FTC tends to 
spread by hematogenous routes leading to bone, lung, 
and central nervous system metastases. Mortality rates 
associated with FTC are less favorable than those for 
PTC, in part because a larger proportion of patients 
present with stage IV disease (Fig. 4-12B). Poor prog-
nostic features include distant metastases, age >50 years, 
primary tumor size >4 cm, Hürthle cell histology, and 
the presence of marked vascular invasion.
Treatment	
Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Surgery  All well-differentiated thyroid cancers 
should be surgically excised. In addition to removing 
the primary lesion, surgery allows accurate histologic 
diagnosis and staging, and multicentric disease is com-
monly found in the contralateral thyroid lobe. Lymph 
node spread can also be assessed at the time of surgery, 
and involved nodes can be removed. Recommendations
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
96
about the extent of surgery vary for stage I disease, 
as survival rates are similar for lobectomy and near-
total thyroidectomy. Lobectomy is associated with a 
lower incidence of hypoparathyroidism and injury to 
the recurrent laryngeal nerves. However, it is not pos-
sible to monitor Tg levels or to perform whole-body 131I 
scans in the presence of the residual lobe. Moreover, 
if final staging or subsequent follow-up indicates the 
need for radioiodine scanning or treatment, repeat sur-
gery is necessary to remove the remaining thyroid tis-
sue. Therefore, near-total thyroidectomy is preferable 
in almost all patients; complication rates are acceptably 
low if the surgeon is highly experienced in the proce-
dure. Postsurgical radioablation of the remnant thyroid 
tissue is increasingly being used because it may destroy 
remaining or multifocal thyroid carcinoma, and it facili-
tates the use of Tg determinations and radioiodine scan-
ning for long-term follow-up by eliminating residual 
normal or neoplastic tissue.
TSH Suppression Therapy  As most tumors 
are still TSH responsive, levothyroxine suppression of 
TSH is a mainstay of thyroid cancer treatment. Though 
TSH suppression clearly provides therapeutic benefit, 
there are no prospective studies that identify the opti-
mal level of TSH suppression. A reasonable goal is to 
suppress TSH as much as possible without subjecting 
the patient to unnecessary side effects from excess 
thyroid hormone, such as atrial fibrillation, osteope-
nia, anxiety, and other manifestations of thyrotoxico-
sis. For patients at low risk of recurrence, TSH should 
be suppressed into the low but detectable range 
(0.1–0.5 mIU/L). For patients at high risk of recurrence 
or with known metastatic disease, complete TSH sup-
pression is indicated if there are no strong contra-
indications to mild thyrotoxicosis. In this instance, 
unbound T4 must also be monitored to avoid exces-
sive treatment.
Radioiodine Treatment  Well-differentiated 
thyroid cancer still incorporates radioiodine, though less 
efficiently than normal thyroid follicular cells. Radioio-
dine uptake is determined primarily by expression of 
the NIS and is stimulated by TSH, requiring expression 
of the TSH-R. The retention time for radioactivity is influ-
enced by the extent to which the tumor retains differ-
entiated functions such as iodide trapping and organi-
fication. After near-total thyroidectomy, substantial 
thyroid tissue often remains, particularly in the thyroid 
bed and surrounding the parathyroid glands. Conse-
quently, 131I ablation is necessary to eliminate remain-
ing normal thyroid tissue and to treat residual tumor 
cells.
Indications  The use of therapeutic doses of radio-
iodine remains an area of controversy in thyroid cancer 
management. However, postoperative thyroid ablation 
and radioiodine treatment of known residual PTC or 
FTC clearly reduces recurrence rates but has a smaller 
impact on mortality, particularly in patients at relatively 
low risk. This low-risk group includes most patients with 
stage 1 PTC with primary tumors <1.5 cm in size. For 
patients with larger papillary tumors, spread to the adja-
cent lymph nodes, FTC, or evidence of metastases, thy-
roid ablation and radioiodine treatment are generally 
indicated.
131I Thyroid Ablation and Treatment  As 
noted above, the decision to use 131I for thyroid abla-
tion should be coordinated with the surgical approach, 
as radioablation is much more effective when there 
is minimal remaining normal thyroid tissue. A typical 
strategy is to treat the patient for several weeks postop-
eratively with liothyronine (25 μg bid or tid), followed 
by thyroid hormone withdrawal. Ideally, the TSH level 
should increase to >50 mU/L over 3–4 weeks. The level
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
5
10
Years after initial treatment
Surviving papillary thyroid
carcinoma, %
15
20
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
25
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
5
10
Years after initial treatment
Surviving follicular thyroid
carcinoma, %
15
20
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
25
A
B
Figure 4-12
Survival rates in patients with differentiated thyroid can-
cer. A. Papillary cancer, cohort of 1851 patients. I, 1107 
(60%); II, 408 (22%); III, 312 (17%); IV, 24 (1%); n = 1185. 
B. Follicular cancer, cohort of 153 patients. I, 42 (27%); II, 82 
(54%); III, 6 (4%); IV, 23 (15%); n = 153. (Adapted from PR 
Larsen et al: William’s Textbook of Endocrinology, 9th ed, 
JD Wilson et al [eds]. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1998, pp 389–
575, with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
97
to which TSH rises is dictated largely by the amount 
of normal thyroid tissue remaining postoperatively. 
Recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) has also been used to 
enhance 131I uptake for postsurgical ablation. It appears 
to be at least as effective as thyroid hormone with-
drawal and should be particularly useful as residual thy-
roid tissue prevents an adequate endogenous TSH rise.
A pretreatment scanning dose of 131I [usually 111–
185 MBq (3–5 mCi)] can reveal the amount of residual 
tissue and provides guidance about the dose needed 
to accomplish ablation. However, because of concerns 
about radioactive “stunning” that impairs subsequent 
treatment, there is a trend to avoid pretreatment scan-
ning and to proceed directly to ablation, unless there 
is suspicion that the amount of residual tissue will alter 
therapy. A maximum outpatient 131I dose is 1110 MBq 
(29.9 mCi) in the United States, though ablation is often 
more complete using greater doses [1850–3700 MBq 
(50–100 mCi)]. Patients should be placed on a low-
iodine diet (<50 μg/d urinary iodine) to increase radioio-
dine uptake. In patients with known residual cancer, the 
larger doses ensure thyroid ablation and may destroy 
remaining tumor cells. A whole-body scan following 
the high-dose radioiodine treatment is useful to identify 
possible metastatic disease.
Follow-Up Whole-Body Thyroid Scanning 
and Thyroglobulin Determinations  An ini-
tial whole-body scan should be performed about  
6 months after thyroid ablation. The strategy for follow-
up management of thyroid cancer has been altered by 
the availability of rhTSH to stimulate 131I uptake and by 
the improved sensitivity of Tg assays to detect residual 
or recurrent disease. A scheme for using either rhTSH 
or thyroid hormone withdrawal for thyroid scanning is 
summarized in Fig. 4-13. After thyroid ablation, rhTSH 
can be used in follow-up to stimulate Tg and 131I uptake 
without subjecting patients to thyroid hormone with-
drawal and its associated symptoms of hypothyroidism 
as well as the risk of tumor growth after prolonged TSH 
stimulation. Alternatively, in patients who are likely to 
require 131I treatment, the traditional approach of thy-
roid hormone withdrawal can be used to increase TSH. 
This involves switching patients from levothyroxine (T4) 
to the more rapidly cleared hormone liothyronine (T3), 
thereby allowing TSH to increase more quickly. Because 
TSH stimulates Tg levels, Tg measurements should be 
obtained after administration of rhTSH or when TSH lev-
els have risen after thyroid hormone withdrawal.
In low-risk patients who have no clinical evidence of 
residual disease after ablation and a basal Tg <1 ng/ml, 
increasing evidence supports the use of rhTSH-stimu-
lated Tg levels one year after ablation, without the need 
for radioiodine scanning. If stimulated Tg levels are low 
(<2 ng/ml) and, ideally, undetectable, these patients
Thyroidectomy
  131I Ablation
Likely residual disease
  Tg >2 ng/mL
No apparent
  disease
Residual disease
  metastases, ↑Tg
No apparent
  disease
Low disease risk
  Tg <2 ng/mL
T4 suppression
  Postablation or follow-up scan
rhTSH (Thyrogen)
  protocol
Continue
  T4 suppression
rhTSH
0.9 mg IM qd × 2
Day 3
4 mCi 131I
Continue
  follow-up
  measure
Continue
  follow-up
  measure
Therapeutic 131I
Day 5
Body scan;
  Measure Tg  
T4 withdrawal
  protocol
Discontinue T4
  T3, 25 µg 2–3×/d
Discontinue T3 after
  2–3 weeks
Off T4 & T3
  2–3 weeks
TSH >25 mU/L
Measure Tg
4 mCi 131I
Whole-body scan
rhTSH IN FOLLOW UP OF PTS WITH THYROID CANCER
can be managed with suppressive therapy and mea-
surements of unstimulated Tg every 6–12 months. The 
absence of Tg antibodies should be confirmed in these 
patients. On the other hand, patients with residual dis-
ease on whole-body scanning or those with elevated 
Tg levels require additional 131I therapy. In addition, 
most authorities advocate radioiodine treatment for 
scan-negative, Tg-positive (Tg >5–10 ng/mL) patients, 
as many derive therapeutic benefit from a large dose 
of 131I.
In addition to radioiodine, external beam radiother-
apy is also used to treat specific metastatic lesions, 
particularly when they cause bone pain or threaten 
neurologic injury (e.g., vertebral metastases).
New Potential Therapies  Kinase inhibitors are 
being explored as a means to target pathways known 
to be active in thyroid cancer, including the Ras, BRAF, 
EGFR, VEGFR, and angiogenesis pathways. Partial 
responses have been seen in small trials using mote-
saniv, sorafenib, and other agents, but the efficacy of 
these agents awaits larger studies.
Figure 4-13 
Use of recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH) in the follow-up of patients with thyroid cancer. 
rhTSH, recombinant human TSH; Tg, thyroglobulin.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
98
Anaplastic and Other Forms of 
Thyroid Cancer
Anaplastic thyroid cancer
As noted above, ATC is a poorly differentiated and 
aggressive cancer. The prognosis is poor, and most 
patients die within 6 months of diagnosis. Because of 
the undifferentiated state of these tumors, the uptake 
of radioiodine is usually negligible, but it can be used 
therapeutically if there is residual uptake. Chemotherapy 
has been attempted with multiple agents, including 
anthracyclines and paclitaxel, but it is usually ineffective. 
External beam radiation therapy can be attempted and 
continued if tumors are responsive.
Thyroid lymphoma
Lymphoma in the thyroid gland often arises in the 
background of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. A rapidly 
expanding thyroid mass suggests the possibility of this 
diagnosis. Diffuse large-cell lymphoma is the most 
common type in the thyroid. Biopsies reveal sheets of 
lymphoid cells that can be difficult to distinguish from 
small-cell lung cancer or ATC. These tumors are often 
highly sensitive to external radiation. Surgical resec-
tion should be avoided as initial therapy because it may 
spread disease that is otherwise localized to the thyroid. 
If staging indicates disease outside of the thyroid, treat-
ment should follow guidelines used for other forms of 
lymphoma.
Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma
MTC can be sporadic or familial and accounts for about 
5% of thyroid cancers. There are three familial forms of 
MTC: MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial MTC without 
other features of MEN (Chap. 23). In general, MTC 
is more aggressive in MEN 2B than in MEN 2A, and 
familial MTC is more aggressive than sporadic MTC. 
Elevated serum calcitonin provides a marker of residual 
or recurrent disease. It is reasonable to test all patients 
with MTC for RET mutations, as genetic counseling 
and testing of family members can be offered to those 
individuals who test positive for mutations.
The management of MTC is primarily surgical. 
Unlike tumors derived from thyroid follicular cells, 
these tumors do not take up radioiodine. External radia-
tion treatment and chemotherapy may provide pallia-
tion in patients with advanced disease (Chap. 23).
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
A Thyroid Nodule
Palpable thyroid nodules are found in about 5% of 
adults, but the prevalence varies considerably world-
wide. Given this high prevalence rate, practitioners 
commonly identify thyroid nodules. The main goal of 
this evaluation is to identify, in a cost-effective manner, 
the small subgroup of individuals with malignant lesions.
Nodules are more common in iodine-deficient areas, 
in women, and with aging. Most palpable nodules are 
>1 cm in diameter, but the ability to feel a nodule is 
influenced by its location within the gland (superficial 
versus deeply embedded), the anatomy of the patient’s 
neck, and the experience of the examiner. More sensi-
tive methods of detection, such as CT, thyroid ultra-
sound, and pathologic studies, reveal thyroid nodules in 
>20% of glands. The presence of these thyroid inciden-
talomas has led to much debate about how to detect 
nodules and which nodules to investigate further. Most 
authorities still rely on physical examination to detect 
thyroid nodules, reserving ultrasound for monitoring 
nodule size or as an aid in thyroid biopsy.
An approach to the evaluation of a solitary nodule is 
outlined in Fig. 4-14. Most patients with thyroid nod-
ules have normal thyroid function tests. Nonetheless, 
thyroid function should be assessed by measuring a TSH 
level, which may be suppressed by one or more autono-
mously functioning nodules. If the TSH is suppressed, a 
radionuclide scan is indicated to determine if the iden-
tified nodule is “hot,” as lesions with increased uptake 
are almost never malignant and FNA is unnecessary. 
Otherwise, FNA biopsy, ideally performed with ultra-
sound guidance, should be the first step in the evalua-
tion of a thyroid nodule. FNA has good sensitivity and 
specificity when performed by physicians familiar with 
the procedure and when the results are interpreted by 
experienced cytopathologists. The technique is particu-
larly useful for detecting PTC. The distinction of benign 
and malignant follicular lesions is often not possible 
using cytology alone.
In several large studies, FNA biopsies yielded the fol-
lowing findings: 70% benign, 10% malignant or suspi-
cious for malignancy, and 20% nondiagnostic or yielding 
insufficient material for diagnosis. Characteristic features 
of malignancy mandate surgery. A diagnosis of follicular 
neoplasm also warrants surgery, as benign and malig-
nant lesions cannot be distinguished based on cytopa-
thology or frozen section. The management of patients 
with benign lesions is more variable. Many authorities 
advocate TSH suppression, whereas others monitor 
nodule size without suppression. With either approach, 
thyroid nodule size should be monitored, ideally using 
ultrasound. Repeat FNA is indicated if a nodule enlarges, 
and a second biopsy should be performed within 
2–5 years to confirm the benign status of the nodule.
Nondiagnostic biopsies occur for many reasons, 
including a fibrotic reaction with relatively few cells 
available for aspiration, a cystic lesion in which cellular 
components reside along the cyst margin, or a nodule
 
CHAPTER 4
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland
99
that may be too small for accurate aspiration. For these 
reasons, ultrasound-guided FNA is indicated when the 
FNA is repeated. Ultrasound characteristics are also 
useful for deciding which nodules to biopsy when mul-
tiple nodules are present. Sonographic characteristics 
suggestive of malignancy include microcalcifications, 
increased vascularity, and hypoechogenicity within the 
nodule.
The evaluation of a thyroid nodule is stressful for 
most patients. They are concerned about the possibility 
of thyroid cancer, whether verbalized or not. It is con-
structive, therefore, to review the diagnostic approach 
and to reassure patients when no malignancy is found. 
When a suspicious lesion or thyroid cancer is identified, 
the generally favorable prognosis and available treat-
ment options can be reassuring.
Solitary or suspicious
  nodulea
Thyroid scan
FNA, consider
US-guided
Benign
Monitor by US
Surgery if further growth or suspicious cytology
Malignant
Surgery
“Hot” nodule
“Cold” or
indeterminate
Nondiagnostic
Suspicious or
  follicular neoplasm
Repeat bx
inadequate
Consider
thyroid scan
Cytopathology
Ablate, resect,
  or Rx medically
Low TSH
Normal TSH
“Hot” nodule
“Cold” or
   indeterminate
17%
10%
4%
69%
APPROACH TO PT WITH THYROID NODULE
Figure 4-14 
Approach to the patient with a thyroid nodule. See text 
and references for details. aAbout one-third of nodules are 
cystic or mixed solid-cystic. US, ultrasound; TSH, thyroid-
stimulating hormone; FNA, fine-needle aspiration.
 Wiebke Arlt 
100
 The adrenal cortex produces three classes of corticosteroid 
hormones: glucocorticoids (e.g., cortisol), mineralocorti-
coids (e.g., aldosterone), and adrenal androgen precursors 
(e.g., dehydroepiandrosterone, DHEA)  ( Fig. 5-1 ) . Glu-
cocorticoids and mineralocorticoids act through specifi c 
nuclear receptors, regulating aspects of the physiologic 
stress response as well as blood pressure and electrolyte 
homeostasis. Adrenal androgen precursors are converted in 
the gonads and peripheral target cells to sex steroids that act 
via nuclear androgen and estrogen receptors. 
 Disorders of the adrenal cortex are characterized 
by defi ciency or excess of one or several of the three 
major corticosteroid classes. Hormone defi ciency can 
be caused by inherited glandular or enzymatic disor-
ders or by destruction of the pituitary or adrenal gland 
by autoimmune disorders, infection, infarction, or by 
iatrogenic events such as surgery or hormonal suppres-
sion. Hormone excess is usually the result of neoplasia, 
leading to increased production of adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary or neuroendocrine 
cells (ectopic ACTH), or increased production of glu-
cocorticoids or mineralocorticoids by adrenal nodules. 
Adrenal nodules are increasingly identifi ed inciden-
tally during abdominal imaging performed for other 
reasons. 
 AdRenAl AnAtomy And develoPment 
 The normal adrenal glands weigh 6–11 g each. They 
are located above the kidneys and have their own blood 
supply. Arterial blood fl ows initially to the subcapsular 
region and then meanders from the outer cortical zona 
glomerulosa through the intermediate zona fasciculata 
to the inner zona reticularis and eventually to the adre-
nal medulla. The right suprarenal vein drains directly 
into the vena cava while the left suprarenal vein drains 
into the left renal vein. 
 During early embryonic development, the adrenals 
originate from the urogenital ridge and then separate 
from gonads and kidneys about the sixth week of gesta-
tion. Concordant with the time of sexual differentiation 
(seventh to ninth week of gestation, see  Chap. 7 ), the 
adrenal cortex starts to produce cortisol and the adre-
nal sex steroid precursor DHEA. The orphan nuclear 
receptors SF1 (steroidogenic factor 1) and DAX1 (dos-
age-sensitive sex reversal gene 1), among others, play 
a crucial role during this period of development, as 
they regulate a multitude of adrenal genes involved in 
steroidogenesis. 
 RegulAtoRy contRol 
of SteRoidogeneSiS 
 Production of glucocorticoids and adrenal androgens 
is under the control of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal (HPA) axis, whereas mineralocorticoids are 
regulated by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) 
system. 
 Glucocorticoid synthesis is under inhibitory feedback 
control by the hypothalamus and the pituitary  ( Fig. 5-2 ) . 
Hypothalamic release of corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) occurs in response to endogenous or exog-
enous stress. CRH stimulates the cleavage of the 241–
amino acid polypeptide pro opiomelanocortin (POMC) 
by pituitary-specifi c prohormone convertase, yielding 
ACTH. ACTH is released by the corticotrope cells of 
the anterior pituitary and acts as the pivotal regulator of 
cortisol synthesis, with additional short-term effects on 
mineralocorticoid and adrenal androgen synthesis. The 
release of CRH, and subsequently ACTH, occurs in a 
pulsatile fashion that follows a circadian rhythm under 
the control of the hypothalamus, specifi cally its supra-
chiasmatic nucleus (SCN), with additional regulation 
by a complex network of cell-specifi c clock genes. 
Refl ecting the pattern of ACTH secretion, adrenal cor-
tisol secretion exhibits a distinct circadian rhythm, with 
peak levels in the morning and low levels in the evening 
( Fig. 5-3 ) . 
 DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL CORTEX 
 CHAPTER 5 
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
101
CH3
HO
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
OH
OH
H
HO
H3C
H3C
H
HO
H3C
CH3
H3C
O
H
H
H
HO
H3C
H3C
H
HO
H3C
H3C
O
H
H
H
O
CH3
O
O
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
CH3
O
O
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
O
O
O
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
CH3
O
OH
O
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
OH
O
OH
O
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
O
H3C
HO
H3C
H
H
HO
O
HO
H3C
H
H
H
O
OH
HO
O
CHO
H3C
H
H
H
O
OH
HO
H
OH
O
O
OH
O
H3C
H3C
H
H
H
OH
O
H
H
H
H
H3C
H3C
H
O
H
H
O
H3C
H3C
H
O
H
H
O
H3C
H3C
H
OH
H
H
H
Pregnenolone
Cholesterol
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
Mineralocorticoid
precursors
Glucocorticoid
precursors
Androgens
Adrenal Androgen
precursors
Progesterone
HSD17B
HSD17B
SRD5A
HSD11B2
HSD11B1
17-hydroxy-
pregnenolone
17-hydroxy-
progesterone
(17OHP)
11-
Deoxycortisol
Cortisol
Andro-
stenedione
Testosterone
5-Dihydrotestosterone
Deoxycortico-
sterone
Cortico-
sterone
18OH-Cortico-
sterone
Aldosterone
Cortisone
DHEA
DHEAS
CYP11B1
CYP11A1
ADX
HSD3B2
HSD3B2
HSD3B2
CYP21A2
POR
CYP17A1
POR
CYP17A1
POR
CYP17A1
POR
SULT2A1
PAPSS2
CYP17A1
POR
CYP11B2
ADX
CYP11B2
ADX
CYP11B1
ADX
H6PDH
CYP21A2
POR
CYP11B2
ADX
Diagnostic tests assessing the HPA axis make use of 
the fact that it is regulated by negative feedback. Glu-
cocorticoid excess is diagnosed by employing a dexa-
methasone suppression test. Dexamethasone, a potent 
glucocorticoid, suppresses CRH/ACTH and, therefore, 
endogenous cortisol. Various versions of the dexa-
methasone suppression test are described in detail in 
Chap. 2. If cortisol production is autonomous (e.g., 
adrenal nodule), ACTH is already suppressed and dexa-
methasone has little additional effect. If cortisol pro-
duction is driven by an ACTH-producing pituitary 
adenoma, dexamethasone suppression is ineffective at 
low doses but usually induces suppression at high doses. 
If cortisol production is driven by an ectopic source of 
ACTH, the tumors are usually resistant to dexametha-
sone suppression. Thus, the dexamethasone suppression 
test is useful to establish the diagnosis of Cushing’s syn-
drome and to assist with the differential diagnosis of 
cortisol excess.
Conversely, to assess glucocorticoid deficiency, ACTH 
stimulation of cortisol production is used. The ACTH pep- 
tide contains 39 amino acids, but the first 24 are suf-
ficient to elicit a physiologic response. The standard 
ACTH stimulation test involves administration of 
cosyntropin (ACTH 1-24), 0.25 mg IM or IV, and col-
lection of blood samples at 0, 30, and 60 minutes for 
Figure 5-1
Adrenal steroidogenesis. CYP11A1, side chain cleavage 
enzyme; CYP17A1, 17α-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase; POR, P450 
oxidoreductase; ADX, adrenodoxin; HSD3B2, 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 2; CYP21A2, 21-hydroxylase; CYP11B1, 
11β-hydroxylase; CYP11B2, aldosterone synthase; HSD11B1, 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1; HSD11B2, 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; H6PDH, hexose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase; HSD17B, 17β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase; SRD5A, 5α-reductase; SULT2A1, DHEA 
sulfotransferase; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHEAS, 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; PAPSS2, PAPS synthase 
type 2.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
102
–
–
+
+
Hypothalamus
Circadian
rhythm
Stressors
(physical, emotional, including
fever, hypoglycemia, hypotension)
Anterior
pituitary
Adrenal Cortex
CRH
Neurotransmitters
Circulating
Cortisol
ACTH
Figure 5-2
Regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis. CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; ACTH, adreno-
corticotropic hormone.
cortisol. A normal response is defined as a cortisol level 
>20 μg/dL or an increment of >10 μg/dL over base-
line. A low-dose (1 μg cosyntropin IV) version of this 
test has been advocated to avoid overstimulation of 
the adrenal gland. Alternatively, an insulin tolerance 
test (ITT) can be used to assess adrenal insufficiency. 
It involves injection of insulin to induce hypoglyce-
mia, which represents a strong stress signal that triggers 
hypothalamic CRH release and activation of the entire 
HPA axis. The ITT involves administration of regular 
insulin 0.1 U/kg IV (dose should be lower if hypopi-
tuitarism is likely) and collection of blood samples at 
0, 30, 60, and 120 minutes for glucose, cortisol, and 
growth hormone (GH), if also assessing the GH axis. 
Oral or IV glucose is administered after the patient has 
achieved symptomatic hypoglycemia (usually glucose 
<40 mg/dL). A normal response is defined as a cortisol 
>20 μg/dL and GH >5.1 μg/L. The ITT requires care-
ful clinical monitoring and sequential measurements of 
glucose. It is contraindicated in patients with coronary 
disease, cerebrovascular disease, or seizure disorders, 
which has made the short cosyntropin test the com-
monly accepted first-line test.
Mineralocorticoid production is controlled by the 
RAA regulatory cycle, which is initiated by the release 
of renin from the juxtaglomerular cells in the kidney, 
resulting in cleavage of angiotensinogen to angiotensin I 
in the liver (Fig. 5-4). Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) cleaves angiotensin I to angiotensin II, which 
binds and activates the angiotensin II receptor type 1 
(AT1 receptor), resulting in increased aldosterone produc-
tion and vasoconstriction. Aldosterone enhances sodium 
retention and potassium excretion, and increases the 
300
400
500
600
0
100
200
22 23 24
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Clock time
Cortisol (nmol/L)
Nadir: 0015 h
MESOR: 5.25 µg/dL (145 nmol/L)
Acrophase: 0830 h
Figure 5-3
Physiologic cortisol circadian rhythm. Circulating corti-
sol concentrations drop under the rhythm-adjusted mean 
(MESOR) in the early evening hours, with nadir levels 
around midnight and a rise in the early morning hours; peak 
  
levels are observed ∼8:30 a.m. (acrophase). (Modified after 
Debono M et al: Modified-release hydrocortisone to provide 
circadian cortisol profiles. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:1548, 
2009.)
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
103
arterial perfusion pressure, which in turn regulates renin 
release. Because mineralocorticoid synthesis is primarily 
under the control of the RAA system, hypothalamic- 
pituitary damage does not significantly impact the capacity 
of the adrenal to synthesize aldosterone.
Similar to the HPA axis, the assessment of the RAA 
system can be used for diagnostic purposes. If mineralo-
corticoid excess is present, there is a counter-regulatory 
downregulation of plasma renin (see below for testing). 
Conversely, in mineralocorticoid deficiency, plasma 
renin is markedly increased. Physiologically, oral or IV 
sodium loading results in suppression of aldosterone, 
a response that is attenuated or absent in patients with 
autonomous mineralocorticoid excess.
Steroid Hormone Synthesis, 
Metabolism, and Action
ACTH stimulation is required for the initiation of ste-
roidogenesis. The ACTH receptor MC2R (melanocortin 
2 receptor) interacts with the MC2R-accessory protein 
MRAP, and the complex is transported to the adre-
nocortical cell membrane, where it binds to ACTH 
(Fig. 5-5). ACTH stimulation generates cyclic AMP 
(cAMP), which upregulates the protein kinase A 
(PKA) signaling pathway. PKA activation impacts ste-
roidogenesis in three distinct ways: (1) increases the 
import of cholesterol esters; (2) increases the activity 
of hormone-sensitive lipase, which cleaves cholesterol 
esters to cholesterol for import into the mitochondrion; 
and (3) increases the availability and phosphorylation of 
CREB (cAMP response element binding), a transcrip-
tion factor that enhances transcription of CYP11A1 and 
other enzymes required for glucocorticoid synthesis.
Adrenal steroidogenesis occurs in a zone-specific 
fashion, with mineralocorticoid synthesis occurring in 
the outer zona glomerulosa, glucocorticoid synthesis 
in the zona fasciculata, and adrenal androgen synthesis 
in the inner zona reticularis (Fig. 5-1). All steroidogenic 
pathways require cholesterol import into the mitochon-
drion, a process initiated by the action of the steroido-
genic acute regulatory (StAR) protein, which shuttles 
cholesterol from the outer to the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. The majority of steroidogenic enzymes 
are cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, which are 
either located in the mitochondrion (side chain cleav-
age enzyme, CYP11A1; 11β-hydroxylase, CYP11B1; 
aldosterone synthase, CYP11B2) or in the endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane (17α-hydroxylase, CYP17A1; 
21-hydroxylase, CYP21A2; aromatase, CYP19A1). 
These enzymes require electron donation via specific 
redox cofactor enzymes, P450 oxidoreductase (POR), 
and adrenodoxin/adrenodoxin reductase (ADX/ADR) 
for the microsomal and mitochondrial CYP enzymes, 
respectively. In addition, the short-chain dehydrogenase 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (3β-HSD2), 
Circulating blood volume
Kidney
Angiotensin II
Adrenal
Aldosterone  release
Activation of
Angiotensin II receptor
type 1 (AT1 receptor)
Angiotensin-
converting
enzyme (ACE)
Vasoconstriction
Renal sodium
retention (and
potassium excretion)
Renal perfusion
pressure
Juxtaglomerular
cells
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
 Renin  release
Figure 5-4
Regulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) system.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
104
also termed Δ4,Δ5 isomerase, plays a major role in adre-
nal steroidogenesis.
The cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme CYP11A1 
generates pregnenolone. Glucocorticoid synthesis requires 
conversion of pregnenolone to progesterone by 3β-HSD2, 
followed by conversion to 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
by CYP17A1, further hydroxylation at carbon 21 by 
21-hydroxylase, and eventually, 11β-hydroxylation by 
CYP11B1 to generate active cortisol (Fig. 5-1). Miner-
alocorticoid synthesis also requires progesterone, which 
is first converted to deoxycorticosterone by CYP21A2 
and then converted via corticosterone and 18-hydroxy-
corticosterone to aldosterone in three steps catalyzed by 
CYP11B2. For adrenal androgen synthesis, pregnenolone 
undergoes conversion by CYP17A1, which uniquely 
catalyzes two enzymatic reactions. Via its 17α-hydroxylase 
activity, CYP17A1 converts pregnenolone to 17-hydroxy­
pregnenolone, followed by generation of the universal 
sex steroid precursor DHEA via CYP17A1 17,20 lyase 
activity. The majority of DHEA is secreted by the adre-
nal in the form of its sulfate ester, DHEAS, generated by 
DHEA sulfotransferase (SULT2A1).
Following its release from the adrenal, cortisol 
circulates in the bloodstream mainly bound to corti-
sol-binding globulin (CBG) and to a lesser extent to 
albumin, with only a minor fraction circulating as free, 
unbound hormone. Free cortisol is thought to enter 
cells directly, not requiring active transport. In addi-
tion, in a multitude of peripheral target tissues of glu-
cocorticoid action, including adipose, liver, muscle, 
and brain, cortisol is generated from inactive cortisone 
within the cell by the enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1 (11β-HSD1) (Fig. 5-6). Thereby, 
11β-HSD1 functions as a tissue-specific prereceptor 
regulator of glucocorticoid action. For the conver-
sion of inactive cortisone to active cortisol, 11β-HSD1 
requires nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
[NADPH (reduced form)], which is provided by the 
enzyme hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (H6PDH). 
Like the catalytic domain of 11β-HSD1, H6PDH is 
located in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, 
and converts glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) to 6-phos-
phogluconate (6PGL), thereby regenerating NADP+ 
to NADPH, which drives the activation of cortisol 
from cortisone by 11β-HSD1.
In the cytosol of target cells, cortisol binds and 
activates the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which 
results in dissociation of heat shock proteins (HSPs) from 
the receptor and subsequent dimerization (Fig. 5-6). 
Cortisol-bound GR dimers translocate to the nucleus 
and activate glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) 
in the DNA sequence, thereby enhancing transcription 
P
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nucleus
Cytosol
Cell membrane
ACTH
StAR
CYP11A1
ACTH
Transcription of CYP11A1
and other steroidogenic
enzymes
Pregnenolone
CRE
CREB
CREB
Protein
Kinase A
Scavenger
receptor B1
Cholesterol
Cholesterol
ester
Hormone-
sensitive
lipase
Cholesterol
ester
Adrenal cortex cell
ATP
cAMP
Adenylate
cyclase
MC2R
MRAP
MRAP
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
C
Gsα
γ
C
C
β
Figure 5-5
ACTH effects on adrenal steroidogenesis. ACTH, adreno-
corticotropic hormone; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CRE, 
cAMP response element; CREB, cAMP response element 
binding; MRAP, MC2R-accessory protein; StAR, steroido-
genic acute regulatory (protein).
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
105
Nucleus
No Transcription
GR Transrepression
GR Transactivation
Nucleus
or
NADPH
NADP+
11β-HSD1
H6PDH
Cytosol
AP-1
Endoplasmic
reticulum
G6P
6PGL
Cortisone
Cortisol
Transcription
Coactivator
complex
Cortisol
HSP
GR
GR
GR GR
GRE
Glucocorticoid target cell
GR
of glucocorticoid-regulated genes (GR transactivation). 
However, cortisol-bound GR can also form heterodi-
mers with transcription factors such as AP-1 or NF-κB, 
resulting in transrepression of proinflammatory genes, 
a mechanism of major importance for the anti-inflam-
matory action of glucocorticoids. It is important to note 
that corticosterone also exerts glucocorticoid activity, 
albeit much weaker than cortisol itself. However, in 
rodents corticosterone is the major glucocorticoid and 
in patients with 17-hydroxylase deficiency, lack of cor-
tisol can be compensated for by higher concentrations 
of corticosterone that accumulates as a consequence of 
the enzymatic block.
Cortisol is inactivated to cortisone by the microsomal 
enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11β-
HSD2) (Fig. 5-7), mainly in the kidney, but also in the 
colon, salivary glands, and other target tissues. Cortisol 
and aldosterone bind the mineralocorticoid receptor 
(MR) with equal affinity; however, cortisol circulates in 
the bloodstream at about a thousandfold higher concen-
tration. Thus, only rapid inactivation of cortisol to cor-
tisone by 11β-HSD2 prevents MR activation by excess 
cortisol, thereby acting as a tissue-specific modulator 
of the MR pathway. In addition to cortisol and aldo-
sterone, deoxycorticosterone (DOC) (Fig. 5-1) also 
exerts mineralocorticoid activity. DOC accumulation 
due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency or due to tumor-
related excess production can result in mineralocorti-
coid excess.
Analogous to cortisol action via the GR, aldoste-
rone (or cortisol) binding to the MR dissociates the 
HSP–receptor complex, allowing homodimerization 
of the MR, and translocation of the hormone-bound 
MR dimer to the nucleus (Fig. 5-7). The activated MR 
enhances transcription of the epithelial sodium chan-
nel (ENaC) and serum glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 
1 (SGK-1). In the cytosol, interaction of ENaC with 
Nedd4 prevents cell surface expression of ENaC. How-
ever, SGK-1 phosphorylates serine residues within the 
Nedd4 protein, reduces the interaction between Nedd4 
and ENaC, and consequently enhances the trafficking 
of ENaC to the cell surface, where it mediates sodium 
retention.
Cushing’S Syndrome
(See also Chap. 2) Cushing’s syndrome reflects a con-
stellation of clinical features that result from chronic 
exposure to excess glucocorticoids of any etiology. 
The disorder can be ACTH dependent (e.g., pituitary 
corticotrope adenoma, ectopic secretion of ACTH by 
nonpituitary tumor) or ACTH independent (e.g., adre-
nocortical adenoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, nodular 
adrenal hyperplasia), as well as iatrogenic (e.g., admin-
istration of exogenous glucocorticoids to treat various 
inflammatory conditions). The term Cushing’s disease 
refers specifically to Cushing’s syndrome caused by a 
pituitary corticotrope adenoma.
Figure 5-6
Prereceptor activation of cortisol and glucocorticoid 
receptor (GR) action. GRE, glucocorticoid response element; 
HSP, heat shock protein; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (reduced form).
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
106
Epidemiology
Cushing’s syndrome is generally considered a rare dis-
ease. It occurs with an incidence of 1–2 per 100,000 
population per year. However, it is debated whether 
mild cortisol excess may be more prevalent among patients 
with several features of Cushing’s such as centripetal obe-
sity, type 2 diabetes, and osteoporotic vertebral fractures, 
recognizing that these are relatively nonspecific and com-
mon in the population.
In the overwhelming majority of patients, Cushing’s 
syndrome is caused by an ACTH-producing cortico-
trope adenoma of the pituitary (Table 5-1), as initially 
described by Harvey Cushing in 1912. Cushing’s dis-
ease more frequently affects women, with the excep-
tion of prepubertal cases, where it is more common in 
boys. By contrast, ectopic ACTH syndrome is more 
frequently identified in men. Only 10% of patients 
with Cushing’s syndrome have a primary, adrenal cause 
of their disease (e.g., autonomous cortisol excess inde-
pendent of ACTH), and most of these patients are 
women. Overall, the medical use of glucocorticoids for 
immunosuppression, or for the treatment of inflamma-
tory disorders, is the most common cause of Cushing’s 
syndrome.
Nucleus
ER Lumen
NADH
Cortisone
Blood
(basal site)
Lumen
(apical site)
11β_HSD2
NAD+
Cortisol
Aldosterone
Cytosol
Transcription
of
HSP
ENaC
ENaC
ENaC
Na+
Na+
ENaC
MR
MR
MR
MR
MR
MR
MR
MR
HRE
and
ENaC
Nedd4
Nedd4
SGK-1
SGK-1
Kidney distal convoluted tubule cell
Figure 5-7
Prereceptor inactivation of cortisol and mineralocorticoid receptor action.
Table 5-1
Causes of Cushing’s Syndrome
Causes of Cushing’s 
Syndrome
Female:Male 
Ratio
%
ACTH-Dependent Cushing’s
90
Cushing’s disease (= ACTH-pro-
ducing pituitary adenoma)
4:1
75
Ectopic ACTH syndrome (due to 
ACTH secretion by bronchial 
or pancreatic carcinoid tumors, 
small cell lung cancer, medullary 
thyroid carcinoma, pheochro-
mocytoma and others)
1:1
15
ACTH-Independent Cushing’s
4:1
10
Adrenocortical adenoma
5–10
Adrenocortical carcinoma
1%
Rare causes: PPNAD, primary 
pigmented nodular adrenal  
disease; AIMAH, ACTH-
independent massive adrenal 
hyperplasia; McCune-Albright 
syndrome
<1%
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AIMAH, ACTH-
independent macronodular hyperplasia; PPNAD, primary pigmented 
nodular adrenal disease.
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
107
Etiology
In at least 90% of patients with Cushing’s disease, ACTH 
excess is caused by a corticotrope pituitary microad-
enoma, often only a few millimeters in diameter. Pitu-
itary macroadenomas (i.e., tumors >1 cm in size), are 
found in only 5–10% of patients. Pituitary corticotrope 
adenomas usually occur sporadically, but very rarely can 
be found in the context of multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 1 (MEN1) (Chap. 23).
Ectopic ACTH production is predominantly caused 
by occult carcinoid tumors, most frequently in the lung, 
but also in thymus or pancreas. Because of their small 
size, these tumors are often difficult to locate. Advanced 
small cell lung cancer can cause ectopic ACTH produc-
tion. In rare cases, ectopic ACTH production has been 
found to originate from medullary thyroid carcinoma or 
pheochromocytoma, the latter co-secreting catechol-
amines and ACTH.
The majority of patients with ACTH-independent cor-
tisol excess harbor a cortisol-producing adrenal adenoma. 
Adrenocortical carcinomas may also cause ACTH-
independent disease and are often large, with excess 
production of several corticosteroid classes. A rare but 
notable cause of adrenal cortisol excess is ACTH-inde-
pendent macronodular hyperplasia (AIMAH), gener-
ally characterized by ectopic expression of receptors 
not usually found in the adrenal, including receptors for 
luteinizing hormone, vasopressin, serotonin, interleu-
kin-1, or gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP), the cause of 
food-dependent Cushing’s. Activation of these recep-
tors results in upregulation of PKA signaling, as physio-
logically occurs with ACTH, with a subsequent increase 
in cortisol production. Mutations in a regulatory sub-
unit of PKA (PRKAR1A) are found in patients with 
primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease (PPNAD) 
as part of Carney’s complex, an autosomal dominant 
multiple neoplasia condition associated with cardiac 
myxomas, hyperlentiginosis, Sertoli’s cell tumors, and 
PPNAD. PPNAD can present as micronodular or mac-
ronodular hyperplasia, or both. Another rare cause of 
ACTH-independent Cushing’s is McCune-Albright syn-
drome, also associated with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, 
unilateral café-au-lait spots, and precocious puberty. 
McCune-Albright syndrome is caused by activating 
mutations in GNAS-1 (guanine nucleotide binding pro-
tein alpha stimulating activity polypeptide 1), and such 
mutations have also been found in bilateral macronodu-
lar hyperplasia without other McCune-Albright features 
(Table 5-1; see also Chap. 29).
Clinical manifestations
Glucocorticoids affect almost all cells of the body and 
thus signs of cortisol excess impact multiple physi-
ologic systems (Table 5-2), with upregulation of 
Table 5-2
Signs and Symptoms of Cushing’s Syndrome
Body 
Compartment/
System
Signs and Symptoms
Body fat
Weight gain, central obesity, 
rounded face, fat pad on back of 
neck (“buffalo hump”)
Skin
Facial plethora, thin and brittle skin, 
easy bruising, broad and purple 
stretch marks, acne, hirsutism
Bone
Osteopenia, osteoporosis (vertebral 
fractures), decreased linear growth 
in children
Muscle
Weakness, proximal myopathy 
(prominent atrophy of gluteal and 
upper leg muscles)
Cardiovascular 
system
Hypertension, hypokalemia, edema, 
atherosclerosis
Metabolism
Glucose intolerance/diabetes,  
dyslipidemia
Reproductive  
system
Decreased libido, in women amen-
orrhea (due to cortisol-mediated 
inhibition of gonadotropin release)
Central nervous 
system
Irritability, emotional lability, depres-
sion, sometimes cognitive defects; 
in severe cases, paranoid psychosis
Blood and immune 
system
Increased susceptibility to infec-
tions, increased white blood cell 
count, eosinopenia, hypercoagula-
tion with increased risk of deep 
vein thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism
gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and protein catabolism causing 
the most prominent features. In addition, excess gluco-
corticoid secretion overcomes the ability of 11β-HSD2 
to rapidly inactivate cortisol to cortisone in the kidney, 
thereby exerting mineralocorticoid actions, manifest as 
diastolic hypertension, hypokalemia, and edema. Excess 
glucocorticoids also interfere with central regulatory sys-
tems, leading to suppression of gonadotropins with sub-
sequent hypogonadism and amenorrhea, and suppression 
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, resulting in 
decreased TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) secretion.
The majority of clinical signs and symptoms observed in 
Cushing’s syndrome are relatively nonspecific and include 
features such as obesity, diabetes, diastolic hypertension, 
hirsutism, and depression that are commonly found in 
patients who do not have Cushing’s. Therefore, careful 
clinical assessment is an important aspect of evaluating 
suspected cases. A diagnosis of Cushing’s should be con-
sidered when several clinical features are found in the 
same patient, in particular when more specific features 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
108
are found. These include fragility of the skin, with easy 
bruising and broad (>1 cm), purplish striae (Fig. 5-8), 
and signs of proximal myopathy, which becomes most 
obvious when trying to stand up from a chair without 
the use of hands or when climbing stairs. Clinical mani-
festations of Cushing’s do not differ substantially among 
the different causes of Cushing’s. In ectopic ACTH 
syndrome, hyperpigmentation of the knuckles, scars, or 
skin areas exposed to increased friction can be observed 
(Fig. 5-8), and is caused by stimulatory effects of excess 
ACTH and other POMC cleavage products on mela-
nocyte pigment production. Furthermore, patients with 
ectopic ACTH syndrome, and some with adrenocor-
tical carcinoma as the cause of Cushing’s, may have a 
more brisk onset and rapid progression of clinical signs 
and symptoms.
Patients with Cushing’s syndrome can be acutely 
endangered by deep vein thrombosis, with subsequent 
pulmonary embolism due to a hypercoagulable state 
associated with Cushing’s. The majority of patients 
also experience psychiatric symptoms, mostly in the 
form of anxiety or depression, but acute paranoid or 
depressive psychosis may also occur. Even after cure, 
long-term health may be affected by an increased risk 
A
B
C
D
of cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis with verte-
bral fractures, depending on the duration and degree of 
exposure to significant cortisol excess.
Diagnosis
The most important first step in the management of 
patients with suspected Cushing’s syndrome is to estab-
lish the correct diagnosis. Most mistakes in clinical man-
agement, leading to unnecessary imaging or surgery, are 
made because the diagnostic protocol is not followed 
(Fig. 5-9). This protocol requires establishing the diag-
nosis of Cushing’s beyond doubt prior to employing 
any tests used for the differential diagnosis of the condi-
tion. In principle, after excluding exogenous glucocor-
ticoid use as the cause of clinical signs and symptoms, 
suspected cases should be tested if there are multiple and 
progressive features of Cushing’s, particularly features 
with a potentially higher discriminatory value. Exclu-
sion of Cushing’s is also indicated in patients with inci-
dentally discovered adrenal masses.
A diagnosis of Cushing’s can be considered as estab-
lished if the results of several tests are consistently sug-
gestive of Cushing’s. These tests may include increased 
Figure 5-8
Clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome. A. Note cen-
tral obesity and broad, purple stretch marks (B, close-up). 
C. Note thin and brittle skin in an elderly patient with Cushing’s. 
D. Hyperpigmentation of the knuckles in a patient with ecto-
pic ACTH excess.
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
109
24-hour urinary free cortisol excretion in three sepa-
rate collections, failure to appropriately suppress morning 
cortisol after overnight exposure to dexamethasone, 
and evidence of loss of diurnal cortisol secretion with 
high levels at midnight, the time of the physiologically 
lowest secretion (Fig. 5-9). Factors potentially affect-
ing the outcome of these diagnostic tests have to be 
excluded such as incomplete 24-hour urine collec-
tion or rapid inactivation of dexamethasone due to 
concurrent intake of CYP3A4-inducing drugs (e.g., 
antiepileptics, rifampicin). Concurrent intake of oral 
contraceptives that raise CBG and thus total cortisol 
can cause failure to suppress after dexamethasone. If 
in doubt, testing should be repeated after 4–6 weeks 
off estrogens. Patients with pseudo-Cushing states, 
i.e., alcohol-related, and those with cyclic Cush-
ing’s may require further testing to safely confirm or 
exclude the diagnosis of Cushing’s. In addition, the 
biochemical assays employed can affect the test results, 
with specificity representing a common problem with 
antibody-based assays for the measurement of urinary 
free cortisol. These assays have been greatly improved 
by the introduction of highly specific tandem mass 
spectrometry.
Neg.
Adrenal tumor
workup
• 24-h urinary free cortisol excretion increased above normal (3x)
• Dexamethasone overnight test (Plasma cortisol >50 nmol/L at 8-9
 a.m. after 1 mg dexamethasone at 11 p.m.)
• Midnight plasma (or salivary) cortisol >130 nmol/L
 If further confirmation needed/desired:
• Low dose DEX test (Plasma cortisol >50 nmol/L after 0.5 mg
 dexamethasone q6h for 2 days)
Clinical suspicion of Cushing’s
(Central adiposity, proximal myopathy, striae, amenorrhea, hirsutism,
impaired glucose tolerance, diastolic hypertension, and osteoporosis)
Screening/confirmation of diagnosis
Positive
Negative
Differential diagnosis 1: Plasma ACTH
ACTH normal or high
>15 pg/mL
CRH test and high-
dose DEX positive
ACTH suppressed
to <5 pg/mL
ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s
ACTH-independent
Cushing’s
Bilateral
micronodular
or
macronodular
adrenal
hyperplasia
Bilateral
adrenal-
ectomy
Unilateral
adrenal-
ectomy
Unilateral
adrenal mass
  
Differential diagnosis 2
• MRI pituitary
• CRH test (ACTH increase >40% at
 15-30 min + cortisol increase >20%
 at 45-60 min after CRH 100 µg IV)
• High dose DEX test
 (Cortisol suppression >50% after
 q6h 2 mg DEX for 2 days)
Inferior petrosal
sinus sampling
(petrosal/peripheral
ACTH ratio >2 at
baseline, >3  at 2-5 min
after CRH 100 µg i.v.)
Locate and
remove
ectopic
ACTH
source
Ectopic ACTH
production
Cushing’s disease
Trans-
sphenoidal
pituitary
surgery
CRH test and high-
dose DEX negative
Equivocal
results
Pos.
Neg.
ALGORITHM FOR MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH SUSPECTED CUSHING’S SYNDROME
Unenhanced CT
adrenals
Figure 5-9
Management of the patient with suspected Cushing’s syndrome. CHR, corticotropin- releasing hormone; DEX, 
dexamethasone.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
110
Differential diagnosis
The evaluation of patients with confirmed Cushing’s 
should be carried out by an endocrinologist and begins 
with the differential diagnosis of ACTH-dependent and 
ACTH-independent cortisol excess (Fig. 5-9). Gen-
erally, plasma ACTH levels are suppressed in cases of 
autonomous adrenal cortisol excess, as a consequence 
of enhanced negative feedback to the hypothalamus and 
pituitary. By contrast, patients with ACTH-dependent 
Cushing’s have normal or increased plasma ACTH, 
with very high levels being found in some patients with 
ectopic ACTH syndrome. Importantly, imaging should 
only be used after it is established whether the cortisol 
excess is ACTH dependent or ACTH independent, as 
nodules in the pituitary or the adrenal are a common 
finding in the general population. In patients with con-
firmed ACTH-independent excess, adrenal imaging is 
indicated (Fig. 5-10), preferably using an unenhanced 
CT scan. This allows assessment of adrenal morphology 
and determination of tumor density in Hounsfield Units 
A
C
B
D
Figure 5-10
Adrenal imaging in Cushing’s syndrome. A. Adrenal CT 
showing normal bilateral adrenal morphology (arrows). 
B. CT scan depicting a right adrenocortical adenoma (arrow)
causing Cushing’s syndrome. C. MRI showing bilateral adrenal
hyperplasia due to excess ACTH stimulation in Cushing’s dis-
ease. D. MRI showing bilateral macronodular hyperplasia 
causing Cushing’s syndrome.
(HU), which helps to distinguish between benign and 
malignant adrenal lesions.
For ACTH-dependent cortisol excess (Chap. 2), 
an MRI of the pituitary is the investigation of choice, 
but it may not show an abnormality in up to 40% of 
cases because small tumors are below the sensitivity 
of detection. Characteristically, pituitary corticotrope 
adenomas fail to enhance following gadolinium admin-
istration on T1-weighted MRI images. In all cases of 
confirmed ACTH-dependent Cushing’s, further tests 
are required for the differential diagnosis of pituitary 
Cushing’s disease and ectopic ACTH syndrome. These 
tests exploit the fact that most pituitary corticotrope 
adenomas still display regulatory features, including 
residual ACTH suppression by high-dose glucocor-
ticoids and CRH responsiveness. In contrast, ectopic 
sources of ACTH are typically resistant to dexametha-
sone suppression and unresponsive to CRH (Fig. 5-9). 
However, it should be noted that a small minority of 
ectopic ACTH-producing tumors exhibit dynamic 
responses similar to pituitary corticotrope tumors. If the 
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
111
two tests show discordant results, or if there is any other 
reason for doubt, the differential diagnosis can be fur-
ther clarified by performing bilateral inferior petrosal 
sinus sampling (IPSS) with concurrent blood sampling 
for ACTH in the right and left inferior petrosal sinus 
and a peripheral vein. An increased central/peripheral 
plasma ACTH ratio >2 at baseline and >3 after CRH 
injection is indicative of Cushing’s disease (Fig. 5-9), 
with very high sensitivity and specificity. Of note, the 
results of the IPSS cannot be reliably used for lateral-
ization (i.e., prediction of the location of the tumor 
within the pituitary), because there is broad interindi-
vidual variability in the venous drainage of the pituitary 
region. Importantly, no cortisol-lowering agents should 
be used prior to IPSS.
If the differential diagnostic testing indicates ectopic 
ACTH syndrome, then further imaging should include 
high-resolution, fine-cut CT scanning of the chest and 
abdomen for scrutiny of the lung, thymus, and pancreas. 
If no lesions are identified, an MRI of the chest can be 
considered as carcinoid tumors usually show high sig-
nal intensity on T2-weighted images. Furthermore, 
octreotide scintigraphy can be helpful in some cases as 
ectopic ACTH-producing tumors often express soma-
tostatin receptors. Depending on the suspected cause, 
patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome should also 
undergo blood sampling for fasting gut hormones, chro-
mogranin A, calcitonin, and biochemical exclusion of 
pheochromocytoma.
Treatment	
Cushing’s Syndrome
Overt Cushing’s is associated with a poor prognosis 
if left untreated. In ACTH-independent disease, treat-
ment consists of surgical removal of the adrenal tumor. 
For smaller tumors, a minimally invasive approach can 
be employed, whereas for larger tumors and those sus-
pected of malignancy, an open approach is preferred.
In Cushing’s disease, the treatment of choice is selec-
tive removal of the pituitary corticotrope tumor, usu-
ally via a transsphenoidal approach. This results in an 
initial cure rate of 70–80% when performed by a highly 
experienced surgeon. However, even after initial remis-
sion following surgery, long-term follow-up is impor-
tant as late relapse occurs in a significant number of 
patients. If pituitary disease recurs, there are several 
options, including second surgery, radiotherapy, stereo-
tactic radiosurgery, and bilateral adrenalectomy. These 
options need to be applied in a highly individualized 
fashion.
In some with very severe, overt Cushing’s (e.g., dif-
ficult to control hypokalemic hypertension or acute 
psychosis), it may be necessary to introduce medical 
therapy to rapidly control the cortisol excess during the
period leading up to surgery. Similarly, patients with 
metastasized, glucocorticoid-producing carcinomas may 
require long-term antiglucocorticoid drug treatment. 
In case of ectopic ACTH syndrome, in which the tumor 
cannot be located, one must carefully weigh whether 
drug treatment or bilateral adrenalectomy is the most 
appropriate choice, with the latter facilitating immediate 
cure but requiring life-long corticosteroid replacement. 
In this instance, it is paramount to ensure regular imaging 
follow-up for identification of the ectopic ACTH source.
Oral agents with established efficacy in Cushing’s 
syndrome are metyrapone and ketoconazole. Metyra-
pone inhibits cortisol synthesis at the level of 11β-
hydroxylase (Fig. 5-1), whereas the antimycotic drug 
ketoconazole inhibits the early steps of steroido-
genesis. Typical starting doses are 500 mg  tid for 
metyrapone (maximum dose, 6 g) and 200 mg tid for 
ketoconazole (maximum dose, 1200 mg). Mitotane, 
a derivative of the insecticide o,p’DDD, is an adreno-
lytic agent that is also effective for reducing cortisol. 
Because of its side effect profile, it is most commonly 
used in the context of adrenocortical carcinoma, but 
low-dose treatment (500–1000 mg per day) has also 
been used in benign Cushing’s. In severe cases of cor-
tisol excess, etomidate can be used to lower cortisol. It 
is administered by continuous IV infusion in low, non-
anesthetic doses.
After the successful removal of an ACTH- or cortisol-
producing tumor, the HPA axis will remain suppressed. 
Thus, hydrocortisone replacement needs to be initi-
ated at the time of surgery and slowly tapered following 
recovery, to allow physiologic adaptation to normal cor-
tisol levels. Depending on degree and duration of cor-
tisol excess, the HPA axis may require many months or 
even years to resume normal function.
Mineralocorticoid Excess
Epidemiology
Following the first description of a patient with an 
aldosterone-producing adrenal adenoma (Conn’s syndrome), 
mineralocorticoid excess was thought to represent a rare 
cause of hypertension. However, in studies systemati-
cally screening all patients with hypertension, a much 
higher prevalence is now recognized, ranging from 5 to 
12%. The prevalence is higher when patients are prese-
lected for hypokalemic hypertension.
Etiology
The most common cause of mineralocorticoid excess is 
primary hyperaldosteronism, reflecting excess produc-
tion of aldosterone by the adrenal zona glomerulosa. 
Bilateral micronodular hyperplasia is somewhat more 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
112
common than unilateral adrenal adenomas (Table 5-3). 
Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia is usually micronodular but 
can also contain larger nodules that might be mistaken 
for a unilateral adenoma. In rare instances, primary 
hyperaldosteronism is caused by an adrenocortical car-
cinoma. Carcinomas should be considered in younger 
patients and in those with larger tumors, as benign aldo-
sterone-producing adenomas usually measure <1 cm in 
diameter.
A rare cause of aldosterone excess is glucocorticoid-
remediable aldosteronism (GRA), which is caused by 
a chimeric gene resulting from cross-over of promoter 
sequences between the CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 genes 
that are involved in glucocorticoid and mineralocorti-
coid synthesis, respectively (Fig. 5-1). This rearrange-
ment brings CYP11B2 under the control of ACTH 
receptor signaling; consequently, aldosterone produc-
tion is regulated by ACTH rather than by renin. The 
family history can be helpful as there may be evidence 
for dominant transmission of hypertension. Recognition 
of the disorder is important because it can be associ-
ated with early-onset hypertension and strokes. In addi-
tion, glucocorticoid suppression can reduce aldosterone 
production.
Other rare causes of mineralocorticoid excess are 
listed in Table 5-3. An important cause is excess bind-
ing and activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor 
by a steroid other than aldosterone. Cortisol acts as a 
Table 5-3
Causes of Mineralocorticoid Excess
Causes of Mineralocorticoid Excess
Mechanism
%
Primary Hyperaldosteronism
Adrenal (Conn’s) adenoma
Autonomous aldosterone excess
40
Bilateral (micronodular) adrenal hyperplasia
Autonomous aldosterone excess
60
Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldoste-
ronism (dexamethasone-suppressible 
hyperaldosteronism)
Crossover between the CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 genes results in 
ACTH-driven aldosterone production
<1
Other Causes (Rare)
<1
Syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess (AME)
Mutations in HSD11B2 result in lack of renal activation of cortisol to 
cortisone, leading to excess activation of the MR by cortisol
Cushing’s syndrome
Cortisol excess overcomes the capacity of HSD11B2 to inactivate 
cortisol to cortisone, consequently flooding the MR
Glucocorticoid resistance
Upregulation of cortisol production due to GR mutations results in 
flooding of the MR by cortisol
Adrenocortical carcinoma
Autonomous aldosterone and/or DOC excess
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Accumulation of DOC due to mutations in CYP11B1 or CYP17A1
Progesterone-induced hypertension
Progesterone acts as an abnormal ligand due to mutations in the MR 
gene
Liddle’s syndrome
Mutant ENaC β or γ subunits resulting in reduced degradation of 
ENaC keeping the membrane channel in open conformation for  
longer, enhancing mineralocorticoid action
Abbreviations: DOC, deoxycorticosterone; ENaC, epithelial sodium channel; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor.
potent mineralocorticoid if it escapes efficient inactiva-
tion to cortisone by 11β-HSD2 in the kidney (Fig. 5-7). 
This can be caused by inactivating mutations in the 
HSD11B2 gene resulting in the syndrome of appar-
ent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) that characteristi-
cally manifests with severe hypokalemic hypertension 
in childhood. However, milder mutations may cause 
normokalemic hypertension manifesting in adulthood 
(Type II AME). Inhibition of 11β-HSD2 by excess 
licorice ingestion also results in hypokalemic hyperten-
sion, as does overwhelming of 11β-HSD2 conversion 
capacity by cortisol excess in Cushing’s syndrome. Des-
oxycorticosterone (DOC) also binds and activates the 
mineralocorticoid receptor and can cause hypertension 
if its circulating concentrations are increased. This can 
arise through autonomous DOC secretion by an adre-
nocortical carcinoma, but also when DOC accumu-
lates as a consequence of an adrenal enzymatic block, as 
seen in congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to CYP11B1 
(11β-hydroxylase) or CYP17A1 (17α-hdyroxylase) 
deficiency (Fig. 5-1). Progesterone can cause hypokale-
mic hypertension in rare individuals who harbor a min-
eralocorticoid receptor mutation that enhances binding 
and activation by progesterone; physiologically, proges-
terone normally exerts antimineralocorticoid activity. 
Finally, excess mineralocorticoid activity can be caused 
by mutations in the β or γ subunits of the ENaC, dis-
rupting its interaction with Nedd4 (Fig. 5-7), and 
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
113
thereby decreasing receptor internalization and degrada-
tion. The constitutively active ENaC drives hypokale-
mic hypertension, resulting in an autosomal dominant 
disorder termed Liddle’s syndrome.
Clinical manifestations
Excess activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor leads 
to potassium depletion and increased sodium reten-
tion, with the latter causing an expansion of extracel-
lular and plasma volume. Increased ENaC activity also 
results in hydrogen depletion that can cause metabolic 
alkalosis. Aldosterone also has direct effects on the vas-
cular system, where it increases cardiac remodeling and 
decreases compliance. Aldosterone excess may cause 
direct damage to the myocardium and the kidney glom-
eruli, in addition to secondary damage due to systemic 
hypertension.
The clinical hallmark of mineralocorticoid excess is 
hypokalemic hypertension; serum sodium tends to be 
normal due to the concurrent fluid retention, which in 
some cases can lead to peripheral edema. Hypokalemia 
can be exacerbated by thiazide drug treatment, which 
leads to increased delivery of sodium to the distal renal 
tubule, thereby driving potassium excretion. Severe 
hypokalemia can be associated with muscle weakness, 
overt proximal myopathy, or even hypokalemic paraly-
sis. Severe alkalosis contributes to muscle cramps and, in 
severe cases, can cause tetany.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic screening for mineralocorticoid excess is 
not currently recommended for all patients with hyper-
tension, but should be restricted to those who exhibit 
hypertension associated with drug resistance, hypoka-
lemia, an adrenal mass, or hypertension before the age 
of 40 years (Fig. 5-11). The accepted screening test is 
concurrent measurement of plasma renin and aldoste-
rone with subsequent calculation of the aldosterone-
renin ratio (ARR) (Fig. 5-11); serum potassium needs 
to be normalized prior to testing. Stopping antihyper-
tensive medication can be cumbersome, particularly in 
patients with severe hypertension. Thus, for practical 
purposes, in the first instance the patient can remain on 
the usual antihypertensive medications, with the excep-
tion that mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists need 
to be ceased at least 4 weeks prior to ARR measure-
ment. The remaining antihypertensive drugs usually 
do not affect the outcome of ARR testing, except that 
β-blocker treatment can cause false-positive results and 
ACE/AT1R inhibitors can cause false-negative results 
in milder cases (Table 5-4).
ARR screening is positive if the ratio is greater than 
750 pmol/L:ng/mL per hour, with a concurrently high 
normal or increased aldosterone (Fig. 5-11). If one relies 
on the ARR only, the likelihood of a false-positive 
ARR becomes greater when renin levels are very low. 
The characteristics of the biochemical assays are also 
important. Some labs measure plasma renin activity 
whereas others measure plasma renin concentrations. 
Antibody-based assays for the measurement of serum 
aldosterone lack the reliability of tandem mass spectrom-
etry assays, but these are not yet ubiquitously available.
Diagnostic confirmation of mineralocorticoid excess 
in a patient with a positive ARR screening result should 
be undertaken by an endocrinologist as the tests lack 
optimized validation. The most straightforward is the 
saline infusion test, which involves the IV administra-
tion of 2 L of physiologic saline over a 4-hour period. 
Failure of aldosterone to suppress below 140 pmol/L 
(5 ng/dL) is indicative of autonomous mineralocorti-
coid excess. Alternative tests are the oral sodium loading 
test (300 mmol NaCl/d for 3 days) or the fludrocorti-
sone suppression test (0.1 mg q6h with 30 mmol NaCl 
q8h for 4 days); the latter can be difficult because of the 
risk of profound hypokalemia and increased hyperten-
sion. In patients with overt hypokalemic hypertension, 
strongly positive ARR, and concurrently increased 
aldosterone levels, confirmatory testing is usually not 
necessary.
Differential diagnosis and treatment
After the diagnosis of hyperaldosteronism is established, 
the next step is to use adrenal imaging to further assess 
the cause. Fine-cut CT scanning of the adrenal region 
is the method of choice as it provides excellent visual-
ization of adrenal morphology. CT will readily iden-
tify larger tumors suspicious of malignancy but may 
miss lesions smaller than 5 mm. The differentiation 
between bilateral micronodular hyperplasia and a uni-
lateral adenoma is only required if a surgical approach 
is feasible and desired. Consequently, selective adrenal 
vein sampling (AVS) should only be carried out in sur-
gical candidates with either no obvious lesion on CT 
or evidence of a unilateral lesion in patients older than 
40 years, as the latter patients have a high likelihood 
of harboring a coincidental, endocrine inactive adrenal 
adenoma (Fig. 5-11). AVS is used to compare aldoste-
rone levels in the inferior vena cava and between the 
right and left adrenal veins. AVS requires concurrent 
measurement of cortisol to document correct placement 
of the catheter in the adrenal veins and should dem-
onstrate a cortisol gradient >3 between the vena cava 
and each adrenal vein. Lateralization is confirmed by an 
aldosterone/cortisol ratio that is at least twofold higher 
on one side than the other. AVS is a complex proce-
dure that requires a highly skilled interventional radiol-
ogist. Even then, the right adrenal vein can be difficult 
to cannulate correctly, which invalidates the proce-
dure. There is also no agreement as to whether the two 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
114
adrenal veins should be cannulated simultaneously or 
successively and whether ACTH stimulation enhances 
the diagnostic value of AVS.
Patients younger than 40 years with confirmed min-
eralocorticoid excess and a unilateral lesion can go 
straight to surgery, which is also indicated in patients 
with confirmed lateralization documented by a valid 
AVS procedure. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the pre-
ferred approach. Patients who are not surgical candi-
dates, or with evidence of bilateral hyperplasia based on 
CT or AVS, should be treated medically (Fig. 5-11). 
Medical treatment, which can also be considered prior to 
surgery to avoid postsurgical hypoaldosteronism, consists 
primarily of the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist 
spironolactone. It can be started at 12.5–50 mg bid and 
titrated up to a maximum of 400 mg/d to control blood 
pressure and normalize potassium. Side effects include 
menstrual irregularity, decreased libido, and gyneco-
mastia. The more selective MR antagonist eplerenone 
can also be used. Doses start at 25 mg bid and it can 
be titrated up to 200 mg/d. Another useful drug is the 
sodium channel blocker amiloride (5–10 mg/bid).
In patients with normal adrenal morphology 
and family history of early-onset, severe hyperten-
sion, a diagnosis of GRA should be considered and 
can be evaluated using genetic testing. Treatment of 
Unilateral
adrenalectomy
Drug treatment
(MR antagonists,
amiloride)
Dexamethasone
0.125-0.5 mg/d
Negative
Negative
• Severe hypertension (>3 BP drugs, drug resistant) or
• Hypokalemia (spontaneous or diuretic-induced) or
• Adrenal mass or
• Family history of early-onset hypertension or cerebrovascular
 events at <40 years of age
 
Screening
Measurement of aldosterone-renin ratio (ARR) on current
blood pressure medication (stop spironolactone for 4 wks) and
with hypokalemia corrected (ARR screen positive if  ARR >750
pmol/L: ng/mL/h and aldosterone >450 pmol/L) (consider
repeat off β-blockers for 2 wks if results are equivocal)
E.g., saline infusion test (2 liters physiologic saline over 4 h IV),
oral sodium loading, fludrocortisone suppression
Adrenal
vein sampling
Bilateral
micronodular
hyperplasia
Normal
adrenal
morphology
24-h urinary steroid profile
(GC/MS)
   
 
Diagnostic for
• Apparent mineralocorti-
 coid excess (HSD11B2 def.)
• CAH (CYP11B1
 or CYP17A1 def.)
• Adrenal tumor-related
 desoxycorticosterone excess
 If negative, consider
• Liddle’s syndrome (ENaC
 mutations) (responsive to
 amiloride trial)
Family history of early-
onset Hypertension?
Screen for glucocorticoid-
remediable aldosteronism
Clinical suspicion of mineralocorticoid excess
Patients with hypertension and
Positive
Negative
Confirmation of diagnosis
Unenhanced CT adrenals
Age <40
years
Age >40 years
(if surgery
practical
and desired)
Pos.
Pos.
Neg.
Neg.
Rare:
Both PRA
and Aldo
suppressed
ALGORITHM FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH SUSPECTED MINERALOCORTICOID
EXCESS
Unilateral
adrenal
massa
Figure 5-11
Management of patients with suspected mineralocorticoid excess. aPerform adrenal tumor workup (see Fig. 5-12). GC/MS, 
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
115
Table 5-5
Classification of Unilateral Adrenal Masses
Benign
Approximate 
Prevalence (%)
Adrenocortical adenoma
  Endocrine inactive
60–85
  Cortisol producing
5–10
  Aldosterone producing
2–5
Pheochromocytoma
5–10
Adrenal myelolipoma
<1
Adrenal ganglioneuroma
<0.1
Adrenal hemangioma
<0.1
Adrenal cyst
<1
Adrenal hematoma/hemorrhagic 
infarction
<1
Indeterminate
Adrenocortical oncocytoma
<1
Malignant
Adrenocortical carcinoma
2–5
Malignant pheochromocytoma
<1
Adrenal neuroblastoma
<0.1
Lymphomas (incl. primary adrenal 
lymphoma)
<1
Metastases (most frequent: breast, 
lung)
15
Note: Bilateral adrenal enlargement/masses may be caused by 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, bilateral macronodular hyperplasia, 
bilateral hemorrhage (due to antiphospholipid syndrome or sepsis-
associated Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome), granuloma, amyloi-
dosis, or infiltrative disease including tuberculosis.
GRA consists of administering dexamethasone, using 
the lowest dose possible to control blood pressure. 
Some patients also require additional MR antagonist 
treatment.
The diagnosis of nonaldosterone-related mineralocor-
ticoid excess is based on documentation of suppressed 
renin and suppressed aldosterone in the presence of 
hypokalemic hypertension. This testing is best carried 
out by employing urinary steroid metabolite profiling 
by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). 
An increased free cortisol over free cortisone ratio is 
suggestive of AME and can be treated with dexameth-
asone. Steroid profiling by GC/MS also detects the 
steroids associated with CYP11B1 and CYP17A1 defi-
ciency or the irregular steroid secretion pattern in a 
DOC-producing adrenocortical carcinoma (Fig. 5-11). If 
the GC/MS profile is normal, then Liddle’s syndrome 
should be considered. It is very sensitive to amiloride 
treatment but will not respond to MR antagonist treat-
ment, as the defect is due to a constitutively active 
ENaC.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Incidentally Discovered Adrenal Mass
Epidemiology  Incidentally discovered adrenal 
masses, commonly termed adrenal “incidentalomas,” 
are common, with a prevalence of at least 2% in the 
general population as documented in CT and autopsy 
series. The prevalence increases with age, with 1% of 
40-year-olds and 7% of 70-year-olds harboring an adre-
nal mass.
Etiology  Most solitary adrenal tumors are mono-
clonal neoplasms. Several genetic syndromes, including 
MEN-1 (MEN1), MEN-2 (RET), Carney’s complex (PRKAR1A), 
and McCune-Albright (GNAS1), can have adrenal tumors
Table 5-4
Effects of Antihypertensive Drugs on the 
Aldosterone-Renin-Ratio (ARR)
Drug
Effect 
on 
Renin
Effect on 
Aldosterone
Net 
Effect 
on ARR
β-Blockers
↓
↑
↑
α1-Blockers
→
→
→
α2-Sympathomimetics
→
→
→
ACE inhibitors
↑
↓
↓
AT1R blockers
↑
↓
↓
Calcium antagonists
→
→
→
Diuretics
(↑)
(↑)
→/(↓)
as one of their features. Somatic mutations in MEN1, 
GNAS1, and PRKAR1A have been identified in a small pro-
portion of sporadic adrenocortical adenomas. Aberrant 
expression of membrane receptors (gastric inhibitory 
peptide, β-adrenergic, luteinizing hormone, vasopres-
sin V1 and interleukin-1 receptors) have been identified 
in some sporadic cases of macronodular adrenocortical 
hyperplasia.
The majority of adrenal nodules are endocrine inac-
tive adrenocortical adenomas. However, larger series 
suggest that up to 25% of adrenal nodules are hormon-
ally active, due to a cortisol- or aldosterone-producing 
adrenocortical adenoma or a pheochromocytoma asso-
ciated with catecholamine excess (Table 5-5). Adreno-
cortical carcinoma is rare but it is the cause of an adrenal 
mass in 5% of patients. However, the most common 
cause of a malignant adrenal mass is metastasis origi-
nating from another solid tissue tumor (Table 5-5).
Differential diagnosis and treatment  
Patients with an adrenal mass >1 cm require a diagnos-
tic evaluation. Two key questions need to be addressed: 
(1) Does the tumor autonomously secrete hormones
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
116
specificity is suboptimal. CT is the procedure of choice 
for imaging the adrenal glands (Fig. 5-12). The risk 
of adrenocortical carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, 
and benign adrenal myelolipoma increases with the 
diameter of the adrenal mass. However, size alone is 
of poor predictive value, with only 80% sensitivity and 
60% specificity for the differentiation of benign from 
malignant masses when using a 4-cm cut-off. Metasta-
ses are found with similar frequency in adrenal masses 
of all sizes. Tumor density on unenhanced CT is of 
additional diagnostic value, with most adrenocortical 
adenomas being lipid rich and thus presenting with 
low attenuation values (i.e., densities of <10 HU. By 
contrast, adrenocortical carcinomas, but also pheo-
chromocytomas, usually have high attenuation values 
(i.e., densities >20 HU on precontrast scans). Generally, 
benign lesions are rounded and homogeneous, whereas 
most malignant lesions appear lobulated and inhomo-
geneous. Pheochromocytoma and adrenomyelolipoma 
may also exhibit lobulated and inhomogeneous fea-
tures. Additional information can be obtained from CT 
by assessment of contrast wash-out after 15 minutes, 
which is >50% in benign lesions but <40% in malig-
nant lesions, which usually have a more extensive vas-
cularization. MRI also allows for the visualization of the
that could have a detrimental effect on health, and (2) is 
the adrenal mass benign or malignant?
Hormone secretion by an adrenal mass occurs along 
a continuum, with a gradual increase in clinical mani-
festations in parallel with hormone levels. Exclusion of 
catecholamine excess from a pheochromocytoma aris-
ing from the adrenal medulla is a mandatory part of the 
diagnostic workup (Fig. 5-12). Furthermore, autono-
mous cortisol and aldosterone secretion resulting in 
Cushing’s syndrome or primary hyperaldosteronism, 
respectively, require exclusion. Adrenal incidentalomas 
are associated with lower levels of autonomous cortisol 
secretion, and patients may lack overt clinical features 
of Cushing’s syndrome. Nonetheless, they may exhibit 
one or more components of the metabolic syndrome 
(e.g., obesity, type 2 diabetes, or hypertension). There is 
ongoing debate about the optimal treatment for these 
patients with mild or subclinical Cushing’s syndrome. 
Overproduction of adrenal androgen precursors, DHEA 
and its sulfate, is rare and is most frequently seen in the 
context of adrenocortical carcinoma, as are increased 
levels of steroid precursors such as 17-hydroxyproges-
terone.
For the differentiation of benign from malignant 
adrenal masses, imaging is relatively sensitive though
CT/MRI finding of incidentally discovered adrenal mass
Positive
Neg.
Repeat screening for 
hormone excess after 
12 months
F/U as needed
Neg.
Neg.
Unilateral
 adrenalectomy
Negative but
   imaging suggestive
   of malignancy:
• Size >4 cm
• High CT density (>20 HU)
• CT contrast wash-out <40%
Repeat screening for 
hormone excess after
12 months; Repeat
imaging after 6–12
months
Negative and imaging
not suggestive of
malignancy:
• Size <4 cm
• Low CT density (<10 HU)
• CT contrast wash-out >50%
F/U as needed
 Pos.
 Pos.
ALGORITHM FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH AN INCIDENTALLY DISCOVERED
ADRENAL MASS
 
 
 
 
Screening for hormone excess
• Plasma metanephrines or 24-h urine for
    metanephrine/catecholamine excretion
• 24-h urine for free cortisol excretion, plasma ACTH,
    midnight plasma (or salivary) cortisol, 
    dexamethasone 1 mg overnight test
    (perform at least two out of four tests)     
• Plasma aldosterone and plasma renin
• If tumor >2 cm: Serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone
    and DHEAS
Confirmatory testing
Figure 5-12
Management of the patient with an incidentally discovered adrenal mass. F/U, follow-up.
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
117
adrenal glands with somewhat lower resolution than 
CT. However, as it does not involve exposure to ionizing 
radiation, it is preferred in children, young adults, and 
during pregnancy. MRI has a valuable role in the charac-
terization of indeterminate adrenal lesions using chemi-
cal shift analysis, with malignant tumors rarely showing 
loss of signal on opposed-phase MRI.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or CT-guided biopsy 
of an adrenal mass is almost never indicated. FNA of a 
pheochromocytoma can cause a life-threatening hyper-
tensive crisis. FNA of an adrenocortical carcinoma vio-
lates the tumor capsule. FNA should only be considered 
in a patient with a history of nonadrenal malignancy 
and a newly detected adrenal mass. FNA should be car-
ried out only after careful exclusion of pheochromo-
cytoma and if the outcome will influence therapeutic 
management. It is important to recognize that in 25% 
of patients with a previous history of nonadrenal malig-
nancy, a newly detected mass on CT is not a metastasis.
Adrenal masses associated with confirmed hormone 
excess or suspected malignancy are usually treated sur-
gically (Fig. 5-12) or, if adrenalectomy is not feasible 
or desired, with medication. Preoperative exclusion of 
glucocorticoid excess is particularly important for the 
prediction of postoperative suppression of the con-
tralateral adrenal gland, which requires glucocorticoid 
replacement before surgery. If the initial decision is for 
observation, imaging and biochemical testing should be 
repeated about a year after the first assessment. However, 
this may be performed earlier in patients with borderline 
imaging or hormonal findings. There is no agreement 
with regard to the required long-term follow-up beyond 
1 year and in patients with normal biochemistry and no 
evidence of increased tumor size at follow-up.
Adrenocortical Carcinoma
Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy 
with an annual incidence of 1–2 per million population. 
ACC is generally considered a highly malignant tumor; 
however, it presents with broad interindividual variabil-
ity with regard to biologic characteristics and clini-
cal behavior. Somatic mutations in the tumor suppressor 
gene TP53 are found in 25% of apparently sporadic 
ACCs. Germline TP53 mutations are the cause of the Li-
Fraumeni syndrome associated with multiple solid organ 
cancers including ACC and are found in 25% of pediatric 
ACC cases; the TP53 mutation R337H is found in almost 
all pediatric ACCs in Brazil. Other genetic changes iden-
tified in ACC include alterations in the Wnt/β-catenin 
pathway and in the insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) 
cluster; IGF2 overexpression is found in 90% of ACCs.
Patients with large adrenal tumors suspicious of malig-
nancy should be managed by a multidisciplinary special-
ist team, including an endocrinologist, an oncologist, a 
Table 5-6
Classification System for Staging of 
Adrenocortical Carcinoma
Stage
ENSAT Stage
TNM Definitions
I
T1, N0, M0
T1, tumor ≤5 cm
N0, no positive lymph node
M0, no distant metastases
II
T2, N0, M0
T2, tumor >5 cm
N0, no positive lymph node
M0, no distant metastases
III
T1–T2, N1, M0
T3–T4, N0–N1, 
M0
N1, positive lymph node(s)
M0, no distant metastases
T3, tumor infiltration into 
surrounding tissue
T4, tumor invasion into 
adjacent organs or venous 
tumor thrombus in vena 
cava or renal vein
IV
T1–T4, N0–N1, 
M1
M1, presence of distant 
metastases
Abbreviation: ENSAT, European Network for the Study of Adrenal 
Tumors.
surgeon, a radiologist, and a histopathologist. FNA is 
not indicated in suspected ACC: first, cytology and 
also histopathology of a core biopsy cannot differentiate 
between benign and malignant primary adrenal masses; 
second, FNA violates the tumor capsule and may even 
cause needle canal metastasis. Even when the entire tumor 
specimen is available, the histopathologic differentiation 
between benign and malignant lesions is a diagnostic chal-
lenge. The most common histopathologic classification is 
the Weiss score, taking into account high nuclear grade; 
mitotic rate (>5/HPF); atypical mitosis; <25% clear cells; 
diffuse architecture; and presence of necrosis, venous 
invasion, and invasion of sinusoidal structures and tumor 
capsule. The presence of three or more elements suggests 
ACC.
Although 60–70% of ACCs are biochemically found 
to overproduce hormones, this is not clinically apparent 
in many patients due to the relatively inefficient steroid 
production by the adrenocortical cancer cells. Excess 
production of glucocorticoids and adrenal androgen 
precursors are most common. Mixed excess production 
of several corticosteroid classes by an adrenal tumor is 
generally indicative of malignancy.
Tumor staging at diagnosis (Table 5-6) has impor-
tant prognostic implications and requires scanning of the 
chest and abdomen for local organ invasion, lymphade-
nopathy, and metastases. Intravenous contrast medium is 
necessary for maximum sensitivity for hepatic metastases. 
An adrenal origin may be difficult to determine on 
standard axial CT imaging if the tumors are large and 
invasive, but CT reconstructions or MRI is more 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
118
informative (Fig. 5-13) using multiple planes and dif-
ferent sequences. Vascular and adjacent organ invasion is 
diagnostic of malignancy. 18-Fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose 
positron emission tomography (18-FDG PET) is highly 
sensitive for the detection of malignancy and can be used 
to detect small metastases or local recurrence that may 
not be obvious on CT (Fig. 5-13). However, FDG PET 
is not specific and therefore cannot be used for differenti-
ating benign from malignant adrenal lesions. Metastasis in 
ACC most frequently occurs to liver and lung.
ACC carries a poor prognosis and cure can be 
achieved only by complete surgical removal. Capsule 
violation during primary surgery, metastasis at diagno-
sis, and primary treatment in a nonspecialist center are 
major determinants of poor survival. If the primary 
tumor invades adjacent organs, en bloc removal of 
kidney and spleen should be considered to reduce the 
risk of recurrence. Surgery can also be considered in a 
patient with metastases if there is severe tumor-related 
hormone excess. This indication needs to be care-
fully weighed against surgical risk, including thrombo-
embolic complications, and the resulting delay in the 
introduction of other therapeutic options. Patients with 
confirmed ACC and successful removal of the primary 
tumor should receive adjuvant treatment with mito-
tane (o,p’DDD), particularly in patients with a high 
risk of recurrence as determined by tumor size >8 cm, 
histopathologic signs of vascular invasion, capsule inva-
sion or violation, and a Ki67 proliferation index ≥10%. 
Mitotane is usually started at 500 mg qid, with doses 
increased by 1000 mg/d every 1–2 weeks as tolerated. 
The maximum tolerated dose is usually 8–10 g/m2 per day. 
Adjuvant mitotane should be continued for at least 
2 years, if the patient can tolerate side effects. Regu-
lar monitoring of plasma mitotane levels is mandatory 
(therapeutic range 14–20 mg/L; neurotoxic complica-
tions are more frequent at >20 mg/L), as is concurrent 
replacement with hydrocortisone. The latter should be 
given at higher doses than usually employed in adrenal 
insufficiency (e.g., 20 mg tid), as mitotane increases glu-
cocorticoid inactivation due to the induction of hepatic 
CYP3A4 activity. It also increases circulating cortisol-
binding globulin, thereby decreasing the available free 
cortisol fraction. Single metastases can be addressed sur-
gically or with radiofrequency ablation as appropriate. 
If the tumor recurs or progresses during mitotane treat-
ment, chemotherapy should be considered (e.g., cispla-
tin, etoposide, doxorubicin plus continuing mitotane, 
the so-called Berrutti regimen); painful bone metastasis 
responds to irradiation. Overall survival in ACC is still 
poor, with 5-year survival rates of 30–40%.
Adrenal Insufficiency
Epidemiology
The prevalence of well-documented, permanent adre-
nal insufficiency is 5 in 10,000 in the general popula-
tion. Hypothalamic-pituitary origin of disease is most 
frequent, with a prevalence of 3 in 10,000, whereas 
primary adrenal insufficiency has a prevalence of 2 in 
10,000. Approximately one-half of the latter cases are 
acquired, mostly caused by autoimmune destruction of 
the adrenal glands; the other one-half are genetic, most 
commonly caused by distinct enzymatic blocks in adre-
nal steroidogenesis affecting glucocorticoid synthesis 
(i.e., congenital adrenal hyperplasia.)
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 5-13
Imaging in adrenocortical carcinoma. MRI scan with (A) 
frontal and (B) lateral views of a right adrenocortical carcinoma 
that was detected incidentally. CT scan with (C) coronal and 
(D) transverse views depicting a right-sided adrenocortical 
carcinoma. Note the irregular border and inhomogeneous 
structure. CT scan (E) and PET-CT (F) visualizing a peritoneal 
metastasis of an adrenocortical carcinoma in close proximity 
to the right kidney (arrow).
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
119
Adrenal insufficiency arising from suppression of the 
HPA axis as a consequence of exogenous glucocorticoid 
treatment is much more common, occurring in 0.5–2% 
of the population in developed countries.
Etiology
Primary adrenal insufficiency is most commonly 
caused by autoimmune adrenalitis. Isolated autoimmune 
adrenalitis accounts for 30–40%, whereas 60–70% develop 
adrenal insufficiency as part of autoimmune polyglandu-
lar syndromes (APSs) (Chap. 23) (Table 5-7). APS1, 
also termed APECED (autoimmunepolyendocrinopa-
thy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy), is the underlying 
cause in 10% of patients affected by APS. APS1 is trans-
mitted in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused 
by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene AIRE. 
Associated autoimmune conditions overlap with those 
Table 5-7
Causes of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
Diagnosis
Gene
Associated Features
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 1 (APS1)
AIRE
Hypoparathyroidism, chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, other autoimmune disorders, rarely 
lymphomas
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 2 (APS2)
Associations with  
HLA-DR3, CTLA-4
Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, premature  
ovarian failure, vitiligo, type 1 diabetes mellitus, 
pernicious anemia
Isolated autoimmune adrenalitis
Associations with  
HLA-DR3, CTLA-4
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)
CYP21A2, CYP11B1, 
CYP17A1, HSD3B2, 
POR
See Table 5-10 (see also Chap. 7)
Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (CLAH)
StAR, CYP11A1
46,XY DSD, gonadal failure (see also Chap. 7)
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC)
NR0B1 (DAX-1), 
NR5A1 (SF-1)
46,XY DSD, gonadal failure (see also Chap. 7)
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD),  
adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN)
X-ALD
Demyelination of central nervous system (ALD) or 
spinal cord and peripheral nerves (AMN)
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency
- FGD1
- FGD2
- FGD3
Triple A syndrome
MC2R
MRAP
?
AAAS
ACTH insensitivity syndromes due to mutations  
in the ACTH receptor MC2R and its accessory 
protein MRAP tall stature
Alacrima, achalasia, neurologic impairment
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
SLOS
Cholesterol synthesis disorder associated with 
mental retardation, craniofacial malformations, 
growth failure
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
Mitochondrial DNA 
deletions
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary 
retinal degeneration, cardiac conduction defects, 
gonadal failure, hypoparathyroidism, type 1  
diabetes
IMAGe syndrome
?
Intrauterine growth retardation, metaphyseal  
dysplasia, genital anomalies
Adrenal infections
Tuberculosis, HIV, CMV, cryptococcosis,  
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis
Adrenal infiltration
Metastases, lymphomas, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, 
hemochromatosis
Adrenal hemorrhage
Meningococcal sepsis (Waterhouse-Friderichsen 
syndrome), primary antiphospholipid syndrome
Drug induced
Mitotane, aminoglutethimide, arbiraterone, trilo-
stane, etomidate, ketoconazole, suramin, RU486
Bilateral adrenalectomy
E.g., in the management of Cushing’s or after 
bilateral nephrectomy
Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; DSD, disordered sex development.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
120
seen in APS2, but may also include total alopecia, pri-
mary hypoparathyroidism, and, in rare cases, lymphoma. 
APS1 patients invariably develop chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, usually manifest in childhood, and preced-
ing adrenal insufficiency by years or decades. The much 
more prevalent APS2 is of polygenic inheritance, with 
confirmed associations with the HLA-DR3 gene region 
in the major histocompatibility complex and distinct 
gene regions involved in immune regulation (CTLA-4, 
PTPN22, CLEC16A). Coincident autoimmune disease 
most frequently includes thyroid autoimmune disease, 
vitiligo, and premature ovarian failure. Less commonly, 
additional features may include type 1 diabetes and perni-
cious anemia caused by vitamin B12 deficiency.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy has an incidence of 
1:20,000 males and is caused by mutations in the X-ALD 
gene encoding the peroxisomal membrane transporter 
protein ABCD1; its disruption results in accumulation of 
very long chain (>24 carbon atoms) fatty acids. Approxi-
mately 50% of cases manifest in early childhood with rap-
idly progressive white matter disease (cerebral ALD); 35% 
present during adolescence or in early adulthood with 
neurologic features indicative of myelin and peripheral 
nervous system involvement (adrenomyeloneuropathy, 
AMN). In the remaining 15%, adrenal insufficiency is the 
sole manifestation of disease. Of note, distinct mutations 
manifest with variable penetrance within affected families.
Rarer causes of adrenal insufficiency involve destruction 
of the adrenal glands as a consequence of infection, hem-
orrhage, or infiltration (Table 5-7); tuberculous adrenalitis 
is still a frequent cause of disease in developing countries. 
Adrenal metastases rarely cause adrenal insufficiency, and 
this occurs only with bilateral, bulky metastases.
Inborn causes of primary adrenal insufficiency other 
than congenital adrenal hyperplasia are rare, causing less 
than 1% of cases. However, their elucidation provides 
important insights into adrenal gland development and 
physiology. Mutations causing primary adrenal insuf-
ficiency (Table 5-7) include factors regulating adre-
nal development and steroidogenesis (DAX-1, SF-1), 
cholesterol synthesis, import and cleavage (DHCR7, 
StAR, CYP11A1), and elements of the adrenal ACTH 
response pathway (MC2R, MRAP) (Fig. 5-5).
Secondary adrenal insufficiency is the conse-
quence of dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary 
component of the HPA axis (Table 5-8). Excluding 
Table 5-8
Causes of Secondary Adrenal Insufficiency
Diagnosis
Gene
Associated Features
Pituitary tumors (endocrine active and inac-
tive adenomas, very rare: carcinoma)
Depending on tumor size and location: visual field impairment 
(bilateral hemianopia), hyperprolactinemia, secondary hypo-
thyroidism, hypogonadism, growth hormone deficiency
Other mass lesions affecting the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary region
Craniopharyngioma, meningioma, ependymoma, metastases
Pituitary irradiation
Radiotherapy administered for pituitary tumors, brain tumors, or 
craniospinal irradiation in leukemia
Autoimmune hypophysitis
Often associated with pregnancy; may present with panhypopi-
tuitarism or isolated ACTH deficiency; can be associated with 
autoimmune thyroid disease, more rarely with vitiligo, prema-
ture ovarian failure, type 1 diabetes, pernicious anemia
Pituitary apoplexy/hemorrhage
Hemorrhagic infarction of large pituitary adenomas or pituitary 
infarction consequent to traumatic major blood loss (e.g., sur-
gery or pregnancy: Sheehan’s syndrome)
Pituitary infiltration
Tuberculosis, actinomycosis, sarcoidosis, histiocytosis X, gran-
ulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), metastases
Drug induced
Chronic glucocorticoid excess (endogenous or exogenous)
Congenital isolated ACTH deficiency
TBX19 (Tpit)
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency 
(CPHD)
PROP-1
HESX1
LHX3
LHX4
SOX3
Progressive development of CPHD in the order GH, PRL, TSH, 
LH/FSH, ACTH
CPHD and septo-optic dysplasia
CPHD and limited neck rotation, sensorineural deafness
CPHD and cerebellar abnormalities
CPHD and variable mental retardation
Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency
POMC
Early-onset obesity, red hair pigmentation
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; GH, growth hormone; LH/FSH, luteinizing hormone/follicle-stimulating hormone; PRL, pro-
lactin; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
121
iatrogenic suppression, the overwhelming majority of cases 
are caused by pituitary or hypothalamic tumors, or their 
treatment by surgery or irradiation (Chap. 2). Rarer 
causes include pituitary apoplexy, either as a consequence 
of an infarcted pituitary adenoma or transient reduction 
in the blood supply of the pituitary during surgery or after 
rapid blood loss associated with parturition, also termed 
Sheehan’s syndrome. Isolated ACTH deficiency is rarely 
caused by autoimmune disease or pituitary infiltration 
(Table 5-8). Mutations in the ACTH precursor POMC 
or in factors regulating pituitary development are genetic 
causes of ACTH deficiency (Table 5-8).
Clinical manifestations
In principle, the clinical features of primary adrenal insuf-
ficiency (Addison’s disease) are characterized by the loss 
of both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid secretion 
(Table 5-9). In secondary adrenal insufficiency, only 
Table 5-9
Signs and Symptoms of Adrenal 
Insufficiency
Signs and Symptoms Caused by Glucocorticoid 
Deficiency
Fatigue, lack of energy
Weight loss, anorexia
Myalgia, joint pain
Fever
Anemia, lymphocytosis, eosinophilia
Slightly increased TSH (due to loss of feedback inhibition 
of TSH release)
Hypoglycemia (more frequent in children)
Low blood pressure, postural hypotension
Hyponatremia (due to loss of feedback inhibition of AVP 
release)
Signs and Symptoms Caused by Mineralocorticoid 
Deficiency (Primary AI Only)
Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
Dizziness, postural hypotension
Salt craving
Low blood pressure, postural hypotension
Increased serum creatinine (due to volume depletion)
Hyponatremia
Hyperkalemia
Signs and Symptoms Caused by Adrenal Androgen 
Deficiency
Lack of energy
Dry and itchy skin (in women)
Loss of libido (in women)
Loss of axillary and pubic hair (in women)
Other Signs and Symptoms
Hyperpigmentation (primary AI only) [due to excess of  
proopiomelanocortin (POMC)–derived peptides]
Alabaster-colored pale skin (secondary AI only) (due to 
deficiency of POMC-derived peptides)
glucocorticoid deficiency is present, as the adrenal itself 
is intact and thus still amenable to regulation by the 
RAA system. Adrenal androgen secretion is disrupted 
in both primary and secondary adrenal insufficiency 
(Table 5-9). Hypothalamic-pituitary disease can lead to 
additional clinical manifestations due to involvement 
of other endocrine axes (thyroid, gonads, growth hor-
mone, prolactin) or visual impairment with bitempo-
ral hemianopia caused by chiasmal compression. It is 
important to recognize that iatrogenic adrenal insuffi-
ciency caused by exogenous glucocorticoid suppression 
of the HPA axis may result in all symptoms associated 
with glucocorticoid deficiency (Table 5-9), if exog-
enous glucocorticoids are stopped abruptly. However, 
patients will appear clinically cushingoid as a result of 
the preceding overexposure to glucocorticoids.
Chronic adrenal insufficiency manifests with rela-
tively nonspecific signs and symptoms such as fatigue 
and loss of energy, often resulting in delayed or missed 
diagnoses (e.g., as depression or anorexia). A distinguish-
ing feature of primary adrenal insufficiency is hyperpig-
mentation, which is caused by excess ACTH stimulation 
of melanocytes. Hyperpigmentation is most pronounced 
in skin areas exposed to increased friction or shear stress 
and is increased by sunlight (Fig. 5-14). Conversely, in 
secondary adrenal insufficiency, the skin has an alabaster-
like paleness due to lack of ACTH secretion.
Hyponatremia is a characteristic biochemical feature 
in primary adrenal insufficiency and is found in 80% of 
patients at presentation. Hyperkalemia is present in 40% 
of patients at initial diagnosis. Hyponatremia is primarily 
caused by mineralocorticoid deficiency but can also occur 
in secondary adrenal insufficiency due to diminished inhi-
bition of ADH by cortisol, resulting in mild syndrome of 
inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). 
Glucocorticoid deficiency also results in slightly increased 
TSH concentrations that normalize within days to weeks 
after initiation of glucocorticoid replacement.
Acute adrenal insufficiency usually occurs after a 
prolonged period of nonspecific complaints and is more 
frequently observed in patients with primary adrenal 
insufficiency, due to the loss of both glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid secretion. Postural hypotension may 
progress to hypovolemic shock. Adrenal insufficiency 
may mimic features of acute abdomen with abdominal 
tenderness, nausea, vomiting, and fever. In some cases, 
the primary presentation may resemble neurologic dis-
ease, with decreased responsiveness progressing to stu-
por and coma. An adrenal crisis can be triggered by an 
intercurrent illness, surgical or other stress, or increased 
glucocorticoid inactivation (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is established 
by the short cosyntropin test, a safe and reliable tool 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
122
with excellent predictive diagnostic value (Fig. 5-15). 
The cut-off for failure is usually defined at cortisol 
levels of <500–550 nmol/L (18–20 μg/dL) sampled 
30–60 minutes after ACTH stimulation; the exact cut-
off is dependent on the locally available assay. During 
the early phase of HPA disruption (e.g., within 4 weeks 
of pituitary insufficiency), patients may still respond to 
exogenous ACTH stimulation. In this circumstance, the 
insulin tolerance test is an alternative choice but is more 
invasive and should be carried out only under a special-
ist’s supervision (see above). Induction of hypoglycemia 
is contraindicated in individuals with diabetes mellitus, 
cardiovascular disease, or history of seizures. Random 
serum cortisol measurements are of limited diagnostic 
value, as baseline cortisol levels may be coincidentally 
low due to the physiologic diurnal rhythm of cortisol 
secretion (Fig. 5-3). Similarly, many patients with sec-
ondary adrenal insufficiency have relatively normal 
baseline cortisol levels but fail to mount an appropriate 
cortisol response to ACTH, which can only be revealed 
by stimulation testing. Importantly, tests to establish the 
diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency should never delay 
treatment. Thus, in a patient with suspected adrenal cri-
sis, it is reasonable to draw baseline cortisol levels, pro-
vide replacement therapy, and defer formal stimulation 
testing until a later time.
Once adrenal insufficiency is confirmed, measure-
ment of plasma ACTH is the next step, with increased 
or inappropriately low levels defining primary and 
secondary origin of disease, respectively (Fig. 5-15). In 
primary adrenal insufficiency, increased plasma renin will 
confirm the presence of mineralocorticoid deficiency. 
A
B
C
D
Figure 5-14
Clinical features of Addison’s disease. Note the hyperpig-
mentation in areas of increased friction including (A) palmar 
creases, (B) dorsal foot, (C) nipples and axillary region, and 
(D) patchy hyperpigmentation of the oral mucosa.
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
123
At initial presentation, patients with primary adrenal 
insufficiency should undergo screening for steroid auto-
antibodies as a marker of autoimmune adrenalitis. If 
these tests are negative, adrenal imaging by CT is indi-
cated to investigate possible hemorrhage, infiltration, 
or masses. In male patients with negative autoantibod-
ies in the plasma, very long chain fatty acids should be 
measured to exclude X-ALD. Patients with inappropri-
ately low ACTH, in the presence of confirmed cortisol 
deficiency, should undergo hypothalamic-pituitary 
imaging by MRI. Features suggestive of preceding pitu-
itary apoplexy, such as sudden-onset severe headache, 
or history of previous head trauma should be carefully 
explored, particularly in patients with no obvious MRI 
lesion.
Treatment	
Acute Adrenal Insufficiency
Acute adrenal insufficiency requires immediate ini-
tiation of rehydration, usually carried out by saline 
infusion at initial rates of 1 L/h with continuous car-
diac monitoring. Glucocorticoid replacement should 
be initiated by bolus injection of 100 mg hydrocor-
tisone, followed by the administration of 100–200 mg 
hydrocortisone over 24 h, either by continuous infu-
sion or provided by several IV or IM injections. Min-
eralocorticoid replacement can be initiated once the 
daily hydrocortisone dose has been reduced to <50 mg, 
because at higher doses hydrocortisone provides suf-
ficient stimulation of mineralocorticoid receptors.
Negative
Adrenal autoantibodies
• Autoimmune
 adrenalitis;
• Autoimmune
 polyglandular
  syndrome (APS)
Hypothalamic-
pituitary mass lesion
• History of exogenous
 glucocorticoid treatment?
• History of head trauma?
• Consider isolated ACTH
 deficiency
MRI Pituitary
Clinical suspicion of adrenal insufficiency
(weight loss, fatigue, postural hypotension, hyperpigmentation,
hyponatremia)
Differential diagnosis
Plasma ACTH, plasma renin, serum aldosterone
• Plasma cortisol 30–60 min after 250 µg cosyntropin IM or IV
 (Cortisol post cosyntropin <500 nmol/L)
• CBC, serum sodium, potassium, creatinine, urea, TSH
Screening/confirmation of diagnosis
Secondary adrenal insufficiency
(Low-normal ACTH, normal PRA,
normal aldosterone )
Primary adrenal insufficiency
(High ACTH, High PRA, low
aldosterone)
Glucocorticoid + mineralocorticoid
replacement
Glucocorticoid replacement
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
• Adrenal infection
 (tuberculosis),
• Infiltration
 (e.g., lymphoma)
• Hemorrhage
• Congenital adrenal
 hyperplasia (17OHP↑)
• Autoimmune
 adrenalitis most likely
 diagnosis
• In men, consider
 adrenoleukodystrophy
 (VLCFA↑)
ALGORITHM FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH SUSPECTED ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY
• Chest X-ray
• Serum 17OHP
• In men: plasma very
 long chain fatty acids
 (VLCFA)
• Adrenal CT
Figure 5-15
Management of the patient with suspected adrenal insufficiency. PRA, plasma renin activity.
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
124
Glucocorticoid replacement for the treatment of 
chronic adrenal insufficiency should be administered at 
a dose that replaces the physiologic daily cortisol pro-
duction, which is usually achieved by the oral admin-
istration of 15–25 mg hydrocortisone in two to three 
divided doses. Pregnancy may require an increase in 
hydrocortisone dose by 50% during the last trimester. 
In all patients, at least one-half of the daily dose should 
be administered in the morning. Currently available 
glucocorticoid preparations fail to mimic the physi-
ologic cortisol secretion rhythm (Fig. 5-3). Long-acting 
glucocorticoids such as prednisolone or dexametha-
sone are not preferred as they result in increased glu-
cocorticoid exposure due to extended glucocorticoid 
receptor activation at times of physiologically low 
cortisol secretion. There are no well-established dose 
equivalencies, but as a guide, equipotency can be 
assumed for 1 mg hydrocortisone, 1.6 mg cortisone 
acetate, 0.2 mg prednisolone, 0.25 mg prednisone, and 
0.025 mg dexamethasone.
Monitoring of glucocorticoid replacement is mainly 
based on the history and examination for signs and 
symptoms suggestive of glucocorticoid over- or under-
replacement, including assessment of body weight 
and blood pressure. Plasma ACTH, 24-hour urinary free 
cortisol, or serum cortisol day curves reflect whether 
hydrocortisone has been taken or not, but do not con-
vey reliable information about replacement quality. In 
patients with isolated primary adrenal insufficiency, 
monitoring should include screening for autoim-
mune thyroid disease, and female patients should 
be made aware of the possibility of premature ovar-
ian failure. Supraphysiologic glucocorticoid treatment 
with doses equivalent to 30 mg hydrocortisone or 
more will affect bone metabolism, and these patients 
should undergo regular bone mineral density evalu-
ation. All patients with adrenal insufficiency need to 
be instructed about the requirement for stress-related 
glucocorticoid dose adjustments. These generally con-
sist of doubling the routine oral glucocorticoid dose in 
the case of intercurrent illness with fever and bedrest 
and the need for IV hydrocortisone injection at a daily 
dose of 100 mg in cases of prolonged vomiting, sur-
gery, or trauma. Patients living or traveling in regions 
with delayed access to acute health care should carry a 
hydrocortisone self-injection emergency kit, in addition 
to their usual steroid emergency cards and bracelets.
Mineralocorticoid replacement in primary adrenal 
insufficiency should be initiated at a dose of 100–150 
μg fludrocortisone. The adequacy of treatment can be 
evaluated by measuring blood pressure, sitting and 
standing, to detect a postural drop indicative of hypo-
volemia. In addition, serum sodium, potassium, and 
plasma renin should be measured regularly. Renin lev-
els should be kept in the upper normal reference range. 
Changes in glucocorticoid dose may also impact min-
eralocorticoid replacement as cortisol also binds the 
mineralocorticoid receptor; 40 mg hydrocortisone is 
equivalent to 100 μg fludrocortisone. In patients living 
or traveling in areas with hot or tropical weather condi-
tions, the fludrocortisone dose should be increased 
by 50–100 μg during the summer. Mineralocorticoid 
dose may also need to be adjusted during pregnancy, 
due to the antimineralocorticoid activity of progester-
one, but this is less often required than hydrocortisone 
dose adjustment. Plasma renin cannot serve as a moni-
toring tool during pregnancy, as renin rises physiologi-
cally during gestation.
Adrenal androgen replacement is an option in 
patients with lack of energy, despite optimized gluco-
corticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement. It may 
also be indicated in women with features of androgen 
deficiency, including loss of libido. Adrenal androgen 
replacement can be achieved by once-daily adminis-
tration of 25–50 mg DHEA. Treatment is monitored by 
measurement of DHEAS, androstenedione, testosterone, 
and SHBG 24 hours after the last DHEA dose.
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
(See also Chap. 7) Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH) is caused by mutations in genes encoding ste-
roidogenic enzymes involved in glucocorticoid synthesis 
(CYP21A2, CYP17A1, HSD3B2, CYP11B1) or in the 
cofactor enzyme P450 oxidoreductase that serves as an 
electron donor to CYP21A2 and CYP17A1 (Fig. 5-1). 
Invariably, patients affected by CAH exhibit gluco-
corticoid deficiency. Depending on the exact step of 
enzymatic block, they may also have excess production 
mineralocorticoids or deficient production of sex ste-
roids (Table 5-10). The diagnosis of CAH is readily 
established by measurement of the steroids accumulat-
ing before the distinct enzymatic block, either in serum 
or in urine, preferably by the use of mass spectrometry–
based assays (Table 5-10).
Mutations in CYP21A2 are the most preva-
lent cause of CAH, responsible for 90–95% of cases. 
21-Hydroxylase 
deficiency 
disrupts 
glucocorticoid 
and mineralocorticoid synthesis (Fig. 5-1), resulting in 
diminished negative feedback via the HPA axis. This 
leads to increased pituitary ACTH release, which drives 
increased synthesis of adrenal androgen precursors and 
subsequent androgen excess. The degree of impair-
ment of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid secretion 
depends on the severity of mutations. Major loss-of-
function mutations result in combined glucocorticoid 
and mineralocorticoid deficiency (classic CAH, neo-
natal presentation), whereas less severe mutations affect 
glucocorticoid synthesis only (simple virilizing CAH, 
neonatal or early childhood presentation). The mildest 
 
CHAPTER 5
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
125
mutations result in the least severe clinical phenotype, 
nonclassical CAH, usually presenting during adoles-
cence and early adulthood and with preserved glucocor-
ticoid production.
Androgen excess is present in all patients and mani-
fests with broad phenotypic variability, ranging from 
severe virilization of the external genitalia in neonatal 
girls (e.g., 46,XX DSD) to hirsutism and oligomenor-
rhea resembling a polycystic ovary syndrome phenotype 
in young women with nonclassic CAH. In countries 
without neonatal screening for CAH, boys with classic 
CAH usually present with life-threatening adrenal cri-
sis in the first few weeks of life (salt-wasting crisis); a 
simple-virilizing genotype manifests with precocious 
pseudo-puberty and advanced bone age in early child-
hood, whereas men with nonclassic CAH are usually 
detected only through family screening.
Glucocorticoid treatment is more complex than for 
other causes of primary adrenal insufficiency. It not only 
needs to replace missing glucocorticoids but also aims 
to suppress the increased ACTH drive and subsequent 
androgen excess. Current treatment is hampered by the 
lack of glucocorticoid preparations that mimic the diur-
nal cortisol secretion profile, resulting in a prolonged 
period of ACTH stimulation and subsequent androgen 
production during the early morning hours. In child-
hood, optimization of growth and pubertal develop-
ment are important goals of glucocorticoid treatment, 
in addition to prevention of adrenal crisis and treatment 
Table 5-10
Variants of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Variant
Gene
Impact on Steroid 
Synthesis
Diagnostic Marker Steroids in Serum 
(and Urine)
21-Hydroxylase deficiency 
(21OHD)
CYP21A2
Glucocorticoid deficiency, 
mineralocorticoid defi-
ciency, adrenal androgen 
excess
17-Hydroxyprogesterone, 21-deoxycortisol 
(pregnanetriol, 17-hydroxypregnanolone, 
pregnanetriolone)
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency 
(11OHD)
CYP11B1
Glucocorticoid deficiency, 
mineralocorticoid excess, 
adrenal androgen excess
11-Deoxycortisol, 11-deoxycorticosterone 
(tetrahydro-11-deoxycortisol, tetrahydro-
11-deoxycorticosterone)
17α-Hydroxylase deficiency 
(17OHD)
CYP17A1
(Glucocorticoid deficiency), 
mineralocorticoid excess, 
androgen deficiency
11-Deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, 
pregnenolone, progesterone (tetrahydro-
11-deoxycorticosterone, tetrahydrocortico-
sterone, pregnenediol, pregnanediol)
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehy-
drogenase deficiency 
(3bHSDD)
HSD3B2
Glucocorticoid deficiency, 
(mineralocorticoid defi-
ciency), adrenal androgen 
excess
17-Hydroxypregnanolone (pregnanetriol)
P450 oxidoreductase defi-
ciency (ORD)
POR
Glucocorticoid deficiency, 
(mineralocorticoid excess), 
androgen deficiency, skel-
etal malformations
Pregnenolone, progesterone, 17-hydroxy-
progesterone (pregnanediol, pregnanetriol)
of 46,XX DSD. In adults, the focus shifts to preserv-
ing fertility and preventing side effects of glucocorticoid 
overtreatment, namely, the metabolic syndrome and 
osteoporosis. Fertility can be compromised in women 
due to oligo/amenorrhea with chronic anovulation as 
a consequence of androgen excess. Men may develop 
so-called testicular adrenal rest tumors (Fig. 5-16). 
These consist of hyperplastic cells with adrenocortical 
characteristics located in the rete testis and should not 
be confused with testicular tumors. Testicular adre-
nal rest tumors can compromise sperm production and 
induce fibrosis that may be irreversible.
Treatment	
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Hydrocortisone is a good treatment option for the pre-
vention of adrenal crisis but longer-acting prednisolone 
may be needed to control androgen excess. In children, 
hydrocortisone is given in divided doses at 1–1.5 times 
the normal cortisol production rate (about 10–13 mg/m2 
per day). In adults, intermediate-acting glucocorticoids 
(e.g., prednisone) may be given, using the lowest dose 
necessary to suppress excess androgen production. For 
achieving fertility, dexamethasone treatment may be 
required, but should only be given for the shortest pos-
sible time period to limit metabolic side effects. Bio-
chemical monitoring should include androstenedione 
and testosterone, aiming for the normal sex-specific 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
126
reference range. 17-Hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP) is 
a useful marker of overtreatment, indicated by 17OHP 
levels within the normal range of healthy controls. 
Glucocorticoid overtreatment may suppress the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Thus, treatment needs 
to be carefully titrated against clinical features of disease 
control. Stress dose glucocorticoids should be given 
at double or triple the daily dose for surgery, acute ill-
ness, or severe trauma. Poorly controlled CAH can result 
in adrenocortical hyperplasia, which gave the disease 
its name, and may present as macronodular hyperpla-
sia subsequent to long-standing ACTH excess (Fig. 5-15).
The nodular areas can develop autonomous adrenal 
androgen production, and may be unresponsive to glu-
cocorticoid treatment.
Mineralocorticoid requirements change during life 
and are higher in children, explained by relative miner-
alocorticoid resistance that diminishes with ongoing 
maturation of the kidney. Children with CAH usually 
receive mineralocorticoid and salt replacement. How-
ever, young adults with CAH should undergo reassess-
ment of their mineralocorticoid reserve. Plasma renin 
should be regularly monitored and kept within the 
upper half of the normal reference range.
B
A
D
C
Figure 5-16
Imaging in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Adrenal CT 
scans showing homogeneous bilateral hyperplasia in a young 
patient with classic CAH (A), and macronodular bilateral hyper-
plasia (B) in a middle-aged classic CAH patient with long-
standing poor disease control. MRI scan with T1-weighted (C) 
and T2-weighted (D) images showing bilateral testicular adre-
nal rest tumors (arrows) in a young patient with salt-wasting 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. (Courtesy of N. Reisch.)
 Hartmut P. H. Neumann 
127
 Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are catechol-
amine-producing tumors derived from the sympathetic 
or parasympathetic nervous system. These tumors may 
arise sporadically or be inherited as features of multi-
ple endocrine neoplasia type 2 or several other pheo-
chromocytoma-associated syndromes. The diagnosis of 
pheochromocytomas provides a potentially correctable 
cause of hypertension, and their removal can prevent 
hypertensive crises that can be lethal. The clinical pre-
sentation is variable, ranging from an adrenal inciden-
taloma to a patient in hypertensive crisis with associated 
cerebrovascular or cardiac complications. 
 ePiDemiology 
 Pheochromocytoma is estimated to occur in 2–8 of 
1 million persons per year, and about 0.1% of hyper-
tensive patients harbor a pheochromocytoma. Autopsy 
series reveal a prevalence of 0.2%. The mean age at 
diagnosis is about 40 years, although the tumors can 
occur from early childhood until late in life. The “rule 
of tens” for pheochromocytomas states that about 10%
are bilateral, 10% are extra-adrenal, and 10% are malig-
nant. However, these percentages are higher in the 
inherited syndromes. 
 etiology anD Pathogenesis 
 Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are well-
vascularized tumors that arise from cells derived from 
the sympathetic (e.g., adrenal medulla) or parasym-
pathetic (e.g., carotid body, glomus vagale) paragan-
glia ( Fig. 6-1 ). The name  pheochromocytoma refl ects 
the black-colored staining caused by chromaffi n oxi-
dation of catecholamines. Although a variety of terms 
have been used to describe these tumors, most clinicians 
use the term  pheochromocytoma to describe symptomatic 
catecholamine-producing tumors, including those in 
extraadrenal retroperitoneal, pelvic, and thoracic sites. 
The term  paraganglioma is used to describe catechol-
amine-producing tumors in the head and neck. These 
tumors may secrete little or no catecholamines. 
 The etiology of sporadic pheochromocytomas and 
paragangliomas is unknown. However, about 25% 
of patients have an inherited condition, including 
germ-line mutations in the  RET, VHL, NF1, SDHB, 
SDHC, SDHD, or  SDHAF2 genes. Biallelic gene 
inactivation has been demonstrated for the  VHL, NF1 , 
and  SDH genes, whereas  RET mutations activate the 
receptor tyrosine kinase activity. SDH is an enzyme 
of the Krebs cycle and the mitochondrial respiratory 
chain. The VHL protein is a component of a ubiquitin 
E3 ligase.  VHL mutations reduce protein degradation, 
resulting in upregulation of components involved in 
cell cycle progression, glucose metabolism, and oxygen 
sensing. 
 CliniCal Features 
 The clinical presentation is so variable that pheochro-
mocytoma has been termed “the great masquerader” 
( Table 6-1 ). Among the presenting symptoms, epi-
sodes of palpitations, headaches, and profuse sweating 
are typical and constitute a classic triad. The presence 
of all three symptoms in association with hypertension 
makes pheochromocytoma a likely diagnosis. However, 
a pheochromocytoma can be asymptomatic for years, 
and some tumors grow to a considerable size before 
patients note symptoms. 
 The dominant sign is hypertension. Classically, 
patients have episodic hypertension, but sustained 
hypertension is also common. Catecholamine crises 
can lead to heart failure, pulmonary edema, arrhyth-
mias, and intracranial hemorrhage. During episodes 
of hormone release, which can occur at very diver-
gent intervals, patients are anxious and pale, and they 
 PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA 
 CHAPTER 6 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
128
experience tachycardia and palpitations. These par-
oxysms generally last less than an hour and may be 
precipitated by surgery, positional changes, exercise, 
pregnancy, urination (particularly bladder pheochro-
mocytomas), and various medications (e.g., tricyclic 
antidepressants, opiates, metoclopramide).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on documentation of catechol-
amine excess by biochemical testing and localization of 
the tumor by imaging. Both are of equal importance, 
Table 6-1
Clinical Features Associated With 
Pheochromocytoma
Headaches
Sweating attacks
Palpitations and tachycardia
Hypertension, sustained or 
paroxysmal
Anxiety and panic attacks
Pallor
Nausea
Abdominal pain
Weakness
Weight loss
Paradoxical response to  
antihypertensive drugs
Polyuria and polydipsia
Constipation
Orthostatic hypotension
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Erythrocytosis
Elevated blood sugar
Hypercalcemia
although measurement of catecholamines is traditionally 
the first step.
Biochemical testing
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas synthesize 
and store catecholamines, which include norepi-
nephrine (noradrenaline), epinephrine (adrenaline), 
and dopamine. Elevated plasma and urinary levels 
of catecholamines and the methylated metabolites, 
metanephrines, are the cornerstone for the diagnosis. 
The hormonal activity of tumors fluctuates, result-
ing in considerable variation in serial catecholamine 
measurements. Thus, there is some value in obtaining 
tests during or soon after a symptomatic crisis. How-
ever, most tumors continuously leak O-methylated 
metabolites, which are detected by measurements of 
metanephrines.
Catecholamines and metanephrines can be mea-
sured by using different methods (e.g., high-perfor-
mance liquid chromatography, enzyme-linked immu-
nosorbent assay, and liquid chromatography/mass 
spectrometry). In a clinical context suspicious for 
pheochromocytoma, when values are increased three 
times the upper limit of normal, a pheochromocytoma 
is highly likely regardless of the assay used. However, 
as summarized in Table 6-2, the sensitivity and spec-
ificity of available biochemical tests vary greatly, and 
these differences are important in assessing patients 
Jugular v.
Vagus n.
Tympanic n.
Jugular p.
Intravagal p.
Intercarotid p.
Sup. laryngeal p.
Inf. laryngeal p.
Subclavian p.
Pulmonary p.
Descending aorta
Glossopharyngeal n.
Jugular
ganglion
Nodose
ganglion
Sup.
laryngeal a.
Int.
laryngeal a.
Recurrent
laryngeal n.
Aortico-
pulmonary p.
Coronary p.
A Adrenal
pheochromocytoma
B Extra-adrenal
pheochromocytoma
C Head and neck paraganglioma
Figure 6-1 
The paraganglial system and topographic sites (in red) 
of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. (Parts A, B, 
from WM Manger, RW Gifford: Clinical and experimental 
pheochromocytoma. Cambridge, Blackwell Science, 1996;
Part C, from GG Glenner, PM Grimley: Tumors of the Extra-
adrenal Paraganglion System (Including Chemoreceptors), 
Atlas of Tumor Pathology, 2nd Series, Fascicle 9. Washington, 
DC, AFIP, 1974.)
 
CHAPTER 6
Pheochromocytoma
129
with borderline elevations of different compounds. 
Urinary tests for vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), meta-
nephrines (total or fractionated), and catecholamines 
are widely available and are used commonly for initial 
testing. Among these tests, the fractionated metaneph-
rines and catecholamines are the most sensitive. Plasma 
tests are more convenient and include measurements 
of catecholamines and metanephrines. Measurements 
of plasma metanephrine are the most sensitive and 
are less susceptible to false-positive elevations from 
stress, including venipuncture. Although the inci-
dence of false-positive test results has been reduced 
by the introduction of newer assays, physiologic stress 
responses and medications that increase catechol-
amines still can confound testing. Because the tumors 
are relatively rare, borderline elevations are likely to 
be false positives. In this circumstance, it is impor-
tant to exclude diet or drug exposure (withdrawal of 
levodopa, sympathomimetics, diuretics, tricyclic anti-
depressants, alpha and beta blockers) that might cause 
false positives and then repeat testing or perform a 
clonidine suppression test (measurement of plasma 
metanephrines 3 h after oral administration of 300 μg 
of clonidine). Other pharmacologic tests, such as 
the phentolamine test and the glucagon provoca-
tion test, are of relatively low sensitivity and are not 
recommended.
Table 6-2
Biochemical and Imaging Methods Used for 
Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
Diagnosis
Diagnostic Method
Sensitivity
Specificity
24-h urinary tests
  Vanillylmandelic acid
+ +
+ + + +
  Catecholamines
+ + +
+ + +
  Fractionated  
  metanephrines
+ + + +
+ +
  Total metanephrines
+ + +
+ + + +
Plasma tests
  Catecholamines
+ + +
+ +
  Free metanephrines
+ + + +
+ + +
  CT
+ + + +
+ + +
  MRI
+ + + +
+ + +
  MIBG scintigraphy
+ + +
+ + + +
  Somatostatin receptor  
  scintigraphya
+ +
+ +
  Dopa (dopamine) PET
+ + +
+ + + +
aParticularly high in head and neck paragangliomas.
Abbreviations: MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; PET, positron emis-
sion tomography.
Diagnostic imaging
A variety of methods have been used to localize pheo-
chromocytomas and paragangliomas (Table 6-2). CT and 
MRI are similar in sensitivity. CT should be performed 
with contrast. T2-weighted MRI with gadolinium con-
trast is optimal for detecting pheochromocytomas and 
is somewhat better than CT for imaging extra-adrenal 
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. About 5% 
of adrenal incidentalomas, which usually are detected 
by CT or MRI, prove to be pheochromocytomas after 
endocrinologic evaluation.
Tumors also can be localized by using radioactive 
tracers, including 131I- or 123I-metaiodobenzylguani-
dine (MIBG), 111In-somatostatin analogues, or 18F-dopa 
(or dopamine) positron emission tomography (PET). 
Because these agents exhibit selective uptake in para-
gangliomas, nuclear imaging is particularly useful in the 
hereditary syndromes.
Differential diagnosis
When one is entertaining the possibility of a pheochro-
mocytoma, other disorders to consider include essential 
hypertension, anxiety attacks, use of cocaine or amphet-
amines, mastocytosis or carcinoid syndrome (usually 
lacking hypertension), intracranial lesions, clonidine 
withdrawal, autonomic epilepsy, and factitious crises 
(usually from sympathomimetic amines). When an 
asymptomatic adrenal mass is identified, likely diagnoses 
other than pheochromocytoma include a nonfunc-
tioning adrenal adenoma, aldosteronoma, and cortisol-
producing adenoma (Cushing’s syndrome).
Treatment	
Pheochromocytoma
Complete tumor removal is the ultimate therapeutic 
goal. Preoperative patient preparation is essential for 
safe surgery. α-Adrenergic blockers (phenoxybenza-
mine) should be initiated at relatively low doses (e.g., 
5–10 mg orally three times per day) and increased as 
tolerated every few days. Because patients are volume 
constricted, liberal salt intake and hydration are nec-
essary to avoid orthostasis. Adequate alpha blockade 
generally requires 7 days, with a typical final dose of 
20–30 mg phenoxybenzamine three times per day. 
Oral prazosin or intravenous phentolamine can be 
used to manage paroxysms while awaiting adequate 
alpha blockade. Before surgery, blood pressure should 
be consistently below 160/90 mmHg, with moder-
ate orthostasis. Beta blockers (e.g., 10 mg propranolol 
three to four times per day) can be added after start-
ing alpha blockers and increased as needed if tachycar-
dia persists. Other antihypertensives, such as calcium 
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
130
channel blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors, have been used when blood pressure is 
difficult to control with phenoxybenzamine alone.
Surgery should be performed by teams of anesthesi-
ologists and surgeons with experience in the manage-
ment of pheochromocytomas. Blood pressure can be 
labile during surgery, particularly at the onset of intuba-
tion or when the tumor is manipulated. Nitroprusside 
infusion is useful for intraoperative hypertensive cri-
ses, and hypotension usually responds to volume infu-
sion. Although laparotomy was the traditional surgical 
approach, endoscopic surgery, using either a trans-
peritoneal or a retroperitoneal approach, is associated 
with fewer complications, a faster recovery, and opti-
mal cosmetic results. Atraumatic endoscopic surgery 
has become the method of choice. It may be possible 
to preserve the normal adrenal cortex, particularly in 
hereditary disorders in which bilateral pheochromo-
cytomas are more likely. Extra-adrenal abdominal as 
well as most thoracic pheochromocytomas also can 
be removed endoscopically. Postoperatively, cate-
cholamine normalization should be documented. An 
adrenocorticotropic hormone test should be used to 
exclude cortisol deficiency when bilateral adrenal cor-
tex–sparing surgery is performed.
Malignant Pheochromocytoma
About 5–10% of pheochromocytomas and paragan-
gliomas are malignant. The diagnosis of malignant 
pheochromocytoma is problematic. Typical histo-
logic criteria of cellular atypia, presence of mitoses, and 
invasion of vessels or adjacent tissues do not reliably 
identify which tumors have the capacity to metastasize. 
Thus, the term malignant pheochromocytoma generally is 
restricted to tumors with distant metastases, most com-
monly found in lungs, bone, or liver, suggesting a vas-
cular pathway of spread. Because hereditary syndromes 
are associated with multifocal tumor sites, these features 
should be anticipated in patients with germ-line muta-
tions of RET, VHL, SDHD, or SDHB. However, dis-
tant metastases also occur in these syndromes, especially 
in carriers of SDHB mutations.
Treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma or para-
ganglioma is challenging. Options include tumor mass 
reduction, alpha blockers for symptoms, chemotherapy, 
and nuclear medicine radiotherapy. Averbuch’s chemo-
therapy protocol includes dacarbazine (600 mg/m2 days 1 
and 2), cyclophosphamide (750 mg/m2 day 1), and vin-
cristine (1.4 mg/m2 day 1), repeated every 21 days for 
three to six cycles. Palliation (stable disease to shrinkage) 
is achieved in about one-half of patients. Other chemo-
therapeutic protocols remain in the experimental stage. 
An alternative is 131I-MIBG treatment using 200-mCi 
doses at monthly intervals over three to six cycles. The 
prognosis of metastatic pheochromocytoma or paragan-
glioma is variable, with a 5-year survival of 30–60%.
Pheochromocytoma in Pregnancy
Pheochromocytomas occasionally are diagnosed in preg-
nancy. Endoscopic removal, preferably in the fourth to 
sixth month of gestation, is possible and can be followed 
by uneventful childbirth. Regular screening in families 
with inherited pheochromocytomas provides an oppor-
tunity to identify and remove asymptomatic tumors in 
women of reproductive age.
Pheochromocytoma-Associated 
Syndromes
About 25–33% of patients with a pheochromocytoma 
or paraganglioma have an inherited syndrome. The 
mean age at diagnosis is about 15 years lower in patients 
with inherited syndromes compared with patients with 
sporadic tumors.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF 1) was the first described 
pheochromocytoma-associated syndrome. The NF1 
gene functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating the 
Ras signaling cascade. Classic features of neurofibroma-
tosis include multiple neurofibromas, café au lait spots, 
axillary freckling of the skin, and Lisch nodules of the 
iris (Fig. 6-2). Pheochromocytomas occur in only 
about 1% of these patients and are located predomi-
nantly in the adrenals. Malignant pheochromocytoma is 
not uncommon.
The best-known pheochromocytoma-associated syn-
drome is the autosomal dominant disorder multiple endo-
crine neoplasia, types 2A and 2B (MEN 2A, MEN 2B) 
(Chap. 23). Both types of MEN 2 are caused by muta-
tions in RET (REarranged during Transfection), which 
encodes a tyrosine kinase. The locations of RET muta-
tions correlate with the severity of disease and the type 
of MEN 2 (Chap. 23). MEN 2A is characterized by 
medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocy-
toma, and hyperparathyroidism; MEN 2B also includes 
MTC and pheochromocytoma, as well as multiple 
mucosal neuromas, marfanoid habitus, and other devel-
opmental disorders, though it typically lacks hyperpara-
thyroidism. MTC is seen in virtually all patients with 
MEN 2, but pheochromocytoma occurs in only about 
50% of these patients. Nearly all pheochromocytomas 
are benign and located in the adrenals, often bilaterally 
(Fig. 6-3). Pheochromocytoma may be symptomatic 
before MTC. Prophylactic thyroidectomy is being per-
formed in many carriers of RET mutations; pheochro-
mocytomas should be excluded before any surgery in 
these patients.
 
CHAPTER 6
Pheochromocytoma
131
Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) is an autosomal 
dominant disorder that predisposes to retinal and cer-
ebellar hemangioblastomas, which also occur in the 
brainstem and spinal cord (Fig. 6-4). Other important 
features of VHL are clear cell renal carcinomas, pancre-
atic islet cell tumors, endolymphatic sac tumors (ELSTs) 
of the inner ear, cystadenomas of the epididymis and 
broad ligament, and multiple pancreatic or renal cysts.
The VHL gene encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase that 
regulates expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 
(HIF-1), among other genes. Loss of VHL is associated 
with increased expression of vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) that induces angiogenesis. Although the 
VHL gene can be inactivated by all types of mutations, 
patients with pheochromocytoma predominantly have 
missense mutations. About 20–30% of patients with 
VHL have pheochromocytomas, but in some families 
the incidence can reach 90%. The recognition of pheo-
chromocytoma as a VHL-associated feature provides an 
opportunity to diagnose retinal, central nervous system, 
renal, and pancreatic tumors at a stage when effective 
treatment may still be possible
The paraganglioma syndromes (PGLs) have been classi-
fied by genetic analyses of families with head and neck 
paragangliomas. The susceptibility genes encode sub-
units of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), 
a component in the Krebs cycle and the mitochon-
drial electron transport chain. SDH is formed by four 
subunits (A–D). Mutations of SDHB (PGL4), SDHC 
(PGL3), SDHD (PGL1), and SDHAF2 (PGL2) pre-
dispose to the paraganglioma syndromes. Mutations 
of SDHA do not predispose to paraganglioma tumors 
but instead cause Leigh’s disease, a form of encepha-
lopathy. The transmission of the disease in carriers of 
SDHB, SDHC, and SDHAF2 germ-line mutations is 
autosomal dominant. In contrast, in SDHD families, 
only the progeny of affected fathers develop tumors if 
they inherit the mutation. In a small number of patients 
with familial pheochromocytoma, a mutation has not 
been identified. PGL1 is most common, followed by 
PGL4; PGL2 and PGL3 are rare. Adrenal, extra-adrenal 
abdominal, and thoracic pheochromocytomas that are 
components of PGL1 and PGL4 are rare in PGL3, but 
absent in PGL2 (Fig. 6-5). About one-third of the 
patients with PGL4 develop metastases.
Familial pheochromocytoma (FP) has been attributed to 
hereditary, exclusively adrenal tumors in patients with 
germ-line mutations in the TMEM127 gene.
Figure 6-2 
Neurofibromatosis. A. MRI of bilateral adrenal pheochro-
mocytoma. B. Cutaneous neurofibromas. C. Lisch nodules 
of the iris. D. Axillary freckling. (Part A from HPH Neumann 
et al: Keio J Med 54:15, 2005; with permission.)
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
132
Guidelines for Genetic Screening in 
Patients with Pheochromocytoma 
or Paraganglioma
In addition to family history, general features suggesting 
an inherited syndrome include young age, multifocal 
tumors, extra-adrenal tumors, and malignant tumors 
(Fig. 6-6). Because of the relatively high prevalence 
of familial syndromes among patients who present 
with pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma, it is useful 
to identify germ-line mutations even in patients with-
out a known family history. A first step is to search 
for clinical features of inherited syndromes and to per-
form an in-depth, multigenerational family history. 
Each of these syndromes exhibits autosomal domi-
nant transmission with variable penetrance, but a pro-
band with a mother affected by paraganglial tumors is 
Figure 6-3 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. Multifocal medul-
lary thyroid carcinoma shown by (A) MIBG scintigraphy and 
(B) operative specimen Arrows demonstrate the tumors; 
arrowheads show the tissue bridge of the cut specimen.
Bilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma shown by (C) MIBG 
scintigraphy, (D) CT imaging, and (E) operative specimens. 
(From HPH Neumann et al: Keio J Med 54:15, 2005; with 
permission.)
not predisposed to PLG1 (SDHD mutation carrier). 
Cutaneous neurofibromas, café au lait spots, and axil-
lary freckling suggest neurofibromatosis. Germ-line 
mutations in NF1 have not been reported in patients 
with sporadic pheochromocytomas. Thus, NF1 test-
ing does not have to be performed in the absence of 
other clinical features of neurofibromatosis. A personal 
or family history of medullary thyroid cancer or eleva-
tion of serum calcitonin strongly suggest MEN 2 and 
should prompt testing for RET mutations. A history of 
visual impairment, or tumors of the cerebellum, kid-
ney, brainstem, or spinal cord, suggests the possibility 
of VHL. A personal and/or family history for head and 
neck paraganglioma suggests PGL1 or PGL4.
A single adrenal pheochromocytoma in a patient 
with an otherwise unremarkable history may still be 
 
CHAPTER 6
Pheochromocytoma
133
Figure 6-4 
Von Hippel-Lindau disease. Retinal angioma (A); heman-
gioblastomas of cerebellum are shown by MRI in (B) brain-
stem; (C and D) spinal cord; (E) bilateral pheochromocyto-
mas and bilateral renal clear cell carcinomas; and (F) multiple 
pancreatic cysts. (Parts A and D from HPH Neumann et al:
Adv Nephrol Necker Hosp 27:361, 1997. harrsion  Elsevier. 
Part B from SH Morgan, J-P Grunfeld [eds]: Inherited Disor-
ders of the Kidney. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 1998. 
Part F from HPH Neumann et al: Contrib Nephrol 136:193, 
2001. harrsion  S. Karger AG, Basel.)
Figure 6-5 
Paraganglioma syndrome. PGL1, a patient with incom-
plete resection of a left carotid body tumor and the SDHD 
W5X mutation. (A) 18F-dopa positron emission tomography 
demonstrating tumor uptake in the right jugular glomus, the 
right carotid body, the left carotid body, the left coronary 
glomus, and the right adrenal gland. Note the physiologic
accumulation of the radiopharmaceutical agent in the kid-
neys, liver, gallbladder, renal pelvis, and urinary bladder. 
(B and C) CT angiography with three-dimensional recon-
struction. Arrows point to the paraganglial tumors. (From 
S Hoegerle et al: Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 30:689, 2003; 
with permission.)
SECTION I
Pituitary, Thyroid, and Adrenal Disorders
134
Figure 6-6 
Mutation distribution in the RET, VHL, NF1, SDHB, and 
SDHD genes. A. Correlation with age. The bars depict the 
frequency of sporadic or various inherited forms of pheo-
chromocytoma in different age groups. The inherited disor-
ders are much more common among younger individuals 
presenting with pheochromocytoma. Germ-line mutations 
according to (B) multiple, (C) extra-adrenal retroperitoneal, 
(D) thoracic, and (E) malignant pheochromocytomas. (Data 
from the Freiburg International Pheochromocytoma and 
Paraganglioma Registry in 2009.)
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Percentages of germ-line mutations in
pheochromocytoma susceptibility genes
0-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
Age (years)
41-50
51-60
>60
spor
RET
NF1
SDHD
SDHB
VHL
A
   
Multiple pheo in %
45%
VHL
SDHB
SDHD
NF1
RET
spor
23%
19%
4%
7%
2%
B
C
Abdominal extra-adrenal in %
17%
30%
7%
1%
1%
44%
VHL
SDHB
SDHD
NF1
RET
spor
       
D
Thoracic pheo in %
20%
23%
24%
33%
VHL
SDHB
SDHD
NF1
RET
spor
VHL
SDHB
SDHD
NF1
RET
spor
Malignant pheo %
6%
28%
2%
3%
1%
60%
E
associated with mutations of VHL, RET, SDHB, or 
SDHD (in decreasing order of frequency). Two-thirds 
of extra-adrenal tumors are associated with one of these 
syndromes, and multifocal tumors occur with decreas-
ing frequency in carriers of RET, SDHD, VHL, and 
SDHB mutations. About 30% of head and neck para-
gangliomas are associated with germ-line mutations of 
one of the SDH subunit genes (particularly SDHD) and 
are rare in carriers of VHL and RET mutations.
Once the underlying syndrome is diagnosed, the 
benefit of genetic testing can be extended to relatives. 
For this purpose, it is necessary to identify the germ-
line mutation in the proband and, after genetic counsel-
ing, perform DNA sequence analyses of the responsible 
gene in relatives to determine whether they are affected. 
Other family members may benefit from biochemi-
cal screening for paraganglial tumors in individuals who 
carry a germ-line mutation.
Section II 
Reproductive  
Endocrinology
 DISORDERS OF SEX DEVELOPMENT 
 John c. Achermann  I   J. larry Jameson 
136
 Sex development begins in utero but continues into 
young adulthood with the achievement of sexual matu-
rity and reproductive capability. The major determi-
nants of sex development can be divided into three 
major components: chromosomal sex, gonadal sex (sex 
determination), and phenotypic sex (sex differentia-
tion) ( Fig. 7-1 ). Abnormalities at each of these stages 
can result in disorders of sex development (DSDs) 
( Table 7-1 ). A child born with ambiguous genita-
lia requires urgent assessment, as some causes such as 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), can be associ-
ated with life-threatening adrenal crises. Early gender 
assignment and clear communication with parents about 
the diagnosis and treatment options are essential. The 
involvement of an experienced multidisciplinary team is 
crucial for counseling, medical management, and surgi-
cal evaluation/intervention (if needed). Subtler forms of 
 ChaPter 7 
Testis-determining
genes
Gonadal steroids
& peptides
(T, DHT, AMH/MIS)
Gonadal steroids
(E2)
Ovary-determining
genes
XX
Chromosomal Sex
Gonadal Sex
Phenotypic Sex
XY
 Figure 7-1 
Sex development can be divided into three major compo-
nents: chromosomal sex, gonadal sex, and phenotypic sex. 
DHT, dihydrotestosterone; MIS, müllerianinhibiting substance 
also known as anti-müllerian hormone, AMH; T, testosterone. 
gonadal dysfunction [e.g., Klinefelter’s syndrome (KS), 
Turner’s syndrome (TS)] often are diagnosed later in 
life by internists. Because these conditions are associated 
with a variety of psychological, reproductive, and met-
abolic consequences, an open dialogue must be estab-
lished between the patient and health care providers to 
ensure continuity and attention to these issues. 
 sex DeVeloPment 
 Chromosomal sex describes the X and/or Y chromo-
some complement (46,XY male; 46,XX female) that is 
established at the time of fertilization. The presence of 
a normal Y chromosome determines that testis devel-
opment will occur even in the presence of multiple X 
chromosomes (e.g., 47,XXY or 48,XXXY). The loss of 
an X chromosome impairs gonad development (45,X or 
45,X/46,XY mosaicism). Fetuses with no X chromo-
some (45,Y) are not viable. 
 Gonadal sex refers to the assignment of gonadal tissue as 
testis or ovary. The embryonic gonad is bipotential and 
can develop (from ∼42 days gestation) into either a tes-
tis or an ovary, depending on which genes are expressed 
( Fig. 7-2 ). Testis development is initiated by expres-
sion of the Y chromosome gene  SRY (sex-determining 
region on the Y chromosome) that encodes an HMG 
box transcription factor.  SRY is expressed transiently 
in cells destined to become Sertoli cells and serves as a 
pivotal switch to establish the testis lineage. Mutation 
of  SRY prevents testis development in chromosomal 
46,XY males, whereas translocation of  SRY in 46,XX 
females is suffi cient to induce testis development and a 
male phenotype. Other genes are necessary to continue 
testis development.  SOX9 ( SRY -related HMG-box 
gene 9) is upregulated by  SRY in the developing male 
gonad but is suppressed in the female gonad. Transgenic 
expression of  SOX9 is suffi cient to initiate testis forma-
tion in mice, and mutations that disrupt  SOX9 impair 
 
CHAPTER 7
Disorders of Sex Development
137
testis development. WT1 (Wilms’ tumor–related gene 
1) acts early in the genetic pathway and regulates the 
transcription of several genes, including SFI (officially 
called NRSA1), DAX1 (NR0B1), and AMH (encod-
ing MIS, müllerian-inhibiting substance). SF1 encodes 
steroidogenic factor 1, a nuclear receptor that functions 
in cooperation with other transcription factors to regu-
late a large array of adrenal and gonadal genes, includ-
ing SOX9 and many genes involved in steroidogenesis. 
Heterozygous SF1 mutations account for ∼10% of XY 
patients with gonadal dysgenesis and impaired andro-
genization, indicating the sensitivity of the testis to SF1 
gene dosage. The early expression pattern of SF1 in the 
gonad parallels that of another orphan nuclear receptor, 
DAX1 (dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia 
congenita on the X chromosome, gene 1). Duplication 
of DAX1 impairs testis development, whereas deletions 
or mutations of DAX1 lead to disordered formation 
Table 7-1
Classification of Disorders of Sex Development (DSD)
Sex Chromosome DSD
46,XY DSD
46,XX DSD
47,XXY (Klinefelter’s syn-
drome and variants)
45,X (Turner’s syndrome and 
variants)
45,X/46,XY mosaicism 
(mixed gonadal dysgenesis)
46,XX/46,XY  
(chimerism/mosaicism)
Disorders of gonadal (testis) development
Complete or partial gonadal dysgenesis (e.g., 
SRY, SOX9, SF1, WT1, DHH)
Impaired fetal Leydig cell function (e.g., SF1/
NR5A1, CXorf6/MAMLD1)
Ovotesticular DSD
Testis regression
Disorders of gonadal (ovary) develop-
ment
Gonadal dysgenesis
Ovotesticular DSD
Testicular DSD (e.g., SRY+, dup SOX9, 
RSPO1)
Disorders in androgen synthesis or action 
(see Table 7-3)
Disorders of androgen biosynthesis
  LH receptor (LHCGR) mutations
  Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
  Steroidogenic acute regulatory (STAR) protein
  Cholesterol side-chain cleavage (CYP11A1)
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase II 
(HSD3b2)
  17α-Hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1)
  P450 oxidoreductase (POR)
17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase III 
(HSD17b3) 
5α-Reductase II (SRD5A2)
Disorders of androgen action
  Androgen insensitivity syndrome
  Drugs and environmental modulators
Androgen excess (see Table 7-4)
Fetal
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase II 
(HSD3b2?)
21-Hydroxylase (CYP21A2?)
P450 oxidoreductase (POR?)
11β-Hydroxylase (CYP11B1?)
Glucocorticoid receptor mutations
Fetoplacental
Aromatase deficiency (CYP19)
Oxidoreductase deficiency (POR)
Maternal
Maternal virilizing tumors (e.g., luteomas)
Androgenic drugs
Other
Syndromic associations of male genital devel-
opment
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome
Vanishing testis syndrome
Isolated hypospadias
Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Cryptorchidism
Environmental influences
Other
Syndromic associations (e.g., cloacal 
anomalies)
Müllerian agenesis/hypoplasia (e.g., 
MRKH)
Uterine abnormalities (e.g., MODY5)
Vaginal atresia (e.g., McKusick-Kaufman)
Labial adhesions
Source: Modified from IA Hughes: Arch Dis Child 91:554, 2006.
of testis cords, again revealing the exquisite sensitivity 
of the male sex-determining pathway to gene dosage 
effects. In addition to the genes mentioned above, stud-
ies of human and murine mutations indicate that at least 
15 other genes are also involved in gonadal differentia-
tion, gonadal development, and final positioning of the 
gonad (Fig. 7-2). These genes encode an array of signal-
ing molecules and paracrine growth factors in addition 
to transcription factors.
Although ovarian development once was considered 
a “default” process, it is now clear that specific genes are 
expressed during the earliest stages of ovary develop­
ment. Some of these factors may repress testis devel-
opment (e.g., WNT4, R-spondin-1) (Fig. 7-2). Once 
the ovary has formed, additional genes are required for 
normal follicular development [e.g., follicle-stimulat-
ing hormone (FSH) receptor, GDF9]. Steroidogenesis 
in the ovary requires the development of follicles that 
Section II 
Reproductive  Endocrinology
138
contain granulosa cells and theca cells surrounding the 
oocytes (Chap. 10). Thus, there is relatively limited 
ovarian steroidogenesis until gonadotropins are pro-
duced at puberty.
Germ cells also develop in a sex dimorphic manner. 
In the developing ovary, primordial germ cells (PGCs) 
proliferate and enter meiosis, whereas they proliferate 
and then undergo mitotic arrest in the developing tes-
tis. PGC entry into meiosis is initiated by retinoic acid 
that activates STRA8 (stimulated by retinoic acid 8) and 
other genes involved in meiosis. The developing tes-
tis produces high levels of CYP26B1, an enzyme that 
degrades retinoic acid, preventing PGC entry into mei-
osis. Approximately 7 million germ cells are present in 
the fetal ovary in the second trimester, and 1 million 
remain at birth. Only 400 are ovulated during a wom-
an’s reproductive life span (Chap. 10).
Phenotypic sex refers to the structures of the external 
and internal genitalia and secondary sex characteristics. 
The male phenotype requires the secretion of anti-mül-
lerian hormone (AMH, also known as müllerian-inhib-
iting substance, MIS) from Sertoli cells and testosterone 
from testicular Leydig cells. AMH is a member of the 
transforming growth factor (TGF) β family and acts 
through specific receptors to cause regression of the 
müllerian structures (from 60 to 80 days’ gestation). 
At ∼60–140 days’ gestation, testosterone supports the 
development of wolffian structures, including the epi-
didymides, vasa deferentia, and seminal vesicles. Testos-
terone is the precursor for dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 
a potent androgen that promotes development of the 
external genitalia, including the penis and scrotum (65–
100 days, and thereafter) (Fig. 7-3). The urogenital 
sinus develops into the prostate and prostatic urethra in 
the male and into the urethra and lower portion of the 
vagina in the female. The genital tubercle becomes 
the glans penis in the male and the clitoris in the female. 
The urogenital swellings form the scrotum or the labia 
majora, and the urethral folds fuse to form the shaft of 
the penis and the male urethra or the labia minora. In the 
female, wolffian ducts regress and the müllerian ducts 
form the fallopian tubes, uterus, and upper segment 
of the vagina. A female phenotype will develop in the 
absence of the gonad, but estrogen is needed for matura-
tion of the uterus and breast at puberty.
Disorders of Chromosomal Sex
Variations in sex chromosome number and struc-
ture can present as disorders of sex development (e.g., 
45,X/46,XY). KS (47,XXY) and TS (45,X) do not 
usually present with genital ambiguity but are associated 
with gonadal dysfunction (Table 7-2).
Klinefelter’s Syndrome (47,XXY)
Pathophysiology
The classic form of KS (47,XXY) occurs after meiotic 
nondisjunction of the sex chromosomes during game-
togenesis (40% during spermatogenesis, 60% during 
oogenesis). Mosaic forms of KS (46,XY/47,XXY) are 
thought to result from chromosomal mitotic nondis-
junction within the zygote and occur in at least 10% 
of individuals with this condition. Other chromosomal 
variants of KS (e.g., 48,XXYY, 48,XXXY) have been 
reported but are less common.
Clinical features
KS is characterized by small testes, infertility, gyneco-
mastia, “eunuchoid” proportions, and incomplete vir-
ilization in phenotypic males. It has an incidence of at 
least 1 in 1000 men, but approximately 75% of cases 
are not diagnosed. In severe cases, individuals present 
prepubertally with small testes or with impaired andro-
genization and gynecomastia at the time of puberty. 
Urogenital ridge
Leydig cells
Sertoli cells
Granulosa cells
WT1
SF1
SRY
SF1
DAX1
SOX9
DHH
MAMLD1
ATRX
DMRT 1,2
RSPO1
WNT4
FST
BMP2
FOXL2
GDF9
BMP15
46XX
AMH
E2
Testosterone
DHT
46XY
Bipotential gonad
Ovary
Testis
Müllerian
regression
Follicle
development
Male sexual
differentiation
Figure 7-2
The genetic regulation of gonadal development. AMH, anti-
müllerian hormone (müllerian-inhibiting substance); ATRX, 
α-thalassemia, mental retardation on the X; BMP2 and 15, 
bone morphogenic factors 2 and 15; DAX1, dosage-sensitive 
sex-reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congenita on the X chromo-
some, gene 1; DHH, desert hedgehog; DHT, dihydrotestoster-
one; DMRT 1,2, doublesex MAB3-related transcription factor 
1,2; FOXL2, forkhead transcription factor L2; FST, follistatin; 
GDF9, growth differentiation factor 9; MAMLD1, mastermind-
like domain containing 1; RSPO1, R-spondin 1; SF1, steroido-
genic factor 1 (also known as NR5A1); SOX9, SRY-related 
HMG-box gene 9; SRY, sex-determining region on the Y chro-
mosome; WNT4, wingless-type MMTV integration site 4; WT1, 
Wilms’ tumor–related gene 1.
 
CHAPTER 7
Disorders of Sex Development
139
Developmental delay and learning disabilities may be 
a feature. Later in life, eunuchoid features or infertility 
lead to the diagnosis. Testes are small and firm [median 
length 2.5 cm (4 mL volume); almost always <3.5 cm 
(12 mL)] and typically seem inappropriately small for 
the degree of androgenization. Biopsies are not usu-
ally necessary but reveal seminiferous tubule hyaliniza-
tion and azoospermia. Other clinical features of KS are 
listed in Table 7-2. Plasma concentrations of FSH and 
luteinizing hormone (LH) are increased in most patients 
with 47,XXY (90% and 80%, respectively), and plasma 
testosterone is decreased (50–75%), reflecting primary 
gonadal failure. Estradiol is often increased because of 
chronic Leydig cell stimulation by LH and because 
of aromatization of androstenedione by adipose tissue; 
the increased ratio of estradiol/testosterone results in 
gynecomastia. Patients with mosaic forms of KS have 
less severe clinical features, have larger testes, and some-
times achieve spontaneous fertility.
Treatment	
Klinefelter’s Syndrome
Gynecomastia should be treated by surgical reduction if 
it causes concern (Chap. 8). Androgen supplementation 
improves virilization, libido, energy, hypofibrinolysis, and 
bone mineralization in underandrogenized men but may 
occasionally worsen gynecomastia (Chap. 8). Fertility has 
been achieved by using in vitro fertilization in men with 
oligospermia or with intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
(ICSI) after retrieval of spermatozoa by testicular sperm 
extraction techniques. In specialized centers, successful 
spermatozoa retrieval using this technique is possible in 
>50% of men with nonmosaic KS. After ICSI and embryo 
transfer, successful pregnancies can be achieved in ∼50% 
of these cases. The risk of transmission of this chromo-
somal abnormality needs to be considered, and preim-
plantation screening may be desired, although this out-
come is much less common than originally predicted.
Clitoris
Labia minora
Labia majora
Vagina
B
Ovary
Fallopian
tube
Uterus
Vagina
Female
Male
Female
Male
Gonad
Mesonephros
Mullerian duct
..
Glans penis
Shaft of 
penis
Scrotum
Penoscrotal
raphe
Wolffian duct
Urogenital
sinus
Epididymis
Testis
Vas
deferens
Seminal
vesicle
Prostate
Genital tubercle
Urethral fold and groove
Genital swelling
A
Figure 7-3
Sex development. A. Internal urogenital tract. B. External 
genitalia. (After E Braunwald et al [eds]: Harrison’s Principles 
of Internal Medicine, 15th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 
2001.)
Section II 
Reproductive  Endocrinology
140
Turner’s Syndrome (Gonadal 
Dysgenesis; 45,X)
Pathophysiology
Approximately one-half of individuals with Turner’s 
syndrome have a 45,X karyotype, about 20% have 
45,X/46,XX mosaicism, and the remainder have struc-
tural abnormalities of the X chromosome such as X frag-
ments, isochromosomes, or rings. The clinical features of 
TS result from haploinsufficiency of multiple X chro-
mosomal genes (e.g., short stature homeobox, SHOX). 
However, imprinted genes also may be affected when 
the inherited X has different parental origins.
Clinical features
TS is characterized by bilateral streak gonads, primary 
amenorrhea, short stature, and multiple congenital 
anomalies in phenotypic females. It affects ∼1 in 2500 
women and is diagnosed at different ages depending on 
the dominant clinical features (Table 7-2). Prenatally, a 
diagnosis of TS usually is made incidentally after chori-
onic villus sampling or amniocentesis for unrelated rea-
sons such as advanced maternal age. Prenatal ultrasound 
findings include increased nuchal translucency. The 
postnatal diagnosis of TS should be considered in female 
neonates or infants with lymphedema, nuchal folds, low 
hairline, or left-sided cardiac defects and in girls with 
unexplained growth failure or pubertal delay. Although 
limited spontaneous pubertal development occurs 
in up to 30% of girls with TS (10%, 45,X; 30–40%, 
45,X/46,XX) and ∼2% reach menarche, the vast major-
ity of women with TS develop complete ovarian fail-
ure. This diagnosis should be considered, therefore, 
in all women who present with primary or secondary 
amenorrhea and elevated gonadotropin levels.
Table 7-2
Clinical Features of Chromosomal Disorders of Sex Development (DSD)
Genitalia
Disorder
Common 
Chromosomal 
Complement
Gonad
External
Internal
Breast Development
Klinefelter’s syndrome
47,XXY or 
46,XY/47,XXY
Hyalinized testes
Male
Male
Gynecomastia
Clinical Features
Small testes, azoospermia, decreased facial and axillary hair, decreased libido, tall stature and 
increased leg length, decreased penile length, increased risk of breast tumors, thromboembolic 
disease, learning difficulties, obesity, diabetes mellitus, varicose veins
Turner’s syndrome
45,X or 
45,X/46,XX
Streak gonad or 
immature ovary
Female
Hypoplastic 
female
Immature female
Clinical Features
Infancy: lymphedema, web neck, shield chest, low-set hairline, cardiac defects and coarctation of 
the aorta, urinary tract malformations and horseshoe kidney
Childhood: short stature, cubitus valgus, short neck, short 4th metacarpals, hypoplastic nails, 
micrognathia, scoliosis, otitis media and sensorineural hearing loss, ptosis and amblyopia, mul-
tiple nevi and keloid formation, autoimmune thyroid disease, visuospatial learning difficulties
Adulthood: pubertal failure and primary amenorrhea, hypertension, obesity, dyslipidemia, impaired 
glucose tolerance and insulin resistance, autoimmune thyroid disease, cardiovascular disease, 
aortic root dilation, osteoporosis, inflammatory bowel disease, chronic hepatic dysfunction, 
increased risk of colon cancer, hearing loss
Mixed gonadal dys-
genesis
45,X/46,XY
Testis or streak 
gonad
Variable
Variable
Usually male
Clinical Features
Short stature, increased risk of gonadal tumors, some Turner’s syndrome features
Ovotesticular DSD (true 
hermaphroditism)
46,XX/46,XY
Testis and ovary 
or ovotestis
Variable
Variable
Gynecomastia
Clinical Features
Possible increased risk of gonadal tumors
 
CHAPTER 7
Disorders of Sex Development
141
Treatment	
Turner’s Syndrome
The management of girls and women with TS requires 
a multidisciplinary approach because of the number 
of potentially involved organ systems. Detailed cardiac 
and renal evaluation should be performed at the time 
of diagnosis. Individuals with congenital heart defects 
(CHDs) (30%) (bicuspid aortic valve, 30–50%; coarcta-
tion of the aorta, 30%; aortic root dilation, 5%) require 
long-term follow-up by an experienced cardiologist, 
antibiotic prophylaxis for dental or surgical procedures, 
and serial imaging of aortic root dimensions, as progres-
sive aortic root dilation is associated with increased risk 
of aortic dissection. Individuals found to have congeni-
tal renal and urinary tract malformations (30%) are at 
risk for urinary tract infections, hypertension, and neph-
rocalcinosis. Hypertension can occur independently of 
cardiac and renal malformations and should be moni-
tored and treated as in other patients with essential 
hypertension. Clitoral enlargement or other evidence 
of virilization suggests the presence of covert, translo-
cated Y chromosomal material and is associated with 
increased risk of gonadoblastoma, apparently as a con-
sequence of Y chromosomal genes distinct from SRY. 
Regular assessment of thyroid function, weight, denti-
tion, hearing, speech, vision, and educational issues 
should be performed during childhood. Otitis media 
and middle-ear disease are prevalent in childhood 
(50–85%), and sensorineural hearing loss becomes pro-
gressively common with age (70–90%). Autoimmune 
hypothyroidism (15–30%) can occur in childhood but 
has a mean age of onset in the third decade. Counseling 
about long-term growth and fertility issues should be 
provided. Patient support groups are active throughout 
the world and can play an invaluable role.
The treatment of short stature in children with TS 
remains a challenge, as untreated final height rarely 
exceeds 150 cm in nonmosaic 45,X TS. High-dose 
recombinant growth hormone stimulates growth rate 
in children with TS and may be used alone or in combi-
nation with low doses of the nonaromatizable anabolic 
steroid oxandrolone (up to 0.05 mg/kg per d) in an older 
child (>9 years). However, final height increments are 
often modest (5–10 cm), and individualization of treat-
ment response to regimens may be beneficial. Girls with 
evidence of gonadal failure require estrogen replace-
ment to induce breast and uterine development, sup-
port growth, and maintain bone mineralization. Most 
physicians now choose to initiate low-dose estrogen 
therapy (one-tenth to one-eighth of the adult replace-
ment dose) to induce puberty at an age-appropriate 
time (∼12 years). Doses of estrogen are increased grad-
ually to allow feminization over a 2–4 year period. Pro-
gestins are added later to regulate withdrawal bleeds, 
and some women with TS have achieved successful
pregnancy after ovum donation and in vitro fertilization. 
Long-term follow-up of women with TS involves careful 
surveillance of sex hormone replacement and repro-
ductive function, bone mineralization, cardiac function 
and aortic root dimensions, blood pressure, weight and 
glucose tolerance, hepatic and lipid profiles, thyroid 
function, and hearing. This service is provided by a dedi-
cated TS clinic in some centers.
Mixed Gonadal Dysgenesis (45,X/46,XY)
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis typically results from 
45,X/46,XY mosaicism. The phenotype of patients 
with this condition varies considerably. Although some 
patients have a predominantly female phenotype with 
somatic features of TS, streak gonads, and müllerian 
structures, most 45,X/46,XY individuals have a male 
phenotype and testes, and the diagnosis is made inci-
dentally after amniocentesis or during investigation of 
infertility. In practice, most children referred for assess-
ment have ambiguous genitalia and variable somatic fea-
tures. A female sex-of-rearing is often assigned (60%) if 
uterine structures are present, gonads are intraabdomi-
nal, and phallic development is poor. In such situa-
tions, gonadectomy usually is undertaken to prevent 
further androgen secretion and prevent development 
of gonadoblastoma (up to 25%). Individuals raised as 
males require reconstructive surgery for hypospadias 
and removal of dysgenetic gonads if the gonads can-
not be brought down into the scrotum. Scrotal testes 
can be preserved but require regular examination for 
tumor development. Biopsy for carcinoma in situ is rec-
ommended in adolescence, and testosterone supplemen-
tation may be required to support androgenization in 
puberty. Height potential is usually attenuated.
Ovotesticular DSD
Ovotesticular DSD (formerly called true hermaphroditism) 
occurs when both an ovary and a testis—or when an 
ovotestis—are found in one individual. For unclear rea-
sons, gonadal asymmetry most often occurs with a testis 
on the right and an ovary on the left. Most individuals 
with this diagnosis have a 46,XX karyotype, especially 
in sub-Saharan Africa. A 46,XX/46,XY chimeric 
karyotype is less common and has a variable phenotype.
Disorders of Gonadal  
and Phenotypic Sex
The clinical features of patients with disorders of 
gonadal and phenotypic sex are divided into the under-
androgenization of 46,XY males (46,XY DSD) and the 
excess androgenization of 46,XX females (46,XX DSD) 
Section II 
Reproductive  Endocrinology
142
(Table 7-1). These disorders cover a spectrum of phe-
notypes ranging from “46,XY phenotypic females” or 
“46,XX males” to individuals with ambiguous genitalia.
46,XY DSD (Underandrogenized 
Males)
Underandrogenization of the 46,XY fetus (formerly 
called male pseudohermaphroditism) reflects defects in 
androgen production or action. It can result from disor-
ders of testis development, defects of androgen synthe-
sis, or resistance to testosterone and DHT (Table 7-1).
Disorders of testis development
Testicular dysgenesis
Patients with pure (or complete) gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer 
syndrome) have streak gonads, müllerian structures (due 
to insufficient AMH/MIS secretion), and a complete 
absence of androgenization. Serum AMH/MIS is low, 
and testosterone response to human chorionic gonado-
tropin (hCG) stimulation is impaired. Patients with 
partial gonadal dysgenesis (dysgenetic testes) may produce 
enough MIS to regress the uterus and, sometimes, suf-
ficient testosterone for partial androgenization. Gonadal 
dysgenesis can result from mutations or deletions of 
testis-promoting genes (WT1, SF1, SRY, SOX9, DHH, 
ATRX, ARX, DMRT ) or duplication of chromo-
somal loci containing “antitestis” genes (e.g., WNT4/
RSPO1, DAX1) (Table 7-3). Among these, dele-
tions or mutations of SRY and heterozygous mutations
of SF1 (NR5A1) appear to be most common but still 
account collectively for <25% of cases. Associated clini-
cal features may be present, reflecting additional func-
tional roles for these genes. For example, renal dysfunc-
tion occurs in patients with specific WT1 mutations 
(Denys-Drash and Fraser’s syndromes), primary adrenal 
failure occurs in some patients with SF1 mutations, and 
severe cartilage abnormalities (campomelic dysplasia) are 
the predominant clinical feature of SOX9 mutations. 
A family history of DSD or premature ovarian insuffi-
ciency is important (e.g., SF1/NR5A1). Intraabdominal 
dysgenetic testes should be removed to prevent malig-
nancy, and estrogens can be used to induce secondary 
sex characteristics in 46,XY individuals raised as females. 
Absent (vanishing) testis syndrome (bilateral anorchia) reflects 
regression of the testis during development. The etiol-
ogy is unknown, but the absence of müllerian structures 
indicates adequate secretion of AMH in utero. Early 
testicular regression causes impaired androgenization in 
utero, and in most cases, androgenization of the exter-
nal genitalia is either normal or slightly impaired (e.g., 
small penis, hypospadias). These individuals can be 
offered testicular prostheses and should receive andro-
gen replacement in adolescence.
Disorders of androgen synthesis
Defects in the pathway that regulates androgen synthesis 
(Fig. 7-4) cause underandrogenization of the male fetus 
(Table 7-1). Müllerian regression is unaffected because 
Sertoli cell function is preserved.
LH receptor
Mutations in the LH receptor (LHCGR) cause Leydig’s 
cell hypoplasia and androgen deficiency. Defects of LH 
receptor synthesis or function preclude hCG stimulation 
of Leydig’s cells in utero, as well as LH stimulation of 
Leydig’s cells late in gestation and during the neonatal 
period. As a result, testosterone and DHT synthesis are 
insufficient for normal androgenization of the internal 
and external genitalia, causing a spectrum of phenotypes 
that range from complete underandrogenization to 
micropenis, depending on the severity of the mutation.
Steroidogenic enzyme pathways
Mutations in steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) 
and CYP11A1 affect both adrenal and gonadal steroido-
genesis (Chap. 5). Affected individuals (46,XY) usually 
have severe early-onset salt-losing adrenal failure and a 
female phenotype, although later-onset milder variants 
have been reported. Defects in 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydro-
genase type 2 (HSD3b2) also cause adrenal insufficiency 
in severe cases, but the accumulation of dehydroepi-
androsterone (DHEA) has a mild androgenizing effect, 
resulting in ambiguous genitalia or hypospadias. Patients 
with CAH due to 17a-hydroxylase (CYP17) deficiency 
have variable underandrogenization and develop hyper-
tension and hypokalemia due to the potent salt-retaining 
effects of corticosterone and 11-deoxycorticosterone. 
Patients with complete loss of 17α-hydroxylase func-
tion often present as phenotypic females who fail to 
enter puberty and are found to have inguinal testes and 
hypertension in adolescence. Some mutations in CYP17 
selectively impair 17,20 lyase activity without altering 
17α-hydroxylase activity, leading to underandrogen-
ization without mineralocorticoid excess and hyper-
tension. Mutations in P450 oxidoreductase (POR) affect 
multiple steroidogenic enzymes, leading to impaired 
androgenization and a biochemical pattern of apparent 
combined 21-hydroxylase and 17α-hydroxylase defi-
ciency, sometimes with skeletal abnormalities (Antley-
Bixler craniosynostosis). Defects in 17b-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 3 (HSD17b3) and 5a-reductase type 2 
(SRD5A2) interfere with the synthesis of testosterone 
and DHT, respectively. These conditions are charac-
terized by minimal or absent androgenization in utero, 
but some phallic development can occur during ado-
lescence due to the action of other enzyme isoforms. 
Individuals with 5a-reductase type 2 deficiency have 
normal wolffian structures and usually do not develop 
breast tissue. At puberty, the increase in testosterone 
induces muscle mass and other virilizing features despite 
 
CHAPTER 7
Disorders of Sex Development
143
Table 7-3
Selected Genetic Causes of Underandrogenization of Karyotypic Males (46,XY DSD)
Gene
Inheritance
Gonad
Uterus
External Genitalia
Associated Features
Disorders of Testis Development
WT1
AD
Dysgenetic 
testis
+/−
Female or ambiguous
Wilms’ tumor, renal abnormalities, 
gonadal tumors (WAGR, Denys-Drash 
and Fraser’s syndromes)
CBX2
AD
Ovary
+
Female
SF1
AR/AD
Dysgenetic 
testis/Leydig’s 
dysfunction
+/−
Female or ambiguous
Primary adrenal failure; primary ovarian 
insufficiency in female (46,XX) relatives
SRY
Y
Dysgenetic tes-
tis or ovotestis
+/−
Female or ambiguous
SOX9
AD
Dysgenetic tes-
tis or ovotestis
+/−
Female or ambiguous
Campomelic dysplasia
DHH
AR
Dysgenetic testis
+
Female
Minifascicular neuropathy
ATRX
X
Dysgenetic testis
−
Female or ambiguous
α Thalassemia, developmental delay
ARX
X
Dysgenetic 
testis
−
Male or ambiguous
Developmental delay; X-linked  
lissencephaly
MAMLD1
X
Dysgenetic 
testis/Leydig’s 
dysfunction
−
Hypospadias
DAX1
dupXp21
Dysgenetic testis
+/−
Female or ambiguous
WNT4/
RSPO1
dup1p35
Dysgenetic testis
+
Ambiguous
Disorders of Androgen Synthesis
LHR
AR
Testis
−
Female, ambiguous or 
micropenis
Leydig’s cell hypoplasia
DHCR7
AR
Testis
−
Variable
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: coarse 
facies, second-third toe syndactyly, 
failure to thrive, developmental delay, 
cardiac and visceral abnormalities
StAR
AR
Testis
−
Female or ambiguous
Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia 
(primary adrenal failure)
CYP11A1
AR
Testis
−
Ambiguous
Primary adrenal failure
HSD3b2
AR
Testis
−
Ambiguous
CAH, primary adrenal failure ± salt loss, 
partial androgenization due to ↑ DHEA
CYP17
AR
Testis
−
Female or ambiguous
CAH, hypertension due to ↑ corticos-
terone and 11-deoxycorticosterone, 
except in isolated 17,20 lyase deficiency
POR
AR
Testis
−
Ambiguous or male
Mixed features of 21-hydroxylase defi-
ciency and 17α-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase 
deficiency, sometimes associated with 
Antley-Bixler craniosynostosis
HSD17b3
AR
Testis
−
Female or ambiguous
Partial androgenization at puberty, ↑ 
androstenedione: testosterone ratio
SRD5A2
AR
Testis
−
Ambiguous or micro-
penis
Partial androgenization at puberty, ↑ tes-
tosterone: dihydrotestosterone ratio
Disorders of Androgen Action
Androgen 
receptor
X
Testis
−
Female, ambiguous, 
micropenis or normal 
male
Phenotypic spectrum from complete 
androgen insensitivity syndrome (female 
external genitalia) and partial androgen 
insensitivity (ambiguous) to normal male 
genitalia and infertility
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ARX, aristaless related homeobox, X-linked; ATRX, α-thalassemia, men-
tal retardation on the X;  CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; CYP11A1, P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage; CYP17, 17α-hydroxylase and 
17,20-lyase; DAX1, dosage-sensitive sex-reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congenita on the X chromosome, gene 1; DHCR7, sterol 7 δ reductase; 
DHH, desert hedgehog; HSD17b3, 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3; HSD3b2, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; LHR, 
LH receptor; POR, P450 oxidoreductase; SF1, steroidogenic factor 1; SOX9, SRY-related HMG-box gene 9; SRD5A2, 5α-reductase type 2; SRY, 
sex-related gene on the Y chromosome; StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein; WAGR, Wilms’ tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, 
and mental retardation; WNT4, wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integration site, 4; WT1, Wilms’ tumor–related gene 1.          
Section II 
Reproductive  Endocrinology
144
DHT deficiency. Some individuals change gender from 
female to male at puberty. Thus, the management of this 
disorder is challenging. DHT cream can improve prepu-
bertal phallic growth in patients raised as male. Gonad-
ectomy before adolescence and estrogen replacement at 
puberty can be considered in individuals raised as females.
Disorders of androgen action
Androgen insensitivity syndrome
Mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) cause resis-
tance to androgen (testosterone, DHT) action or the 
androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS). AIS is a spectrum of 
disorders that affects at least 1 in 100,000 46,XY indi-
viduals. Because the androgen receptor is X-linked, 
only 46,XY offspring are affected if the mother is a car-
rier of a mutation. XY individuals with complete AIS 
(formerly called testicular feminization syndrome) have a 
female phenotype, normal breast development (due to 
aromatization of testosterone), a short vagina but no 
uterus (because MIS production is normal), scanty pubic 
and axillary hair, and a female psychosexual orientation. 
Gonadotropins and testosterone levels can be low, nor-
mal, or elevated, depending on the degree of androgen 
resistance and the contribution of estradiol to feedback 
inhibition of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. 
AMH/MIS levels in childhood are normal or high. 
Most patients present with inguinal hernias (contain-
ing testes) in childhood or with primary amenorrhea in 
adulthood. Gonadectomy sometimes is performed, as 
there is a low risk of malignancy, and estrogen replace-
ment is prescribed. Alternatively, the gonads can be left 
in situ until breast development is complete. The use 
of graded dilators in adolescence is usually sufficient to 
dilate the vagina and permit sexual intercourse.
Partial AIS (Reifenstein’s syndrome) results from less 
severe AR mutations. Patients often present in infancy 
with perineoscrotal hypospadias and small, undescended 
testes, and with gynecomastia at the time of puberty. 
Those individuals raised as males require hypospadias 
Cholesterol
StAR
Pregnenolone
(Cholesterol
  side chain
  cleavage enzyme)
CYP11A1
Congenital
  adrenal
  hyperplasia
  and
  female
  androg-
  enization
Male
  underandrog-
  enization
  only
Congenital
  adrenal
  hyperplasia
  and male
  underandrog-
  enization
17β-HSD17b3
  (17β-Hydroxysteroid
  dehydrogenase 3)
Progesterone
(3β-Hydroxysteroid
  dehydrogenase 2)
CYP21A2
  (21-Hydroxylase)
CYP17
  (17,20-Lyase)
SRD5A2
  (5α-Reductase)
3β-HSD3b2
CYP11B1
  (11-Hydroxylase)
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
11-Deoxycortisol
Androstenedione
Cortisol
Testosterone
Glucocorticoid
  Pathway
Androgen Pathway
(17α-Hydroxylase)
CYP17
LH
  (testis)
ACTH
  (adrenal)
Dihydrotestosterone
Figure 7-4
Simplified overview of glucocorticoid and androgen syn-
thesis pathways. Defects in CYP21A2 and CYP11B1 shunt 
steroid precursors into the androgen pathway and cause 
androgenization of 46,XX females. Testosterone is synthe-
sized in the testicular Leydig’s cells and converted to dihy-
drotestosterone peripherally. Defects in enzymes involved in 
androgen synthesis result in underandrogenization of 46,XY 
males. StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. (After E 
Braunwald et al [eds]: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
cine, 15th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001.)
 
CHAPTER 7
Disorders of Sex Development
145
repair in childhood and breast reduction in adolescence. 
Supplemental testosterone rarely enhances androgeniza-
tion significantly, as endogenous testosterone is already 
increased. More severely underandrogenized patients 
present with clitoral enlargement and labial fusion and 
may be raised as females. The surgical and psychosexual 
management of these patients is complex and requires 
active involvement of the parents and the patient dur-
ing the appropriate stages of development. Azoospermia 
and male-factor infertility also have been described in 
association with mild loss-of-function mutations in the 
androgen receptor.
Other Disorders Affecting 46,  
XY Males
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome is the presence of 
a uterus in an otherwise normal male. This condi-
tion can result from mutations in AMH or its receptor 
(AMHR2). The uterus may be removed, but damage 
to the vasa deferentia must be avoided. Isolated hypospa-
dias occurs in ∼1 in 200 males and is treated by surgi-
cal repair. Most cases are idiopathic, although evidence 
of penoscrotal hypospadias, poor phallic development, 
and/or bilateral cryptorchidism require investigation for 
an underlying disorder of sex development (e.g., partial 
gonadal dysgenesis, mild defect in testosterone action, 
or even severe forms of 46,XX CAH). Unilateral unde-
scended testes (cryptorchidism) affects more than 3% of 
boys at birth. Orchidopexy should be considered if the 
testis has not descended by 6 to 9 months of age. Bilat-
eral cryptorchidism occurs less frequently and should 
raise suspicion of gonadotropin deficiency or DSD. 
A small subset of patients with cryptorchidism may 
have mutations in the insulin-like 3 (INSL3) gene or its 
receptor LGR8 (also known as GREAT), which medi-
ates normal testicular descent. Ascending testis is being 
recognized increasingly as a distinct condition for which 
management is currently unclear. Syndromic associations 
and intrauterine growth retardation also occur relatively fre-
quently in association with impaired testicular function 
or target tissue responsiveness, but the underlying etiol-
ogy of many of these conditions is unknown.
46,XX DSD (Androgenized Females)
Inappropriate androgenization of females (formerly called 
female pseudohermaphroditism) occurs when the gonad 
(ovary) contains androgen-secreting testicular material 
or after increased androgen exposure, which is usually 
adrenal in origin (Table 7-1).
46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD
Testicular tissue can develop in 46,XX testicular DSD 
(46,XX males) after translocation of SRY or duplication 
of SOX9 or defects in RSPO1 (Table 7-4).
Increased androgen exposure
21-Hydroxylase deficiency (congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia)
The classic form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD) 
is the most common cause of CAH (Chap. 5). It has 
an incidence between 1 in 10,000 and 1 in 15,000 and 
is the most common cause of androgenization in chro-
mosomal 46,XX females (Table 7-4). Affected indi-
viduals are homozygous or compound heterozygous 
for severe mutations in the enzyme 21-hydroxylase 
(CYP21A2). This mutation causes a block in adrenal 
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid synthesis, increas-
ing 17-hydroxyprogesterone and shunting steroid pre-
cursors into the androgen synthesis pathway (Fig. 7-4). 
Glucocorticoid insufficiency causes a compensatory 
elevation of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), resulting in 
adrenal hyperplasia and additional synthesis of steroid 
precursors proximal to the enzymatic block. Increased 
androgen synthesis in utero causes androgenization of 
the female fetus in the first trimester. Ambiguous geni-
talia are seen at birth, with varying degrees of clitoral 
enlargement and labial fusion. Excess androgen pro-
duction causes gonadotropin-independent precocious 
puberty in males with 21-OHD.
The salt-wasting form of 21-OHD results from severe 
combined glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid defi-
ciency. A salt-wasting crisis usually manifests between 7 
and 21 days of life and is a potentially life-threatening 
event that requires urgent fluid resuscitation and steroid 
treatment. Thus, a diagnosis of 21-OHD should be 
considered in any baby with ambiguous genitalia with 
bilateral nonpalpable gonads. Males (46,XY) with 21- 
OHD have no genital abnormalities at birth but are 
equally susceptible to adrenal insufficiency and salt-losing 
crises.
Females with the classic simple virilizing form of 
21-OHD also present with genital ambiguity. They have 
impaired cortisol biosynthesis but do not develop salt 
loss. Patients with nonclassic 21-OHD produce normal 
amounts of cortisol and aldosterone, but at the expense 
of producing excess androgens. Hirsutism (60%), oli-
gomenorrhea (50%), and acne (30%) are the most com-
mon presenting features. This is one of the most common 
recessive disorders in humans, with an incidence as high 
as 1 in 100 to 500 in many populations and 1 in 27 in 
Ashkenazi Jews of Eastern European origin.
Biochemical features of acute salt-wasting 21-OHD are 
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, low cortisol 
and aldosterone, and elevated 17-hydroxyprogesterone, 
ACTH, and plasma renin activity. Presymptomatic diag-
nosis of classic 21-OHD is now made by neonatal screen-
ing tests for increased 17-hydroxyprogesterone in many 
centers. In most cases, 17-hydroxyprogesterone is mark-
edly increased. In adults, ACTH stimulation (0.25 mg 
cosyntropin IV) with assays for 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
Section II 
Reproductive  Endocrinology
146
at 0 and 30 min can be useful for detecting nonclassic 
21-OHD and heterozygotes (Chap. 5).
Treatment	
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Acute salt-wasting crises require fluid resuscitation, 
IV hydrocortisone, and correction of hypoglycemia. 
Once the patient is stabilized, glucocorticoids must 
be given to correct the cortisol insufficiency and sup-
press ACTH stimulation, thereby preventing further 
virilization, rapid skeletal maturation, and the devel-
opment of poly­cystic ovaries. Typically, hydrocorti-
sone (10–15  mg/m2 per day in three divided doses) is 
used in childhood with a goal of partially suppressing 
17-hydroxyprogesterone (100–<1000 ng/dL). The aim
Table 7-4
Selected Genetic Causes of Androgenization of Karyotypic Females (46,XX DSD)
Gene
Inheritance
Gonad
Uterus
External Genitalia
Associated Features
Testicular/Ovotesticular DSD
SRY
Translocation
Testis or ovotestis
−
Male or ambiguous
SOX9
dup17q24
Unknown
−
Male or ambiguous
RSPO1
AR
Testis or ovotestis
±
Male or ambiguous
Palmar plantar hyperkeratosis, 
squamous cell skin carcinoma
WNT4
AR
Testis or ovotestis
−
Male or ambiguous
SERKAL syndrome (renal dys-
genesis, adrenal and lung 
hypoplasia)
Increased Androgen Synthesis
HSD3b2
AR
Ovary
+
Clitoromegaly
CAH, primary adrenal failure, 
mild androgenization due to ↑ 
DHEA
CYP21A2
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
CAH, phenotypic spectrum 
from severe salt-losing forms 
associated with adrenal failure 
to simple virilizing forms with 
compensated adrenal function, 
↑ 17-hydroxyprogesterone
POR
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous or 
female
Mixed features of 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency and 17α-hydroxylase/
17,20 lyase deficiency, some-
times associated with Antley-
Bixler craniosynostosis
CYP11B1
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
CAH, hypertension due to 
↑ 11-deoxycortisol and 
11-deoxycorticosterone
CYP19
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
Maternal virilization during preg-
nancy, absent breast develop-
ment at puberty
Glucocorticoid 
receptor
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
↑ ACTH, 17-hydroxyproges-
terone and cortisol; failure of 
dexamethasone suppression
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropin; AR, autosomal recessive; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; CYP11B1, 11β-hydroxylase; CYP19, 
aromatase; CYP21A2, 21-hydroxylase; DSD, disorders of sex development; HSD3b2, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; POR, P450 oxi-
doreductase; RSPO1, R-spondin 1; SOX9, SRY-related HMG-box gene 9; SRY, sex-related gene on the Y chromosome.      
of treatment is to use the lowest glucocorticoid dose 
that adequately suppresses adrenal androgen produc-
tion without causing signs of glucocorticoid excess such 
as impaired growth and obesity. Salt-wasting condi-
tions are treated with mineralocorticoid replacement. 
Infants usually need salt supplements up to the first 
year of life. Plasma renin activity and electrolytes are 
used to monitor mineralocorticoid replacement. Some 
patients with simple virilizing 21-OHD also benefit 
from mineralocorticoid supplements. Newer therapeu-
tic approaches such as antiandrogens and aromatase 
inhibitors (to block premature epiphyseal closure) are 
under evaluation. Parents and patients should be aware 
of the need for increased doses of steroids during sick-
ness, and patients should carry medic alert systems.
 
CHAPTER 7
Disorders of Sex Development
147
Older adolescents and adults often are treated with 
prednisolone or with dexamethasone at night to pro-
vide more complete ACTH suppression. Steroid doses 
should be adjusted to individual requirements as over-
treatment results in weight gain and hypertension and 
can affect bone turnover. Androstenedione and testos-
terone may be useful measurements of long-term con-
trol, with less fluctuation than 17-hydroxyprogesterone. 
Mineralocorticoid requirements often decrease in adult-
hood, and doses should be reduced to avoid hyper-
tension. In very severe cases, adrenalectomy has been 
advocated but incurs the risks of surgery and total adre-
nal insufficiency.
Girls with significant genital androgenization due to 
classic 21-OHD usually undergo vaginal reconstruction 
and clitoral reduction (maintaining the glans and nerve 
supply), but the optimal timing of these procedures 
is debated, as is the need for the individual to be able 
to consent. There is a higher threshold for undertak-
ing clitoral surgery in some centers as long-term sen-
sation and ability to achieve orgasm can be affected, 
but the long-term results of newer techniques are not 
yet known. If surgery is performed in infancy, surgical 
revision or regular vaginal dilatation may be needed 
in adolescence or adulthood, and long-term psycho-
logical support and psychosexual counseling may be 
appropriate. Women with 21-OHD frequently develop 
polycystic ovaries and have reduced fertility, especially 
when control is poor. Fecundity is achieved in up to 90% 
of women, but ovulation induction (or even adrenalec-
tomy) is frequently required. Dexamethasone should 
be avoided in pregnancy. Men with poorly controlled 
21-OHD may develop testicular adrenal rests and are at 
risk for reduced fertility. Prenatal treatment of 21-OHD 
by the administration of dexamethasone to mothers is 
still under evaluation. However, treatment of the mother 
and child must be started ideally before 6 to 7 weeks; 
long-term effects of prenatal dexamethasone exposure 
on fetal development are still under evaluation.
The treatment of other forms of CAH includes min-
eralocorticoid and glucocorticoid replacement for  
salt-losing conditions (e.g., StAR, CYP11A1, HSD3b2), sup-
pression of ACTH drive with glucocorticoids in disorders 
associated with hypertension (e.g., CYP17, CYP11B1), 
and appropriate sex-hormone replacement in adoles-
cence and adulthood, when necessary.
Other causes
Increased androgen synthesis can also occur in CAH 
due to defects in POR, 11b-hydroxylase (CYP11B1), 
and 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD3b2) and 
with mutations in the genes encoding aromatase (CYP19) 
and the glucocorticoid receptor. Increased androgen 
exposure in utero can occur with maternal virilizing 
tumors and with ingestion of androgenic compounds.
Other Disorders Affecting 46, 
XX Females
Congenital absence of the vagina occurs in association with 
müllerian agenesis or hypoplasia as part of the Mayer-
Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome (rarely 
caused by WNT4 mutations). This diagnosis should be 
considered in otherwise phenotypically normal females 
with primary amenorrhea. Associated features include 
renal (agenesis) and cervical spinal abnormalities.
Global Considerations
The approach to a child or adolescent with 
ambiguous genitalia or another DSD requires cul-
tural sensitivity, as the concepts of sex and gender 
vary widely. Rare genetic DSDs can occur more fre-
quently in specific populations (e.g., 5b-reductase type 2 in 
the Dominican Republic). Different forms of CAH also 
show ethnic and geographic variability. In many coun-
tries, appropriate biochemical tests may not be readily 
available, and access to appropriate forms of surgery or 
treatment may be limited.
 Shalender Bhasin  I   J. Larry Jameson 
148
 The male reproductive system regulates sex differentia-
tion, virilization, and the hormonal changes that accom-
pany puberty, ultimately leading to spermatogenesis and 
fertility. Under the control of the pituitary hormones—
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH)—the Leydig cells of the testes produce 
testosterone and germ cells are nurtured by Sertoli cells 
to divide, differentiate, and mature into sperm. During 
embryonic development, testosterone and dihydrotes-
tosterone (DHT) induce the wolffi an duct and viriliza-
tion of the external genitalia. During puberty, testos-
terone promotes somatic growth and the development 
of secondary sex characteristics. In adults, testosterone 
is necessary for spermatogenesis, stimulation of libido, 
normal sexual function, and maintenance of muscle and 
bone mass. This chapter focuses on the physiology of 
the testes and disorders associated with decreased andro-
gen production, which may be caused by gonadotropin 
defi ciency or primary testis dysfunction. A variety of 
testosterone formulations now allow more physiologic 
androgen replacement. Infertility occurs in ∼5% of men 
and is increasingly amenable to treatment by hormone 
replacement or by using sperm transfer techniques.  For
further discussion of sexual dysfunction, disorders of 
the prostate, and testicular cancer, see  Chaps. 15  and  9 , 
respectively . 
 developMent and stRuctuRe 
of the testis 
 The fetal testis develops from the undifferentiated 
gonad after expression of a genetic cascade that is ini-
tiated by the SRY (sex-related gene on the Y chro-
mosome) ( Chap. 7 ). SRY induces differentiation of
Sertoli cells, which surround germ cells and, together 
with peritubular myoid cells, form testis cords that later 
develop into seminiferous tubules. Fetal Leydig cells 
and endothelial cells migrate into the gonad from the 
adjacent mesonephros but also may arise from intersti-
tial cells that reside between testis cords. Leydig cells 
produce testosterone, which supports the growth and 
differentiation of wolffi an duct structures that develop 
into the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicles. 
Testosterone is also converted to DHT (see below), 
which induces formation of the prostate and the exter-
nal male genitalia, including the penis, urethra, and 
scrotum. Testicular descent through the inguinal canal 
is controlled in part by Leydig cell production of insu-
lin-like factor 3 (INSL3), which acts via a receptor 
termed LGR8 (leucine-rich repeat-containing G protein–
coupled receptor 8, also known as GREAT:  G protein–
coupled  re ceptor  a ffecting  t estis descent). Sertoli cells 
produce müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), which 
causes regression of the müllerian structures, includ-
ing the fallopian tube, uterus, and upper segment of the 
vagina. 
 noRMal Male pubeRtal 
developMent 
 Although  puberty commonly refers to the maturation of the 
reproductive axis and the development of secondary sex 
characteristics, it involves a coordinated response of mul-
tiple hormonal systems that include the adrenal gland and 
the growth hormone (GH) axis  ( Fig. 8-1 ) . The develop-
ment of secondary sex characteristics is initiated by  adre-
narche , which usually occurs between 6 and 8 years of age 
when the adrenal gland begins to produce greater amounts 
of androgens from the zona reticularis, the principal site 
of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) production. The sex 
maturation process is greatly accelerated by the activation 
of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and the production of 
 DISORDERS OF THE TESTES AND MALE 
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
 chapteR 8 
149
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). The GnRH 
pulse generator in the hypothalamus is active during 
fetal life and early infancy but is restrained until the early 
stages of puberty by a neuroendocrine brake imposed by 
the inhibitory actions of glutamate, γ-amino butyric acid 
(GABA), and neuropeptide Y. Although the pathways 
that initiate reactivation of the GnRH pulse generator at 
the onset of puberty have been elusive, mounting evidence 
supports involvement of GPR54, a G protein–coupled 
receptor that binds an endogenous ligand, kisspeptin. Indi-
viduals with mutations of GPR54 fail to enter puberty, 
and experiments in primates demonstrate that infusion of 
kisspeptin is sufficient to induce premature puberty. Kis-
speptin signaling plays an important role in mediating the 
feedback action of sex steroids on gonadotropin secre-
tion and in regulating the tempo of sexual maturation at 
puberty. Leptin, a hormone produced by adipose cells, 
plays a permissive role in the resurgence of GnRH secre-
tion at the onset of puberty, as leptin-deficient individuals 
also fail to enter puberty (Chap. 16).
The early stages of puberty are characterized by noc-
turnal surges of LH and FSH. Growth of the testes is 
usually the first sign of puberty, reflecting an increase 
in seminiferous tubule volume. Increasing levels of tes-
tosterone deepen the voice and increase muscle growth. 
Conversion of testosterone to DHT leads to growth of 
the external genitalia and pubic hair. DHT also stimu-
lates prostate and facial hair growth and initiates reces-
sion of the temporal hairline. The growth spurt occurs 
at a testicular volume of about 10–12 mL. GH increases 
early in puberty and is stimulated in part by the rise in 
gonadal steroids. GH increases the level of insulin-like 
growth factor I (IGF-I), which enhances linear bone 
growth. The prolonged pubertal exposure to gonadal 
steroids (mainly estradiol) ultimately causes epiphyseal 
closure and limits further bone growth.
8
9
10
11
12
4–6
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
10–12 15–25
13
Age (years)
Tanner stages
Height velocity
Testicular
  volume (mL)
Genitalia
Pubic hair
14
15
16
17
Figure 8-1 
Pubertal events in males. Sexual maturity ratings for 
genitalia and pubic hair divided into five stages. (From 
WA Marshall, JM Tanner: Arch Dis Child 45:13, 1970.)
Regulation of Testicular 
Function
Regulation of the Hypothalamic-
Pituitary-Testis Axis in Adult Men
Hypothalamic GnRH regulates the production of 
the pituitary gonadotropins LH and FSH (Fig. 8-2). 
GnRH is released in discrete pulses approximately 
every 2 hours, resulting in corresponding pulses of 
LH and FSH. These dynamic hormone pulses account 
in part for the wide variations in LH and testosterone 
even within the same individual. LH acts primarily on 
the Leydig cell to stimulate testosterone synthesis. The 
regulatory control of androgen synthesis is mediated by 
+
–
–
+
+
Hypothalamus
Gonadotrope
(LH, FSH)
GnRH-producing
neuron  
Tunica albuginea
Seminiferous
tubules
Seminiferous
tubules
Interstitial
Leydig cells
(testosterone)
Anterior
pituitary
Vas deferens
Testosterone
Inhibin B
E2
DHT
LH
FSH
LH
FSH
Epididymis
Sertoli cell
(Inhibin B)
Spermatid
Spermatogonium
Figure 8-2 
Human pituitary gonadotropin axis, structure of testis, semi-
niferous tubule. E2, 17β–estradiol; DHT, dihydrotestosterone.
150
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
testosterone and estrogen feedback on both the hypo-
thalamus and the pituitary. FSH acts on the Sertoli cell 
to regulate spermatogenesis and the production of Ser-
toli products such as inhibin B, which acts to suppress 
pituitary FSH selectively. Despite these somewhat dis-
tinct Leydig and Sertoli cell–regulated pathways, testis 
function is integrated at several levels: GnRH regulates 
both gonadotropins; spermatogenesis requires high lev-
els of testosterone; numerous paracrine interactions 
between Leydig and Sertoli cells are necessary for nor-
mal testis function.
The Leydig Cell: Androgen Synthesis
LH binds to its seven transmembrane, G protein–coupled 
receptor to activate the cyclic AMP pathway. Stimula-
tion of the LH receptor induces steroid acute regulatory 
(StAR) protein, along with several steroidogenic enzymes 
involved in androgen synthesis. LH receptor mutations 
cause Leydig cell hypoplasia or agenesis, underscoring 
the importance of this pathway for Leydig cell devel-
opment and function. The rate-limiting process in tes-
tosterone synthesis is the delivery of cholesterol by the 
StAR protein to the inner mitochondrial membrane. 
Peripheral benzodiazepine receptor, a mitochondrial 
cholesterol-binding protein, is also an acute regulator of 
Leydig cell steroidogenesis. The five major enzymatic 
steps involved in testosterone synthesis are summarized 
in Fig. 8-3. After cholesterol transport into the mito-
chondrion, the formation of pregnenolone by CYP11A1 
(side chain cleavage enzyme) is a limiting enzymatic step. 
The 17α-hydroxylase and the 17,20-lyase reactions are 
catalyzed by a single enzyme, CYP17; posttranslational 
modification (phosphorylation) of this enzyme and the 
presence of specific enzyme cofactors confer 17,20-lyase 
activity selectively in the testis and zona reticularis of the 
adrenal gland. Testosterone can be converted to the more 
potent DHT by 5α-reductase, or it can be aromatized to 
estradiol by CYP19 (aromatase). Two isoforms of ste-
roid 5α-reductase, SRD5A1 and SRD5A2, have been 
described; all known individuals with clinical features of 
5α-reductase deficiency have mutations in SRD5A2, the 
predominant form in the prostate and the skin.
Testosterone transport and metabolism
In males, 95% of circulating testosterone is derived from 
testicular production (3–10 mg/d). Direct secretion of 
testosterone by the adrenal and peripheral conversion 
of androstenedione to testosterone collectively account for 
another 0.5 mg/d of testosterone. Only a small amount 
of DHT (70 μg/d) is secreted directly by the testis; most 
circulating DHT is derived from peripheral conversion 
of testosterone. Most of the daily production of estra-
diol (approximately 45 μg/d) in men is derived from 
aromatase-mediated peripheral conversion of testoster-
one and androstenedione.
Circulating testosterone is bound to two plasma 
proteins: sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) and 
albumin (Fig. 8-4). SHBG binds testosterone with 
much greater affinity than albumin. Only 0.5–3% of 
testosterone is unbound. According to the “free 
hormone” hypothesis, only the unbound fraction is 
biologically active; however, albumin-bound hormone 
dissociates readily in the capillaries and may be bio-
available. SHBG concentrations are decreased by andro-
gens, obesity, diabetes mellitus, insulin, and nephrotic 
syndrome. Conversely, estrogen administration, hyper-
thyroidism, many chronic inflammatory illnesses, and 
aging are associated with high SHBG concentrations.
Testosterone is metabolized predominantly in the 
liver, although some degradation occurs in periph-
eral tissues, particularly the prostate and the skin. 
In the liver, testosterone is converted by a series of 
Adrenal and Testis
1
4
6
9
8
7
10
12
11
13
2
3
A
B
C
D
5
19
18
20
23
21
22
24
26
27
25
17
16
15
14
HO
OH
Testosterone
Dihydrotestosterone
Estradiol
(cholesterol side chain
  cleavage enzyme)
CYP11A1
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
OH
Testis
Testis and
Peripheral Tissues
(3-Hydroxysteroid
  dehydrogenase/isomerase 2)
3-HSD2
Progesterone
(17-Hydroxylase)
CYP17
17-OH-Progesterone
(17,20-Lyase)
CYP17
5-Reductase
CYP19 (aromatase)
Androstenedione
(17-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3)
17-HSD3
H
OH
O
OH
HO
Figure 8-3 
The biochemical pathway in the conversion of 27-carbon 
sterol cholesterol to androgens and estrogens.
151
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
enzymatic steps that involve 5α- and 5β-reductases, 
3α- and 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases, and 17β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase into androsterone, etio-
cholanolone, DHT, and 3-α-androstanediol. These 
compounds undergo glucuronidation or sulfation before 
being excreted by the kidneys.
Mechanism of androgen action
The androgen receptor (AR) is structurally related to 
the nuclear receptors for estrogen, glucocorticoids, and 
progesterone (Chap. 1). The AR is encoded by a 
gene on the long arm of the X chromosome and has 
a molecular mass of about 110 kDa. A polymorphic 
region in the amino terminus of the receptor, which 
contains a variable number of glutamine repeats, modi-
fies the transcriptional activity of the receptor. The AR 
protein is distributed in both the cytoplasm and the 
nucleus. Ligand binding to the AR induces conforma-
tional changes that allow the recruitment and assembly 
of tissue-specific cofactors and causes it to translocate 
into the nucleus, where it binds to DNA or other tran-
scription factors already bound to DNA. Thus, the AR 
is a ligand-regulated transcription factor. Some andro-
gen effects may be mediated by nongenomic AR signal 
transduction pathways. Testosterone binds to AR with 
one-half the affinity of DHT. The DHT-AR complex 
also has greater thermostability and a slower dissociation 
rate than the testosterone-AR complex. However, the 
molecular basis for selective testosterone versus DHT 
actions has not been explained completely.
The Seminiferous Tubules: 
Spermatogenesis
The seminiferous tubules are convoluted, closed loops 
with both ends emptying into the rete testis, a network 
of progressively larger efferent ducts that ultimately form 
the epididymis (Fig. 8-2). The seminiferous tubules total 
about 600 m in length and account for about two-thirds 
of testis volume. The walls of the tubules are formed 
by polarized Sertoli cells that are apposed to peritubular 
myoid cells. Tight junctions between Sertoli cells create 
a blood-testis barrier. Germ cells constitute the major-
ity of the seminiferous epithelium (∼60%) and are inti-
mately embedded within the cytoplasmic extensions of 
the Sertoli cells, which function as “nurse cells.” Germ 
cells progress through characteristic stages of mitotic 
and meiotic divisions. A pool of type A spermatogonia 
serve as stem cells capable of self-renewal. Primary sper-
matocytes are derived from type B spermatogonia and 
undergo meiosis before progressing to spermatids that 
undergo spermiogenesis (a differentiation process involv-
ing chromatin condensation, acquisition of an acro-
some, elongation of cytoplasm, and formation of a tail) 
and are released from Sertoli cells as mature spermatozoa. 
The complete differentiation process into mature sperm 
requires 74 days. Peristaltic-type action by peritubular 
myoid cells transports sperm into the efferent ducts. The 
spermatozoa spend an additional 21 days in the epididy-
mis, where they undergo further maturation and capaci-
tation. The normal adult testes produce >100 million 
sperm per day.
Naturally occurring mutations in the FSHb gene and 
the FSH receptor confirm an important, but not essen-
tial, role for this pathway in spermatogenesis. Females 
with these mutations are hypogonadal and infertile 
because ovarian follicles do not mature; males exhibit 
variable degrees of reduced spermatogenesis, presum-
ably because of impaired Sertoli cell function. Because 
Sertoli cells produce inhibin B, an inhibitor of FSH, 
seminiferous tubule damage (e.g., by radiation) causes 
a selective increase of FSH. Testosterone reaches very 
high concentrations locally in the testis and is essential 
for spermatogenesis. The cooperative actions of FSH 
and testosterone are important in the progression of 
meiosis and spermiation. FSH and testosterone regulate 
germ cell survival via intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic 
mechanisms. FSH also may play an important role in 
supporting spermatogonia. Gonadotropin-regulated tes-
ticular RNA helicase (GRTH/DDX25), a testis-specific 
gonadotropin/androgen-regulated RNA helicase, is pres-
ent in germ cells and Leydig cells and may participate in 
paracrine regulation of germ cell development.
A number of knockout mouse models exhibit 
impaired germ cell development or spermatogen-
esis, presaging possible mutations associated with male 
infertility. The human Y chromosome contains a small 
• External genitalia
• Prostate growth
• Acne
• Facial/body hair
• Scalp hair loss
• Hypothalamic/
  pituitary feedback
• Bone resorption
• Epiphyseal closure
• Gynecomastia
• Some vascular and
  behavioral effects
Albumin
(50-70%)
Estradiol
• Wolffian duct
• Bone formation
• Muscle mass
• Spermatogenesis
SHBG
(30-45%)
Bioavailable
Unbound
(0.5-3.0%)
Testosterone
Excretion
(90%)
Dihydrotestosterone
(DHT)
Aromatase
(0.3%)
5α-Reductase
(6-8%)
Testosterone (5 mg/d)
ANDROGEN METABOLISM AND ACTION
Figure 8-4 
Androgen metabolism and actions. SHBG, sex hormone–
binding globulin.
152
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
pseudoautosomal region that can recombine with 
homologous regions of the X chromosome. Most of the 
Y chromosome does not recombine with the X chro-
mosome and is referred to as the male-specific region 
of the Y (MSY). The MSY contains 156 transcrip-
tion units that encode for 26 proteins, including nine 
families of Y-specific multicopy genes; many of these 
Y-specific genes are also testis specific and necessary 
for spermatogenesis. Microdeletions of several Y chro-
mosome azoospermia factor (AZF) genes (e.g., RNA-
binding motif, RBM; deleted in azoospermia, DAZ) are 
associated with oligospermia or azoospermia.
Treatment	
Male Factor Infertility
Treatment options for male factor infertility have 
expanded greatly in recent years. Secondary hypogo-
nadism is highly amenable to treatment with gonado-
tropins (see below). Assisted reproductive technologies 
such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection (ICSI) have provided new opportuni-
ties for patients with male factor infertility primary tes-
ticular failure and disorders of sperm transport. Choice 
of initial treatment options depends on sperm concen-
tration and motility. Expectant management should be 
attempted initially in men with mild male factor infertil-
ity (sperm count 15–20 × 106/mL and normal motility). 
Moderate male factor infertility (10–15 × 106/mL and 
20–40% motility) should begin with intrauterine insemi-
nation alone or in combination with treatment of the 
female partner with clomiphene or gonadotropins, but 
it may require IVF with or without ICSI. For men with a 
severe defect (sperm count <10 × 106/mL, 10% motility), 
IVF with ICSI or donor sperm should be used.
Clinical and Laboratory 
Evaluation of Male Reproductive 
Function
History and Physical Examination
The history should focus on developmental stages such 
as puberty and growth spurts, as well as androgen-
dependent events such as early-morning erections, fre-
quency and intensity of sexual thoughts, and frequency 
of masturbation or intercourse. Although libido and 
the overall frequency of sexual acts are decreased in 
androgen-deficient men, young hypogonadal men may 
achieve erections in response to visual erotic stimuli. 
Men with acquired androgen deficiency often report 
decreased energy and increased irritability.
The physical examination should focus on second-
ary sex characteristics such as hair growth, gynecomas-
tia, testicular volume, prostate, and height and body 
proportions. Eunuchoid proportions are defined as an arm 
span >2 cm greater than height and suggest that andro-
gen deficiency occurred before epiphyseal fusion. Hair 
growth on the face, axilla, chest, and pubic regions is 
androgen dependent; however, changes may not be 
noticeable unless androgen deficiency is severe and pro-
longed. Ethnicity also influences the intensity of hair 
growth (Chap. 13). Testicular volume is best assessed 
by using a Prader orchidometer. Testes range from 3.5 
to 5.5 cm in length, which corresponds to a volume of 
12–25 mL. Advanced age does not influence testicular 
size, although the consistency becomes less firm. Asian 
men generally have smaller testes than Western Euro-
peans, independent of differences in body size. Because 
of its possible role in infertility, the presence of varico-
cele should be sought by palpation while the patient is 
standing; it is more common on the left side. Patients 
with Klinefelter’s syndrome have markedly reduced tes-
ticular volumes (1–2 mL). In congenital hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism, testicular volumes provide a good 
index for the degree of gonadotropin deficiency and the 
likelihood of response to therapy.
Gonadotropin and Inhibin 
Measurements
LH and FSH are measured by using two-site immuno-
radiometric, immunofluorometric, or chemilumines-
cent assays, which have very low cross-reactivity with 
other pituitary glycoprotein hormones and human cho-
rionic gonadotropin (hCG) and have sufficient sensitiv-
ity to measure the low levels present in patients with 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. In men with a low 
testosterone level, an LH level can distinguish primary 
(high LH) from secondary (low or inappropriately nor-
mal LH) hypogonadism. An elevated LH level indicates 
a primary defect at the testicular level, whereas a low 
or inappropriately normal LH level suggests a defect at 
the hypothalamic-pituitary level. LH pulses occur about 
every 1–3 hours in normal men. Thus, gonadotro-
pin levels fluctuate, and samples should be pooled or 
repeated when results are equivocal. FSH is less pulsa-
tile than LH because it has a longer half-life. Selective 
increase in FSH suggests damage to the seminiferous 
tubules. Inhibin B, a Sertoli cell product that suppresses 
FSH, is reduced with seminiferous tubule damage. 
Inhibin B is a dimer with α-βB subunits and is measured 
by two-site immunoassays.
GnRH stimulation testing
The GnRH test is performed by measuring LH and 
FSH concentrations at baseline and at 30 and 60 min-
utes after intravenous administration of 100 μg of 
GnRH. A minimally acceptable response is a twofold 
LH increase and a 50% FSH increase. In the prepubertal 
153
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
period or with severe GnRH deficiency, the gonado-
trope may not respond to a single bolus of GnRH 
because it has not been primed by endogenous hypo-
thalamic GnRH. With the advent of highly sensitive 
gonadotropin assays, this test is rarely used in practice.
Testosterone Assays
Total testosterone
Total testosterone includes both unbound and protein-
bound testosterone and is measured by radioimmunoassays, 
immunometric assays, or liquid chromatography tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS involves 
extraction of serum by organic solvents, separation of 
testosterone from other steroids by high-performance 
liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, and 
quantitation of unique testosterone fragments by mass 
spectrometry. LC-MS/MS provides accurate and sen-
sitive measurements of testosterone levels even in the 
low range and is emerging as the method of choice for 
testosterone measurement. A single random sample pro-
vides a good approximation of the average testosterone 
concentration with the realization that testosterone lev-
els fluctuate in response to pulsatile LH. Testosterone is 
generally lower in the late afternoon and is reduced by 
acute illness. The testosterone concentration in healthy 
young men ranges from 300 to 1000 ng/dL in most 
laboratories, although these reference ranges are not 
derived from population-based random samples. Altera-
tions in SHBG levels due to aging, obesity, diabetes 
mellitus, hyperthyroidism, some types of medications, 
or chronic illness or on a congenital basis can affect total 
testosterone levels. Heritable factors contribute substan-
tially to the population-level variation in testosterone 
levels. Genomewide association studies have revealed 
polymorphisms in the SHBG gene as important con-
tributors to variation in testosterone levels.
Measurement of unbound testosterone levels
Most circulating testosterone is bound to SHBG and 
to albumin; only 0.5–3% of circulating testosterone is 
unbound, or “free.” The unbound testosterone con-
centration can be measured by equilibrium dialysis or 
calculated from total testosterone, SHBG, and albumin 
concentrations by using published mass-action equa-
tions. Tracer analogue methods are relatively inexpen-
sive and convenient but are inaccurate. Bioavailable tes-
tosterone refers to unbound testosterone plus testosterone 
that is loosely bound to albumin; it can be measured by 
the ammonium sulfate precipitation method.
hCG stimulation test
The hCG stimulation test is performed by administering 
a single injection of 1500–4000 IU of hCG intramuscularly 
and measuring testosterone levels at baseline and 24, 48, 
72, and 120 hours after hCG injection. An alternative 
regimen involves three injections of 1500 units of hCG 
on successive days and measurement of testosterone lev-
els 24 hours after the last dose. An acceptable response 
to hCG is a doubling of the testosterone concentration 
in adult men. In prepubertal boys, an increase in tes-
tosterone to >150 ng/dL indicates the presence of tes-
ticular tissue. No response may indicate an absence of 
testicular tissue or marked impairment of Leydig cell 
function. Measurement of MIS, a Sertoli cell product, is 
also used to detect the presence of testes in prepubertal 
boys with cryptorchidism.
Semen Analysis
Semen analysis is the most important step in the evalua-
tion of male infertility. Samples are collected by mastur-
bation after a period of abstinence of 2–3 days. Semen 
volumes and sperm concentrations vary considerably 
among fertile men, and several samples may be needed 
before it is possible to conclude that the results are 
abnormal. Analysis should be performed within an hour 
of collection. The normal ejaculate volume is 2–6 mL and 
contains sperm counts >20 million/mL, with a motil-
ity of >50% and >15% normal morphology. Some men 
with low sperm counts are nevertheless fertile. A variety 
of tests for sperm function can be performed in special-
ized laboratories, but they add relatively little to the 
treatment options.
Testicular Biopsy
Testicular biopsy is useful in some patients with oligo-
spermia or azoospermia as an aid in diagnosis and an 
indication for the feasibility of treatment. Using local anes-
thesia, fine-needle aspiration biopsy is performed to 
aspirate tissue for histology. Alternatively, open biop-
sies can be performed under local or general anesthe-
sia when more tissue is required. A normal biopsy in 
an azoospermic man with a normal FSH level suggests 
obstruction of the vas deferens, which may be correct-
able surgically. Biopsies are also used to harvest sperm 
for ICSI and to classify disorders such as hyposper-
matogenesis (all stages present but in reduced num-
bers), germ cell arrest (usually at primary spermatocyte 
stage), and Sertoli cell–only syndrome (absent germ 
cells) or hyalinization (sclerosis with absent cellular 
elements).
Disorders of Sexual 
Differentiation
See Chap. 7.
154
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
Disorders of Puberty
The onset and tempo of puberty vary greatly in the 
general population and are affected by genetic and envi-
ronmental factors. Although some of the variance in 
the timing of puberty is explained by heritable factors, 
the genes involved and their relative contributions to 
the timing of puberty are not known.
Precocious Puberty
Puberty in boys before age 9 is considered precocious. 
Isosexual precocity refers to premature sexual develop-
ment consistent with phenotypic sex and includes fea-
tures such as the development of facial hair and phallic 
growth. Isosexual precocity is divided into gonadotro-
pin-dependent and gonadotropin-independent causes 
of androgen excess (Table 8-1). Heterosexual precocity 
refers to the premature development of estrogenic fea-
tures in boys such as breast development.
Gonadotropin-dependent precocious puberty
This disorder, called central precocious puberty (CPP), is 
less common in boys than in girls. It is caused by pre-
mature activation of the GnRH pulse generator, some-
times because of central nervous system (CNS) lesions 
such as hypothalamic hamartomas, but it is often idio-
pathic. CPP is characterized by gonadotropin levels 
that are inappropriately elevated for age. Because pitu-
itary priming has occurred, GnRH elicits LH and FSH 
responses typical of those seen in puberty or in adults. 
MRI should be performed to exclude a mass, structural 
defect, infection, or inflammatory process.
Gonadotropin-independent  
precocious puberty
In these disorders, androgens from the testis or the adre-
nal are increased but gonadotropins are low. This group 
of disorders includes hCG-secreting tumors; congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia; sex steroid–producing tumors of the 
testis, adrenal, and ovary; accidental or deliberate exog-
enous sex steroid administration; hypothyroidism; and 
activating mutations of the LH receptor or GSα subunit.
Familial male-limited precocious puberty
Also called testotoxicosis, familial male-limited preco-
cious puberty is an autosomal dominant disorder caused 
by activating mutations in the LH receptor, leading to 
constitutive stimulation of the cyclic AMP pathway 
and testosterone production. Clinical features include 
premature androgenization in boys, growth accelera-
tion in early childhood, and advanced bone age fol-
lowed by premature epiphyseal fusion. Testosterone 
is elevated, and LH is suppressed. Treatment options 
Table 8-1
Causes of Precocious or Delayed Puberty in 
Boys
  I. Precocious puberty
   A.  Gonadotropin dependent
       1.  Idiopathic
       2.  Hypothalamic hamartoma or other lesions
       3.  CNS tumor or inflammatory state
   B.  Gonadotropin independent
       1.  Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
       2.  hCG-secreting tumor
       3.  McCune-Albright syndrome
       4.  Activating LH receptor mutation
       5.  Exogenous androgens
II. Delayed puberty
   A.  Constitutional delay of growth and puberty
   B.  Systemic disorders
       1.  Chronic disease
       2.  Malnutrition
       3.  Anorexia nervosa
   C.  CNS tumors and their treatment (radiotherapy and 
surgery)
   D.  Hypothalamic-pituitary causes of pubertal failure  
(low gonadotropins)
       1.  Congenital disorders (Table 8-2)
          a.  Hypothalamic syndromes (e.g., Prader-Willi)
          b.  Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
          c.  Congenital
          d.  PROP1 mutations and other mutations  
affecting pituitary development/function
       2.  Acquired disorders
          a.  Pituitary tumors
          b.  Hyperprolactinemia
   E.  Gonadal causes of pubertal failure (elevated  
gonadotropins)
       1.  Klinefelter’s syndrome
       2.  Bilateral undescended testes
       3.  Orchitis
       4.  Chemotherapy or radiotherapy
       5.  Anorchia
   F.  Androgen insensitivity
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; GnRH, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, lutein-
izing hormone.
include inhibitors of testosterone synthesis (e.g., keto-
conazole), androgen receptor antagonists (e.g., fluta-
mide and bicalutamide), and aromatase inhibitors (e.g., 
anastrazole).
McCune-Albright syndrome
This is a sporadic disorder caused by somatic (postzy-
gotic) activating mutations in the GSα subunit that 
links G protein–coupled receptors to intracellular sig-
naling pathways (Chap. 29). The mutations impair the 
guanosine triphosphatase activity of the GSα protein, 
leading to constitutive activation of adenylyl cyclase. 
Like activating LH receptor mutations, this stimulates 
155
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
testosterone production and causes gonadotropin-
independent precocious puberty. In addition to sexual 
precocity, affected individuals may have autonomy 
in the adrenals, pituitary, and thyroid glands. Café au 
lait spots are characteristic skin lesions that reflect the 
onset of the somatic mutations in melanocytes during 
embryonic development. Polyostotic fibrous dyspla-
sia is caused by activation of the parathyroid hormone 
receptor pathway in bone. Treatment is similar to that 
in patients with activating LH receptor mutations. 
Bisphosphonates have been used to treat bone lesions.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Boys with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) who 
are not well controlled with glucocorticoid suppression 
of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) can develop 
premature virilization because of excessive androgen 
production by the adrenal gland (Chaps. 5 and 7). LH is 
low, and the testes are small. Adrenal rests may develop 
within the testis of poorly controlled patients with CAH 
because of chronic ACTH stimulation; adrenal rests do 
not require surgical removal and regress with effective 
glucocorticoid therapy. Some children with CAH may 
develop gonadotropin-dependent precocious puberty 
with early maturation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
gonadal axis, elevated gonadotropins, and testicular 
growth.
Heterosexual sexual precocity
Breast enlargement in prepubertal boys can result from 
familial aromatase excess, estrogen-producing tumors in 
the adrenal gland, Sertoli cell tumors in the testis, mari-
juana smoking, or exogenous estrogens or androgens. 
Table 8-2
Causes of Congenital Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
Gene
Locus
Inheritance
Associated Features
KAL1
Xp22
X-linked
Anosmia, renal agenesis, synkinesia, cleft lip/
palate, oculomotor/visuospatial defects, gut 
malrotations
NELF
9q34.3
AR
Anosmia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
FGFR1
8p11-p12
AD
Anosmia, cleft lip/palate, synkinesia, syndactyly
PROK2
20p13
AR
Anosmia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
PROKR2
20p12.3
AR
Anosmia
LEP
7q31
AR
Obesity
LEPR
1p31
AR
Obesity
PC1
5q15-21
AR
Obesity, diabetes mellitus, ACTH deficiency
HESX1
3p21
AR
AD
Septo-optic dysplasia, CPHD
Isolated GH insufficiency
LHX3
9q34
AR
CPHD (ACTH spared), cervical spine rigidity
PROP1
5q35
AR
CPHD (ACTH usually spared)
GPR54
19p13
AR
None
GnRHR
4q21
AR
None
FSHβ
11p13
AR
↑ LH
LHβ
19q13
AR
↑ FSH
SF1 (NR5A1)
9p33
AD/AR
Primary adrenal failure, XY sex reversal
DAX1 (NR0B1)
Xp21
X-linked
Primary adrenal failure, impaired  
spermatogenesis
TAC3R
4q25
AR
None
TAC3
12q13-q21
AR
None
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CPHD, 
combined pituitary hormone deficiency; DAX1, dosage-sensitive sex-reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congen-
ita, X-chromosome; FGFR1, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1; FSHβ, follicle-stimulating hormone β subunit; 
GnRHR, gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor; GPR54, G protein–coupled receptor 54; HESX1, homeobox 
gene expressed in embryonic stem cells 1; KAL1, interval-1 gene; LEP, leptin; LEPR, leptin receptor; LHβ, lutein-
izing hormone β subunit; LHX3, LIM homeobox gene 3; NELF, nasal embryonic LHRH factor; PC1, prohormone 
convertase 1; PROKR2, prokineticin receptor 2; PROP1, Prophet of Pit 1; SF1, steroidogenic factor 1. 
156
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
Occasionally, germ cell tumors that secrete hCG can 
be associated with breast enlargement due to excessive 
stimulation of estrogen production (see “Gynecomastia,” 
below).
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Precocious Puberty
After verification of precocious development, serum 
LH and FSH levels should be measured to determine 
whether gonadotropins are increased in relation to 
chronologic age (gonadotropin dependent) or whether 
sex steroid secretion is occurring independent of LH 
and FSH (gonadotropin independent). In children 
with gonadotropin-dependent precocious puberty, 
CNS lesions should be excluded by history, neuro-
logic examination, and MRI scan of the head. If organic 
causes are not found, one is left with the diagnosis of 
idiopathic central precocity. Patients with high testos-
terone but suppressed LH concentrations have gonad-
otropin-independent sexual precocity; in these patients, 
DHEA sulfate (DHEAS) and 17α-hydroxyprogesterone 
should be measured. High levels of testosterone and 
17α-hydroxyprogesterone suggest the possibility of 
CAH due to 21α-hydroxylase or 11β-hydroxylase defi-
ciency. If testosterone and DHEAS are elevated, adrenal 
tumors should be excluded by obtaining a CT scan of 
the adrenal glands. Patients with elevated testosterone 
but without increased 17α-hydroxyprogesterone or 
DHEAS should undergo careful evaluation of the tes-
tis by palpation and ultrasound to exclude a Leydig 
cell neoplasm. Activating mutations of the LH receptor 
should be considered in children with gonadotropin-
independent precocious puberty in whom CAH, andro-
gen abuse, and adrenal and testicular neoplasms have 
been excluded.
Treatment	
Precocious Puberty
In patients with a known cause (e.g., a CNS lesion or a 
testicular tumor), therapy should be directed toward 
the underlying disorder. In patients with idiopathic 
CPP, long-acting GnRH analogues can be used to sup-
press gonadotropins and decrease testosterone, halt 
early pubertal development, delay accelerated bone 
maturation, and prevent early epiphyseal closure, thus 
increasing final height and mitigating the psychoso-
cial consequences of early pubertal development. The 
treatment is most effective for increasing final adult 
height if it is initiated before age 6. Puberty resumes 
after discontinuation of the GnRH analogue. Counsel-
ing is an important aspect of the overall treatment 
strategy.
In children with gonadotropin-independent pre-
cocious puberty, inhibitors of steroidogenesis, such 
as ketoconazole, and AR antagonists have been used 
empirically. Long-term treatment with spironolactone (a 
weak androgen antagonist) and ketoconazole has been 
reported to normalize growth rate and bone maturation 
and to improve predicted height in small, nonrandom-
ized trials in boys with familial male-limited precocious 
puberty. Aromatase inhibitors such as testolactone and 
letrozole have been used as an adjunct to antiandrogen 
and GnRH analogue therapy for children with familial 
male-limited precocious puberty, congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia, and McCune-Albright syndrome.
Delayed Puberty
Puberty is delayed in boys if it has not ensued by age 14, 
an age that is 2–2.5 standard deviations above the mean 
for healthy children. Delayed puberty is more common 
in boys than in girls. There are four main categories of 
delayed puberty: (1) constitutional delay of growth and 
puberty (∼60% of cases), (2) functional hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism caused by systemic illness or malnutrition 
(∼20% of cases), (3) hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
caused by genetic or acquired defects in the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary region (∼10% of cases), and (4) hypergo-
nadotropic hypogonadism secondary to primary gonadal 
failure (∼15% of cases) (Table 8-1). Functional hypo-
gonadotropic hypogonadism is more common in girls 
than in boys. Permanent causes of hypogonadotropic or 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism are identified in <25% 
of boys with delayed puberty.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Delayed Puberty
Any history of systemic illness, eating disorders, exces-
sive exercise, social and psychological problems, and 
abnormal patterns of linear growth during childhood 
should be verified. Boys with pubertal delay may have 
accompanying emotional and physical immaturity rela-
tive to their peers, which can be a source of anxiety. 
Physical examination should focus on height; arm span; 
weight; visual fields; and secondary sex characteris-
tics, including hair growth, testicular volume, phallic 
size, and scrotal reddening and thinning. Testicular size 
>2.5 cm generally indicates that the child has entered 
puberty.
The main diagnostic challenge is to distinguish those 
with constitutional delay, who will progress through 
puberty at a later age, from those with an underly-
ing pathologic process. Constitutional delay should 
be suspected when there is a family history and when 
there are delayed bone age and short stature. Pituitary 
priming by pulsatile GnRH is required before LH and 
157
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
FSH are synthesized and secreted normally. Thus, 
blunted responses to exogenous GnRH can be seen 
in patients with constitutional delay, GnRH deficiency, 
or pituitary disorders (see “GnRH Stimulation Testing,” 
above). In contrast, low-normal basal gonadotropin lev-
els or a normal response to exogenous GnRH is consis-
tent with an early stage of puberty, which often is her-
alded by nocturnal GnRH secretion. Thus, constitutional 
delay is a diagnosis of exclusion that requires ongoing 
evaluation until the onset of puberty and the growth 
spurt.
Treatment	
Delayed Puberty
If therapy is considered appropriate, it can begin with 
25–50 mg testosterone enanthate or testosterone cypi-
onate every 2 weeks or by using a 2.5-mg testosterone 
patch or 25-mg testosterone gel. Because aromatiza-
tion of testosterone to estrogen is obligatory for mediat-
ing androgen effects on epiphyseal fusion, concomitant 
treatment with aromatase inhibitors may allow attain-
ment of greater final adult height. Testosterone treat-
ment should be interrupted after 6 months to determine 
whether endogenous LH and FSH secretion has ensued. 
Other causes of delayed puberty should be considered 
when there are associated clinical features or when boys 
do not enter puberty spontaneously after a year of obser-
vation or treatment.
Reassurance without hormonal treatment is appropri-
ate for many individuals with presumed constitutional 
delay of puberty. However, the impact of delayed growth 
and pubertal progression on a child’s social relation-
ships and school performance should be weighed. Also, 
boys with constitutional delay of puberty are less likely 
to achieve their full genetic height potential and have 
reduced total body bone mass as adults, mainly due to 
narrow limb bones and vertebrae as a result of impaired 
periosteal expansion during puberty. Administration of 
androgen therapy to boys with constitutional delay does 
not affect final height, and when administered with an 
aromatase inhibitor, it may improve final height.
Disorders of the Male 
Reproductive Axis during 
Adulthood
Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
Because LH and FSH are trophic hormones for the 
testes, impaired secretion of these pituitary gonadotro-
pins results in secondary hypogonadism, which is char-
acterized by low testosterone in the setting of low LH 
and FSH. Those with the most severe deficiency have 
complete absence of pubertal development, sexual 
infantilism, and, in some cases, hypospadias and unde-
scended testes. Patients with partial gonadotropin defi-
ciency have delayed or arrested sex development. The 
24-hour LH secretory profiles are heterogeneous in 
patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, reflect-
ing variable abnormalities of LH pulse frequency or 
amplitude. In severe cases, basal LH is low and there 
are no LH pulses. A smaller subset of patients has low-
amplitude LH pulses or markedly reduced pulse fre-
quency. Occasionally, only sleep-entrained LH pulses 
occur, reminiscent of the pattern seen in the early 
stages of puberty. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
can be classified into congenital and acquired disorders. 
Congenital disorders most commonly involve GnRH 
deficiency, which leads to gonadotropin deficiency. 
Acquired disorders are more common than congenital 
disorders and may result from a variety of sellar mass 
lesions or infiltrative diseases of the hypothalamus or 
pituitary.
Congenital disorders associated with 
gonadotropin deficiency
Most cases of congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonad-
ism are idiopathic despite extensive endocrine testing 
and imaging studies of the sellar region. Among known 
causes, familial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be 
transmitted as an X-linked (20%), autosomal recessive 
(30%), or autosomal dominant (50%) trait. Some indi-
viduals with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonad-
ism (IHH) have sporadic mutations in the same genes 
that cause inherited forms of the disorder (Table 8-2). 
Kallmann’s syndrome is an X-linked disorder caused by 
mutations in the KAL1 gene, which encodes anosmin, 
a protein that mediates the migration of neural progeni-
tors of the olfactory bulb and GnRH-producing neu-
rons. These individuals have GnRH deficiency and 
variable combinations of anosmia or hyposmia, renal 
defects, and neurologic abnormalities, including mir-
ror movements. Gonadotropin secretion and fertility 
can be restored by administration of pulsatile GnRH or 
gonadotropin replacement. Mutations in the FGFR1 
gene cause an autosomal dominant form of hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism that clinically resembles 
Kallmann’s syndrome; mutations in its putative ligand, 
the FGF8 gene product, have also been associated with 
IHH. Prokineticin 2 (PROK2) also encodes a protein 
involved in migration and development of olfactory 
and GnRH neurons. Recessive mutations in PROK2 
or in its receptor, PROKR2, have been associated 
with both anosmic and normosmic forms of hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism. X-linked hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism also occurs in adrenal hypoplasia congen-
ita, a disorder caused by mutations in the DAX1 gene, 
which encodes a nuclear receptor in the adrenal gland 
158
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
and reproductive axis. Adrenal hypoplasia congenita is 
characterized by absent development of the adult zone 
of the adrenal cortex, leading to neonatal adrenal insuf-
ficiency. Puberty usually does not occur or is arrested, 
reflecting variable degrees of gonadotropin deficiency. 
Although sexual differentiation is normal, some patients 
have testicular dysgenesis and impaired spermatogen-
esis despite gonadotropin replacement. Less commonly, 
adrenal hypoplasia congenita, sex reversal, and hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism can be caused by mutations 
of steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1). GnRH receptor muta-
tions, the most common identifiable cause of normosmic 
IHH, account for ∼40% of autosomal recessive and 10% 
of sporadic cases of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. 
These patients have decreased LH response to exog-
enous GnRH. Some receptor mutations alter GnRH 
binding affinity, allowing apparently normal responses 
to pharmacologic doses of exogenous GnRH, whereas 
other mutations may alter signal transduction down-
stream of hormone binding. Mutations of the GnRH1 
gene also have been reported in patients with hypo-
gonadotropic hypogonadism, although they are rare. 
G protein–coupled receptor GPR54 and its cognate 
receptor, kisspeptin, are important regulators of sex-
ual maturation. Recessive mutations in GPR54 cause 
gonadotropin deficiency without anosmia. Patients 
retain responsiveness to exogenous GnRH, suggest-
ing an abnormality in the neural pathways that con-
trol GnRH release. The genes encoding neurokinin B 
(TAC3), which is involved in preferential activation of 
GnRH release in early development, and its receptor 
(TAC3R) have been implicated in some families with 
normosmic IHH. Mutations in more than one gene 
(digenicity) may contribute to clinical heterogeneity in 
IHH patients. Rarely, recessive mutations in the LHb 
or FSHb gene have been described in patients with 
selective deficiencies of these gonadotropins. In approx-
imately 10% of men with IHH, reversal of gonado-
tropin deficiency may occur in adult life. Also, a small 
fraction of men with IHH may present with androgen 
deficiency and infertility in adult life after having gone 
through apparently normal pubertal development.
A number of homeodomain transcription factors 
are involved in the development and differentiation 
of the specialized hormone-producing cells within the 
pituitary gland (Table 8-2). Patients with mutations of 
PROP1 have combined pituitary hormone deficiency 
that includes GH, prolactin (PRL), thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH), LH, and FSH but not ACTH. LHX3 
mutations cause combined pituitary hormone deficiency 
in association with cervical spine rigidity. HESX1 
mutations cause septo-optic dysplasia and combined 
pituitary hormone deficiency.
Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by obesity, 
hypotonic musculature, mental retardation, hypogonad-
ism, short stature, and small hands and feet. Prader-Willi 
syndrome is a genomic imprinting disorder caused by 
deletions of the proximal portion of paternally derived 
chromosome 15q, uniparental disomy of the mater-
nal alleles, or mutations of the genes/loci involved in 
imprinting Laurence-Moon syndrome is an autosomal 
recessive disorder characterized by obesity, hypogo-
nadism, mental retardation, polydactyly, and retini-
tis pigmentosa. Recessive mutations of leptin, or its 
receptor, cause severe obesity and pubertal arrest, 
apparently because of hypothalamic GnRH deficiency 
(Chap. 16).
Acquired hypogonadotropic disorders
Severe illness, stress, malnutrition,  
and exercise
These factors may cause reversible gonadotropin defi-
ciency. Although gonadotropin deficiency and repro-
ductive dysfunction are well documented in these 
conditions in women, men exhibit similar but less pro-
nounced responses. Unlike women, most male runners 
and other endurance athletes have normal gonadotropin 
and sex steroid levels despite low body fat and frequent 
intensive exercise. Testosterone levels fall at the onset 
of illness and recover during recuperation. The magni-
tude of gonadotropin suppression generally correlates 
with the severity of illness. Although hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism is the most common cause of andro-
gen deficiency in patients with acute illness, some have 
elevated levels of LH and FSH, which suggest primary 
gonadal dysfunction. The pathophysiology of repro-
ductive dysfunction during acute illness is unknown 
but probably involves a combination of cytokine and/
or glucocorticoid effects. There is a high frequency of 
low testosterone levels in patients with chronic illnesses 
such as HIV infection, end-stage renal disease, chronic 
obstructive lung disease, and many types of cancer, and 
in patients receiving glucocorticoids. About 20% of 
HIV-infected men with low testosterone levels have 
elevated LH and FSH levels; these patients presumably 
have primary testicular dysfunction. The remaining 80% 
have either normal or low LH and FSH levels; these 
men have a central hypothalamic-pituitary defect or a 
dual defect involving both the testis and the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary centers. Muscle wasting is common in 
chronic diseases associated with hypogonadism, which 
also leads to debility, poor quality of life, and adverse 
outcome of disease. There is great interest in exploring 
strategies that can reverse androgen deficiency or atten-
uate the sarcopenia associated with chronic illness.
Men using opioids for relief of cancer or noncancer-
ous pain or because of addiction often have suppressed 
testosterone and LH levels; the degree of suppression 
is dose related and particularly severe with long-acting 
opioids such as methadone. Opioids suppress GnRH 
secretion and alter the sensitivity to feedback inhibition 
159
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
by gonadal steroids. Men who are heavy users of mari-
juana have decreased testosterone secretion and sperm 
production. The mechanism of marijuana-induced 
hypogonadism is decreased GnRH secretion. Gyneco-
mastia observed in marijuana users can also be caused by 
plant estrogens in crude preparations. Androgen depri-
vation therapy in men with prostate cancer has been 
associated with increased risk of bone fractures, diabetes 
mellitus, cardiovascular events, fatigue, sexual dysfunc-
tion, and poor quality of life.
Obesity
In men with mild to moderate obesity, SHBG levels 
decrease in proportion to the degree of obesity, result-
ing in lower total testosterone levels. However, free 
testosterone levels usually remain within the nor-
mal range. The decrease in SHBG levels is caused by 
increased circulating insulin, which inhibits SHBG pro-
duction. Estradiol levels are higher in obese men than in 
healthy, nonobese controls because of aromatization of 
testosterone to estradiol in adipose tissue. Weight loss is 
associated with reversal of these abnormalities, includ-
ing an increase in total and free testosterone levels and a 
decrease in estradiol levels. A subset of massively obese 
men may have a defect in the hypothalamic-pituitary 
axis as suggested by low free testosterone in the absence 
of elevated gonadotropins. Weight gain in adult men 
can accelerate the rate of age-related decline in testos-
terone levels.
Hyperprolactinemia
(See also Chap. 2.) Elevated PRL levels are associated 
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. PRL inhibits 
hypothalamic GnRH secretion either directly or through 
modulation of tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic path-
ways. A PRL-secreting tumor also may destroy the sur-
rounding gonadotropes by invasion or compression of 
the pituitary stalk. Treatment with dopamine agonists 
reverses gonadotropin deficiency, although there may be 
a delay relative to PRL suppression.
Sellar mass lesions
Neoplastic and nonneoplastic lesions in the hypo-
thalamus or pituitary can affect gonadotrope func-
tion directly or indirectly. In adults, pituitary adeno-
mas constitute the largest category of space-occupying 
lesions affecting gonadotropin and other pituitary hor-
mone production. Pituitary adenomas that extend 
into the suprasellar region can impair GnRH secretion 
and mildly increase PRL secretion (usually <50 μg/L) 
because of impaired tonic inhibition by dopaminergic 
pathways. These tumors should be distinguished from 
prolactinomas, which typically secrete higher PRL lev-
els. The presence of diabetes insipidus suggests the pos-
sibility of a craniopharyngioma, infiltrative disorder, or 
other hypothalamic lesions (Chap. 3).
Hemochromatosis
Both the pituitary and the testis can be affected by exces-
sive iron deposition. However, the pituitary defect is the 
predominant lesion in most patients with hemochroma-
tosis and hypogonadism. The diagnosis of hemochro-
matosis is suggested by the association of characteristic 
skin discoloration, hepatic enlargement or dysfunction, 
diabetes mellitus, arthritis, cardiac conduction defects, 
and hypogonadism.
Primary Testicular Causes  
of Hypogonadism
Common causes of primary testicular dysfunction include 
Klinefelter’s syndrome, uncorrected cryptorchidism, can-
cer chemotherapy, radiation to the testes, trauma, torsion, 
infectious orchitis, HIV infection, anorchia syndrome, 
and myotonic dystrophy. Primary testicular disorders may 
be associated with impaired spermatogenesis, decreased 
androgen production, or both. See Chap. 7 for disorders 
of testis development, androgen synthesis, and androgen 
action.
Klinefelter’s syndrome
(See also Chap. 7.) Klinefelter’s syndrome is the most 
common chromosomal disorder associated with testicu-
lar dysfunction and male infertility. It occurs in about 
1 in 1000 live-born males. Azoospermia is the rule in 
men with Klinefelter’s syndrome who have the 47,XXY 
karyotype; however, men with mosaicism may have 
germ cells, especially at a younger age. The clinical phe-
notype of Klinefelter’s syndrome can be heterogeneous, 
possibly because of mosaicism, polymorphisms in andro-
gen receptor gene, variable testosterone levels, or other 
genetic factors. Testicular histology shows hyalinization 
of seminiferous tubules and absence of spermatogenesis. 
Although their function is impaired, the number of Ley-
dig cells appears to increase. Testosterone is decreased 
and estradiol is increased, leading to clinical features of 
undervirilization and gynecomastia. Men with Kline-
felter’s syndrome are at increased risk of systemic lupus 
erythematosus, breast cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
and lung cancer and reduced risk of prostate cancer. Peri-
odic mammography for breast cancer surveillance is rec-
ommended for men with Klinefelter’s syndrome. Fertility 
has been achieved by intracytoplasmic injection of sperm 
retrieved surgically from testicular biopsies of men with 
Klinefelter’s syndrome, including some men with non-
mosaic forms of Klinefelter’s syndrome.
Cryptorchidism
Cryptorchidism occurs when there is incomplete 
descent of the testis from the abdominal cavity into the 
scrotum. About 3% of full-term and 30% of premature 
160
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
male infants have at least one undescended testis at 
birth, but descent is usually complete by the first few 
weeks of life. The incidence of cryptorchidism is <1% 
by 9 months of age. Androgens regulate both the 
transabdominal and inguinoscrotal descent of the tes-
tes through degeneration of the craniosuspensory liga-
ment and a shortening of the gubernacula, respectively. 
Mutations in INSL3 and its receptor, which regulate 
the transabdominal portion of testicular descent, have 
been found in some patients with cryptorchidism.
Cryptorchidism is associated with increased risk of 
malignancy and infertility. Unilateral cryptorchidism, 
even when corrected before puberty, is associated with 
decreased sperm count, possibly reflecting unrecognized 
damage to the fully descended testis or other genetic 
factors. Epidemiologic, clinical, and molecular evidence 
supports the idea that cryptorchidism, hypospadias, 
impaired spermatogenesis, and testicular cancer may be 
causally related to common genetic and environment 
perturbations and are components of the testicular dys-
genesis syndrome.
Acquired testicular defects
Viral orchitis may be caused by the mumps virus, echo-
virus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, and group B 
arboviruses. Orchitis occurs in as many as one-fourth 
of adult men with mumps; the orchitis is unilateral in 
about two-thirds and bilateral in the remainder. Orchi-
tis usually develops a few days after the onset of paroti-
tis but may precede it. The testis may return to normal 
size and function or undergo atrophy. Semen analysis 
returns to normal for three-fourths of men with uni-
lateral involvement but for only one-third of men with 
bilateral orchitis. Trauma, including testicular torsion, 
also can cause secondary atrophy of the testes. The 
exposed position of the testes in the scrotum renders 
them susceptible to both thermal and physical trauma, 
particularly in men with hazardous occupations.
The testes are sensitive to radiation damage. Doses 
>200 mGy (20 rad) are associated with increased 
FSH and LH levels and damage to the spermatogonia. 
After ∼800 mGy (80 rad), oligospermia or azoospermia 
develops, and higher doses may obliterate the germinal 
epithelium. Permanent androgen deficiency in adult men 
is uncommon after therapeutic radiation; however, most 
boys given direct testicular radiation therapy for acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia have permanently low testoster-
one levels. Sperm banking should be considered before 
patients undergo radiation treatment or chemotherapy.
Drugs interfere with testicular function by several 
mechanisms, including inhibition of testosterone syn-
thesis (e.g., ketoconazole), blockade of androgen action 
(e.g., spironolactone), increased estrogen (e.g., mari-
juana), or direct inhibition of spermatogenesis (e.g., 
chemotherapy).
Combination chemotherapy for acute leukemia, 
Hodgkin’s disease, and testicular and other cancers 
may impair Leydig cell function and cause infertility. 
The degree of gonadal dysfunction depends on the type 
of chemotherapeutic agent and the dose and duration 
of therapy. Because of high response rates and the young 
age of these men, infertility and androgen deficiency have 
emerged as important long-term complications of can-
cer chemotherapy. Cyclophosphamide and combination 
regimens containing procarbazine are particularly toxic to 
germ cells. Thus, 90% of men with Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
receiving MOPP (mechlorethamine, oncovin, procarba-
zine, prednisone) therapy develop azoospermia or extreme 
oligozoospermia; newer regimens that do not include 
procarbazine, such as ABVD (adriamycin, bleomycin, 
vinblastine, dacarbazine), are less toxic to germ cells.
Alcohol, when consumed in excess for prolonged 
periods, decreases testosterone, independent of liver dis-
ease or malnutrition. Elevated estradiol and decreased 
testosterone levels may occur in men taking digitalis.
The occupational and recreational history should be 
evaluated carefully in all men with infertility because of 
the toxic effects of many chemical agents on spermatogen-
esis. Known environmental hazards include microwaves 
and ultrasound and chemicals such as nematocide dibro-
mochloropropane, cadmium, phthalates, and lead. In 
some populations, sperm density is said to have declined 
by as much as 40% in the last 50 years. Environmental 
estrogens or antiandrogens may be partly responsible.
Testicular failure also occurs as a part of polyglandu-
lar autoimmune insufficiency (Chap. 23). Sperm antibod-
ies can cause isolated male infertility. In some instances, 
these antibodies are secondary phenomena result-
ing from duct obstruction or vasectomy. Granuloma-
tous diseases can affect the testes, and testicular atrophy 
occurs in 10–20% of men with lepromatous leprosy 
because of direct tissue invasion by the mycobacteria. 
The tubules are involved initially, followed by endarte-
ritis and destruction of Leydig cells.
Systemic disease can cause primary testis dysfunction 
in addition to suppressing gonadotropin production. 
In cirrhosis, a combined testicular and pituitary abnor-
mality leads to decreased testosterone production inde-
pendent of the direct toxic effects of ethanol. Impaired 
hepatic extraction of adrenal androstenedione leads 
to extraglandular conversion to estrone and estradiol, 
which partially suppresses LH. Testicular atrophy and 
gynecomastia are present in approximately one-half of 
men with cirrhosis. In chronic renal failure, androgen 
synthesis and sperm production decrease despite ele-
vated gonadotropins. The elevated LH level is due to 
reduced clearance, but it does not restore normal testos-
terone production. About one-fourth of men with renal 
failure have hyperprolactinemia. Improvement in tes-
tosterone production with hemodialysis is incomplete, 
but successful renal transplantation may return testicular 
161
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
function to normal. Testicular atrophy is present in one-
third of men with sickle cell anemia. The defect may be 
at either the testicular or the hypothalamic-pituitary level. 
Sperm density can decrease temporarily after acute febrile 
illness in the absence of a change in testosterone produc-
tion. Infertility in men with celiac disease is associated 
with a hormonal pattern typical of androgen resistance, 
namely, elevated testosterone and LH levels.
Neurologic diseases associated with altered testicular 
function include myotonic dystrophy, spinobulbar mus-
cular atrophy, and paraplegia. In myotonic dystrophy, 
small testes may be associated with impairment of both 
spermatogenesis and Leydig cell function. Spinobulbar 
muscular atrophy is caused by an expansion of the gluta-
mine repeat sequences in the amino-terminal region of 
the AR; this expansion impairs function of the AR, but 
it is unclear how the alteration is related to the neurologic 
manifestations. Men with spinobulbar muscular atrophy 
often have undervirilization and infertility as a late mani-
festation. Spinal cord lesions that cause paraplegia can lead 
to a temporary decrease in testosterone levels and may 
cause persistent defects in spermatogenesis; some patients 
retain the capacity for penile erection and ejaculation.
Androgen Insensitivity Syndromes
Mutations in the AR cause resistance to the action of 
testosterone and DHT. These X-linked mutations are 
associated with variable degrees of defective male phe-
notypic development and undervirilization (Chap. 7). 
Although not technically hormone-insensitivity syn-
dromes, two genetic disorders impair testosterone con-
version to active sex steroids. Mutations in the SRD5A2 
gene, which encodes 5α-reductase type 2, prevent the 
conversion of testosterone to DHT, which is neces-
sary for the normal development of the male external 
genitalia. Mutations in the CYP19 gene, which encodes 
aromatase, prevent testosterone conversion to estradiol. 
Males with CYP19 mutations have delayed epiphyseal 
fusion, tall stature, eunuchoid proportions, and osteopo-
rosis, consistent with evidence from an estrogen receptor– 
deficient individual that these testosterone actions are 
mediated indirectly via estrogen.
Gynecomastia
Gynecomastia refers to enlargement of the male breast. 
It is caused by excess estrogen action and is usually the 
result of an increased estrogen/androgen ratio. True 
gynecomastia is associated with glandular breast tissue 
that is >4 cm in diameter and often tender. Glandu-
lar tissue enlargement should be distinguished from 
excess adipose tissue: glandular tissue is firmer and 
contains fibrous-like cords. Gynecomastia occurs as 
a normal physiologic phenomenon in the newborn 
(due to transplacental transfer of maternal and placen-
tal estrogens), during puberty (high ratio of estrogen 
to androgen in early stages of puberty), and with aging 
(increased fat tissue and increased aromatase activity), 
but it also can result from pathologic conditions asso-
ciated with androgen deficiency or estrogen excess. 
The prevalence of gynecomastia increases with age and 
body mass index (BMI), probably because of increased 
aromatase activity in adipose tissue. Medications that 
alter androgen metabolism or action may also cause 
gynecomastia. The relative risk of breast cancer is 
increased in men with gynecomastia, although the 
absolute risk is relatively small.
Pathologic Gynecomastia
Any cause of androgen deficiency can lead to gynecomas-
tia, reflecting an increased estrogen/androgen ratio, 
as estrogen synthesis still occurs by aromatization of 
residual adrenal and gonadal androgens. Gynecomas-
tia is a characteristic feature of Klinefelter’s syndrome 
(Chap. 7). Androgen insensitivity disorders also cause
gynecomastia. Excess estrogen production may be caused 
by tumors, including Sertoli cell tumors in isolation 
or in association with Peutz-Jegher syndrome or Car-
ney complex. Tumors that produce hCG, including 
some testicular tumors, stimulate Leydig cell estrogen 
synthesis. Increased conversion of androgens to estrogens can 
be a result of increased availability of substrate (andro-
stenedione) for extraglandular estrogen formation 
(CAH, hyperthyroidism, and most feminizing adrenal 
tumors) or diminished catabolism of androstenedione 
(liver disease) so that androgen precursors are shunted 
to aromatase in peripheral sites. Obesity is associated 
with increased aromatization of androgen precursors 
to estrogens. Extraglandular aromatase activity can also 
be increased in tumors of the liver or adrenal gland or 
rarely as an inherited disorder. Several families with 
increased peripheral aromatase activity inherited as an auto-
somal dominant or an X-linked disorder have been 
described. In some families with this disorder, an inver-
sion in chromosome 15q21.2-3 causes the CYP19 gene 
to be activated by the regulatory elements of contiguous 
genes, resulting in excessive estrogen production in the 
fat and other extragonadal tissues. Drugs can cause gyne-
comastia by acting directly as estrogenic substances (e.g., 
oral contraceptives, phytoestrogens, digitalis), inhibiting 
androgen synthesis (e.g., ketoconazole), or action (e.g., 
spironolactone).
Because up to two-thirds of pubertal boys and one-
half of hospitalized men have palpable glandular tissue 
that is benign, detailed investigation or intervention 
is not indicated in all men presenting with gyneco-
mastia (Fig. 8-5). In addition to the extent of gyne-
comastia, recent onset, rapid growth, tender tissue, 
162
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
and occurrence in a lean subject should prompt more 
extensive evaluation. This should include a careful drug 
history, measurement and examination of the testes, 
assessment of virilization, evaluation of liver function, 
and hormonal measurements, including testosterone, 
estradiol, and androstenedione, LH, and hCG. A karyo-
type should be obtained in men with very small testes 
to exclude Klinefelter’s syndrome. In spite of exten-
sive evaluation, the etiology is established in fewer than 
one-half of patients.
Treatment	
Gynecomastia
When the primary cause can be identified and corrected, 
breast enlargement usually subsides over several months. 
However, if gynecomastia is of long duration, surgery is 
the most effective therapy. Indications for surgery include 
severe psychological and/or cosmetic problems, contin-
ued growth or tenderness, and suspected malignancy. 
In patients who have painful gynecomastia and in whom 
surgery cannot be performed, treatment with antiestro-
gens such as tamoxifen (20 mg/d) can reduce pain and 
Increased aromatization of
  androgen to estrogen (obesity,
  feminizing adrenal tumors,
  Sertoli cell tumors, inherited
  dysregulation of aromatase)
Breast enlargement
True glandular enlargement
Breast mass hard or fixed to
  the underlying tissue
Recent onset and rapid growth
Mammography and/or
  biopsy to exclude
  malignancy
Follow-up with serial
  examinations
Increased E2,
  normal T, altered
  E2/T ratio
Increased hCGβ
Exclude hCG
  secreting tumors 
Low T, high
  E2/T ratio
Androgen deficiency
  syndrome
Serum T, LH, FSH,
  estradiol, and hCGβ
Onset in neonatal or
  peripubertal period
Causative drugs
Known liver disease
Size <4 cm
Clinical evidence of androgen
  deficiency
Breast tenderness
Very small testes
Glandular tissue >4 cm in diameter
Absence of causative drugs or
  liver disease 
Increased adipose tissue
Figure 8-5 
Evaluation of gynecomastia. E2, 17β-estradiol; FSHs, follicle-
stimulating hormones; hCGβ, human chorionic gonadotropin 
β; LH, luteinizing hormone; T, testosterone. 
breast tissue size in over one-half of the patients.  
The estrogen receptor antagonists tamoxifen and ral-
oxifen have been reported in small trials to reduce breast 
size in men with pubertal gynecomastia, although com-
plete regression of breast enlargement is unusual with 
the use of estrogen receptor antagonists. Aromatase 
inhibitors can be effective in the early proliferative phase 
of the disorder. However, in a randomized trial in men 
with established gynecomastia, anastrozole was no more 
effective than placebo in reducing breast size.
Aging-Related Changes in Male 
Reproductive Function
A number of cross-sectional and longitudinal studies 
(e.g., the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging, the 
Massachusetts Male Aging Study, and the European 
Male Aging Study) have established that testosterone 
concentrations decrease with advancing age. This age-
related decline starts in the third decade of life and pro-
gresses slowly; the rate of decline in testosterone con-
centrations is greater in obese men, men with chronic 
illness, and those taking medications than in healthy 
older men. Because SHBG concentrations are higher 
in older men than in younger men, free or bioavail-
able testosterone concentrations decline with aging to a 
greater extent than do total testosterone concentrations. 
The age-related decline in testosterone is due to defects 
at all levels of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis: 
pulsatile GnRH secretion is attenuated, LH response 
to GnRH is reduced, and testicular response to LH is 
impaired. However, the gradual rise of LH with aging 
suggests that testis dysfunction is the main cause of 
declining androgen levels. The term andropause has been 
used to denote age-related decline in testosterone con-
centrations; this term is a misnomer because there is no 
discrete time when testosterone concentrations decline 
abruptly.
In epidemiologic surveys, low total and bioavail-
able testosterone concentrations have been associated 
with decreased appendicular skeletal muscle mass and 
strength, decreased self-reported physical function, 
higher visceral fat mass, insulin resistance, and increased 
risk of coronary artery disease and mortality. An anal-
ysis of signs and symptoms in older men in the Euro-
pean Male Aging Study revealed a syndromic associa-
tion of sexual and physical symptoms with testosterone 
levels <320 ng/dL in community-dwelling older men. 
In systematic reviews of randomized controlled tri-
als, testosterone therapy in healthy older men with low 
or low-normal testosterone levels was associated with 
greater increments in lean body mass, grip strength, 
and self-reported physical function than was the case 
with placebo. Testosterone therapy also induced greater 
163
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
improvement in vertebral but not femoral bone min-
eral density. Testosterone therapy in older men with 
sexual dysfunction and unequivocally low testosterone 
levels improves libido, but testosterone effects on erec-
tile function and response to selective phosphodiesterase 
inhibitors have been inconsistent. Testosterone therapy 
has not been shown to improve depression scores, frac-
ture risk, cognitive function, or clinical outcomes in 
older men. Furthermore, neither the long-term risks 
nor the clinical benefits of testosterone therapy in older 
men have been demonstrated in adequately powered tri-
als. Although there is no evidence that testosterone causes 
prostate cancer, there is concern that testosterone ther- 
apy might induce the growth of subclinical prostate 
cancers or exacerbate cardiovascular disease. One ran-
domized testosterone trial in older men with mobility 
limitation and a high burden of chronic conditions such 
as diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, and hyperlipid-
emia reported a greater number of cardiovascular events 
in men randomized to the testosterone arm of the study 
than in those randomized to the placebo arm. Popula-
tion screening of all older men for low testosterone lev-
els is not recommended, and testing should be restricted 
to men who have symptoms or physical features attrib-
utable to androgen deficiency. Testosterone therapy is 
not recommended for all older men with low testos-
terone levels. In older men with significant symptoms 
of androgen deficiency who have testosterone levels 
<200 ng/dL, testosterone therapy may be considered 
on an individualized basis and should be instituted after 
careful discussion of the risks and benefits (see “Testos-
terone Replacement,” later).
Testicular morphology, semen production, and 
fertility are maintained up to a very old age in men. 
Although concern has been expressed about age-
related increases in germ cell mutations and impair-
ment of DNA repair mechanisms, the frequency of 
chromosomal aneuploidy or structural abnormalities 
does not increase in the sperm of older men. However, 
the incidence of autosomal dominant diseases such as 
achondroplasia, polyposis coli, Marfan’s syndrome, and 
Apert’s syndrome increases in the offspring of men who 
are advanced in age, consistent with transmission of 
sporadic missense mutations.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Androgen Deficiency
Hypogonadism often is characterized by decreased 
sex drive, reduced frequency of sexual intercourse or 
inability to maintain erections, reduced beard growth, 
loss of muscle mass, decreased testicular size, and 
gynecomastia. Less than 10% of patients with erectile 
dysfunction alone have testosterone deficiency. Thus, 
it is useful to look for a constellation of symptoms and 
signs suggestive of androgen deficiency. Except when 
extreme, these clinical features may be difficult to dis-
tinguish from changes that occur with normal aging. 
Moreover, androgen deficiency may develop gradually. 
Although population studies such as the Massachu-
setts Male Aging Study and the Baltimore Longitudinal 
Study of Aging have reported a high prevalence of low 
testosterone levels in middle-aged and older men, the 
age-related decline in testosterone should be distin-
guished from classic hypogonadism due to diseases of 
the testes, the pituitary, or the hypothalamus.
When symptoms or clinical features suggest pos-
sible androgen deficiency, the laboratory evaluation 
is initiated by the measurement of total testosterone, 
preferably in the morning, using a reliable assay such 
as LC-MS/MS (Fig. 8-6). A consistently low total testos-
terone level <300 ng/dL measured by a reliable assay 
in association with symptoms provides evidence of 
testosterone deficiency. An early-morning testoster-
one level >350 ng/dL makes the diagnosis of andro-
gen deficiency unlikely. In men with testosterone lev-
els between 200 and 350 ng/dL, the total testosterone 
level should be repeated and a free testosterone level 
Klinefelter’s
Cryptorchidism
Postorchitis
Toxic
Other (see text)
Primary
gonadal
failure
Clinical hypogonadism
Total testosterone
Borderline low
200-350 ng/dL
Normal
>350 ng/dL
Free T
normal
LH low or
inappropriately normal
Hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism
Free T low
Total T<300 ng/dL
Androgen
deficiency
likely
LH
LH high
Androgen
deficiency
excluded
Low
<200 ng/dL
Repeat total testosterone
Measure free T
Consider systemic
illness
GnRH deficiency
Hyperprolactinemia
Sellar mass
Other (see text)
Figure 8-6 
Evaluation of hypogonadism. GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; T, testosterone.
164
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
should be measured. In older men and in patients with 
other clinical states that are associated with altera-
tions in SHBG levels, a direct measurement of free tes-
tosterone level by equilibrium dialysis can be useful in 
unmasking testosterone deficiency.
When androgen deficiency has been confirmed by low 
testosterone concentrations, LH should be measured to 
classify the patient as having primary (high LH) or second-
ary (low or inappropriately normal LH) hypogonadism. 
An elevated LH level indicates that the defect is at the tes-
ticular level. Common causes of primary testicular failure 
include Klinefelter’s syndrome, HIV infection, uncorrected 
cryptorchidism, cancer chemotherapeutic agents, radia-
tion, surgical orchiectomy, and prior infectious orchitis. 
Unless causes of primary testicular failure are known, a 
karyotype should be performed in men with low testos-
terone and elevated LH to exclude Klinefelter’s syndrome. 
Men who have low testosterone but “inappropriately nor-
mal” or low LH levels have secondary hypogonadism; their 
defect resides at the hypothalamic-pituitary level. Com-
mon causes of acquired secondary hypogonadism include 
space-occupying lesions of the sella, hyperprolactinemia, 
chronic illness, hemochromatosis, excessive exercise, and 
substance abuse. Measurement of PRL and an MRI scan 
of the hypothalamic-pituitary region can help exclude the 
presence of a space-occupying lesion. Patients in whom 
known causes of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
have been excluded are classified as having IHH. It is not 
unusual for congenital causes of hypogonadotropic hypo-
gonadism such as Kallmann’s syndrome to be diagnosed in 
young adults.
Treatment	
Age-Related Reproductive Dysfunction
Gonadotropins  Gonadotropin therapy is used 
to establish or restore fertility in patients with gonado-
tropin deficiency of any cause. Several gonadotropin 
preparations are available. Human menopausal gonado-
tropin (hMG; purified from the urine of postmenopausal 
women) contains 75 IU FSH and 75 IU LH per vial. hCG 
(purified from the urine of pregnant women) has little 
FSH activity and resembles LH in its ability to stimulate 
testosterone production by Leydig cells. Recombinant 
LH is now available. Because of the expense of hMG, 
treatment usually is begun with hCG alone, and hMG 
is added later to promote the FSH-dependent stages 
of spermatid development. Recombinant human FSH 
(hFSH) is now available and is indistinguishable from 
purified urinary hFSH in its biologic activity and phar-
macokinetics in vitro and in vivo, although the mature 
β subunit of recombinant hFSH has seven fewer amino 
acids. Recombinant hFSH is available in ampules 
containing 75 IU (∼7.5 μg FSH), which accounts for 
>99% of protein content. Once spermatogenesis is 
restored using combined FSH and LH therapy, hCG 
alone is often sufficient to maintain spermatogenesis.
Although a variety of treatment regimens are used, 
1500–2000 IU of hCG or recombinant human LH (rhLH) 
administered intramuscularly three times weekly is a 
reasonable starting dose. Testosterone levels should be 
measured 6–8 weeks later and 48–72 hours after the hCG 
or rhLH injection; the hCG/rhLH dose should be adjusted 
to achieve testosterone levels in the mid-normal range. 
Sperm counts should be monitored on a monthly basis. 
It may take several months for spermatogenesis to be 
restored; therefore, it is important to forewarn patients 
about the potential length and expense of the treatment 
and to provide conservative estimates of success rates.  
If testosterone levels are in the mid-normal range but the 
sperm concentrations are low after 6 months of therapy 
with hCG alone, FSH should be added. This can be done 
by using hMG, highly purified urinary hFSH, or recom-
binant hFSH. The selection of the FSH dose is empirical.  
A common practice is to start with the addition of 75 IU 
FSH three times a week in conjunction with the hCG/
rhLH injections. If sperm densities are still low after  
3 months of combined treatment, the FSH dose 
should be increased to 150 IU. Occasionally, it may take 
≥18–24 months for spermatogenesis to be restored.
The two best predictors of success using gonadotro-
pin therapy in hypogonadotropic men are testicular 
volume at presentation and time of onset. In general, 
men with testicular volumes >8 mL have better response 
rates than those who have testicular volumes <4 mL. 
Patients who became hypogonadotropic after puberty 
experience higher success rates than those who have 
never undergone pubertal changes. Spermatogenesis 
usually can be reinitiated by hCG alone, with high rates of 
success for men with postpubertal onset of hypogonado-
tropism. The presence of a primary testicular abnormality 
such as cryptorchidism will attenuate testicular response 
to gonadotropin therapy. Prior androgen therapy does 
not preclude subsequent response to gonadotropin ther-
apy, although some studies suggest that it may attenuate 
response to subsequent gonadotropin therapy.
Testosterone 
Replacement  Androgen 
therapy is indicated to restore testosterone levels to 
normal to correct features of androgen deficiency. Tes-
tosterone replacement improves libido and overall 
sexual activity and increases energy, lean muscle mass, 
and bone density. The benefits of testosterone replace-
ment therapy have been proved only in men who have 
documented androgen deficiency, as demonstrated by 
testosterone levels that are well below the lower limit of 
normal (<250 ng/dL).
Testosterone is available in a variety of formulations 
with distinct pharmacokinetics (Table 8-3). Testosterone 
serves as a prohormone and is converted to 17β-estradiol 
165
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
(continued )
Table 8-3
Clinical Pharmacology of Some Testosterone Formulations (CONTINUED)
Formulation
Regimen
Pharmacokinetic 
profile
DHT and E2
Advantages
Disadvantages
Testosterone 
enanthate 
or cypi-
onate
150–200 mg IM 
q 2 weeks or 
75-100 mg/
week
After a single IM injec-
tion, serum T levels 
rise into the supra-
physiologic range, then 
decline gradually into 
the hypogonadal range 
by the end of the dos-
ing interval
DHT and E2 levels 
rise in proportion 
to the increase in 
T levels; T:DHT 
and T:E2 ratios 
do not change
Corrects symp-
toms of andro-
gen deficiency; 
relatively inex-
pensive if self-
administered; 
flexibility of 
dosing
Requires IM injec-
tion; peaks and 
valleys in serum  
T levels
1% Testos-
terone gel
Available in 
sachets, 
tubes, and 
pumps 5–10 g 
T gel contain-
ing 50–100 mg 
T qid
Restores serum T and 
E2 levels to physi-
ologic male range
Serum DHT levels 
are higher and 
T:DHT ratios are 
lower in hypo-
gonadal men 
treated with the 
T gel than in 
healthy eugo-
nadal men
Corrects symp-
toms of andro-
gen deficiency; 
provides flex-
ibility of dosing, 
ease of appli-
cation; good 
skin tolerability
Potential of transfer 
to a female partner 
or child by direct 
skin-to-skin con-
tact; skin irritation 
in a small propor-
tion of treated men; 
moderately high 
DHT levels
Transdermal 
testoster-
one patch
1 or 2 patches, 
designed to 
nominally deliver 
5–10 mg T over 
24 h applied qid 
on nonpressure 
areas
Restores serum T, DHT, 
and E2 levels to physi-
ologic male range
T:DHT and T:E2 
levels are in 
physiologic male 
range
Ease of applica-
tion; corrects 
symptoms of 
androgen defi-
ciency
Serum T levels in 
some androgen-
deficient men may 
be in the low-normal 
range; these men 
may need applica-
tion of 2 patches 
daily; skin irritation at 
the application site 
occurs frequently in 
many patients
Buccal, bio-
adhesive, T 
tablets
30-mg con-
trolled-release, 
bioadhesive 
tablets bid
Absorbed from buccal 
mucosa
Normalizes serum 
T and DHT levels 
in hypogonadal 
men
Corrects symp-
toms of andro-
gen deficiency 
in healthy, 
hypogonadal 
men
Gum-related adverse 
events in 16% of 
treated men.
Testosterone 
pellets
3–6 pellets 
implanted SC; 
dose and regi-
men vary with 
formulation
Serum T peaks at  
1 month and then is sus-
tained in normal range 
for 3–6 months, depend-
ing on formulation
T:DHT and T:E2 
ratios do not 
change
Corrects symp-
toms of andro-
gen deficiency
Requires surgical 
incision for inser-
tions; pellets may 
extrude spontane-
ously
17-α-methyl 
testoster-
one
This 
17-α-alkylated 
compound 
should not be 
used because 
of potential for 
liver toxicity.
Orally active
Clinical responses 
are variable; poten-
tial for liver toxic-
ity; should not be 
used for treatment 
of androgen defi-
ciency
Oral tes-
tosterone 
undecano-
atea
40–80 mg PO 
bid or tid with 
meals
When administered in 
oleic acid, T undecano-
ate is absorbed through 
lymphatics, bypassing 
portal system; consid-
erable variability in the 
same individual on dif-
ferent days and among 
individuals
High DHT to T 
ratio
Convenience of 
oral administra-
tion
Not approved in 
the United States; 
variable clinical 
responses, variable 
serum T levels, high 
DHT:T ratio
166
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
Table 8-3
Clinical Pharmacology of Some Testosterone Formulations (CONTINUED)
Formulation
Regimen
Pharmacokinetic 
profile
DHT and E2
Advantages
Disadvantages
Injectable 
long-acting 
testos-
terone 
undecano-
ate in oila
European regi-
men 1000 mg 
IM, followed 
by 1000 mg at 
6 weeks and 
1000 mg q 
10–14 weeks
When administered at a 
dose of 750–1000 mg 
IM, serum T levels are 
maintained in the nor-
mal range in a majority 
of treated men
DHT and E2 levels 
rise in proportion 
to increase in 
T levels; T:DHT 
and T:E2 ratios 
do not change
Corrects symp-
toms of andro-
gen deficiency; 
requires infre-
quent adminis-
tration.
Requires IM injec-
tion of a large vol-
ume (4 mL); cough 
reported immedi-
ately after injection 
in a very small num-
ber of men
Testoster-
one-inadhe-
sive matrix 
patcha
2 × 60 cm2 
patches deliv-
ering approxi-
mately 4.8 mg 
of T/d
Restores serum T, DHT, 
and E2 to physiologic 
range
T:DHT and T:E2 
are in physi-
ologic range.
Lasts 2 d
Some skin irritation
aThese formulations are not approved for clinical use in the United States but are available outside the United States in many countries. Physi-
cians in countries where these formulations are available should follow the approved drug regimens.
Abbreviatons: DHT, dihydrotestosterone; E2, estradiol; T, testosterone.
by aromatase and to 5α-dihydrotestosterone by 5α-
reductase. Therefore, in evaluating testosterone formula-
tions, it is important to consider whether the formulation 
being used can achieve physiologic estradiol and DHT 
concentrations in addition to normal testosterone con-
centrations. Although testosterone concentrations at the 
lower end of the normal male range can restore sexual 
function, it is not clear whether low-normal testosterone 
levels can maintain bone mineral density and muscle 
mass. The current recommendation is to restore testoster-
one levels to the mid-normal range.
Oral 
Derivatives 
of 
Testosterone  Testos-
terone is well absorbed after oral administration but is 
quickly degraded during the first pass through the liver. 
Therefore, it is difficult to achieve sustained blood levels 
of testosterone after oral administration of crystalline tes-
tosterone. 17α-Alkylated derivatives of testosterone (e.g., 
17α-methyl testosterone, oxandrolone, fluoxymesterone) 
are relatively resistant to hepatic degradation and can be 
administered orally; however, because of the potential for 
hepatotoxicity, including cholestatic jaundice, peliosis, 
and hepatoma, these formulations should not be used 
for testosterone replacement. Hereditary angioedema 
due to C1 esterase deficiency is the only exception to 
this general recommendation; in this condition, oral 
17α-alkylated androgens are useful because they stimu-
late hepatic synthesis of the C1 esterase inhibitor.
Injectable 
Forms 
of 
Testosterone  The 
esterification of testosterone at the 17β-hydroxy posi-
tion makes the molecule hydrophobic and extends its 
duration of action. The slow release of testosterone 
ester from an oily depot in the muscle accounts for its 
extended duration of action. The longer the side chain, 
the greater the hydrophobicity of the ester, and the 
longer the duration of action. Thus, testosterone enan-
thate, cypionate, and undecanoate with longer side 
chains have longer durations of action than does tes-
tosterone propionate. Within 24 hours after intramuscu-
lar administration of 200 mg testosterone enanthate or 
cypionate, testosterone levels rise into the high-normal 
or supraphysiologic range and then gradually decline 
into the hypogonadal range over the next 2 weeks.  
A bimonthly regimen of testosterone enanthate or 
cypionate therefore results in peaks and troughs in 
testosterone levels that are accompanied by changes 
in a patient’s mood, sexual desire, and energy level.  
The kinetics of testosterone enanthate and cypionate 
are similar. Estradiol and DHT levels are normal if testos-
terone replacement is physiologic.
Transdermal Testosterone Patch  Nongeni-
tal testosterone patches, when applied in an appropri-
ate dose, can normalize testosterone, DHT, and estradiol 
levels 4–12 hours after application. Sexual function 
and well-being are restored in androgen-deficient men 
treated with the nongenital patch. One 5-mg patch  
may not be sufficient to increase testosterone into 
the mid-normal male range in all hypogonadal men; 
some patients may need two 5-mg patches daily to 
achieve the targeted testosterone concentrations. The 
use of testosterone patches may be associated with skin 
irritation in some individuals.
Testosterone Gel  Two testosterone gels, Andro-
gel and Testim, when applied topically to the skin in 5-, 
7.5-, and 10-g doses, can maintain total and free testos-
terone concentrations in the mid- to high-normal range 
in hypogonadal men. The current recommendations are 
167
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
to begin with a 50-mg dose and adjust the dose on the 
basis of testosterone levels. The advantages of the testos-
terone gel include ease of application and flexibility of dos-
ing. A major concern is the potential for inadvertent trans-
fer of the gel to a sexual partner or to children who may 
come in close contact with the patient. The ratio of DHT to 
testosterone concentrations is higher in men treated with 
the testosterone gel than in healthy men. Also, there is con-
siderable intra- and interindividual variation in serum tes-
tosterone levels in men treated with the transdermal gel.
Buccal Adhesive Testosterone  A buccal tes-
tosterone tablet that adheres to the buccal mucosa and 
releases testosterone as it is slowly dissolved has been 
approved. After twice-daily application of 30-mg tab-
lets, serum testosterone levels are maintained within the 
normal male range in a majority of treated hypogonadal 
men. The adverse effects include buccal ulceration and 
gum problems in a few subjects. The effects of food and 
brushing on absorption have not been studied in detail.
Implants of crystalline testosterone can be inserted 
in the subcutaneous tissue by means of a trocar through 
a small skin incision. Testosterone is released by surface 
erosion of the implant and absorbed into the systemic 
circulation. Two to six 200-mg implants can maintain 
testosterone in the mid- to high-normal range for up to 
6 months. Potential drawbacks include incising the skin 
for insertion and removal and spontaneous extrusions 
and fibrosis at the site of the implant.
Testosterone Formulations Not Available 
in the United States  Testosterone undecanoate, 
when administered orally in oleic acid, is absorbed pref-
erentially through the lymphatics into the systemic cir-
culation and is spared first-pass degradation in the liver. 
Doses of 40–80 mg orally, two or three times daily, are 
typically used. However, the clinical responses are vari-
able and suboptimal. Ratios of DHT to testosterone are 
higher in hypogonadal men treated with oral testoster-
one undecanoate compared with eugonadal men.
After initial priming, long-acting testosterone undecano­
ate in oil, when administered intramuscularly every 
12 weeks, maintains serum testosterone, estradiol, and 
DHT in the normal male range and corrects symptoms 
of androgen deficiency in a majority of treated men. 
However, the large injection volume (4 mL) is a relative 
drawback.
Novel Androgen Formulations  A number of 
androgen formulations with better pharmacokinetics or 
more selective activity profiles are under development. 
Two long-acting esters, testosterone buciclate and testos-
terone undecanoate, when injected intramuscularly, can 
maintain circulating testosterone concentrations in the 
male range for 7–12 weeks. Initial clinical trials have dem-
onstrated the feasibility of administering testosterone 
by the sublingual or buccal route. 7α-Methyl-19-
nortestosterone is an androgen that cannot be 
5α-reduced; therefore, compared to testosterone, it has 
relatively greater agonist activity in muscle and gonado-
tropin suppression but lesser activity on the prostate.
Selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs) 
are a class of androgen receptor ligands that bind the 
androgen receptor and display tissue-selective actions. 
A number of nonsteroidal SARMs that act as full agonists 
on the muscle and bone and spare the prostate to vary-
ing degrees have advanced to phase I and II human trials. 
Nonsteroidal SARMs do not serve as substrates for either 
the steroid 5α-reductase or the CYP19 aromatase. SARM 
binding to AR induces specific conformational changes 
in the AR protein, which then modulates protein-protein 
interactions between AR and its coregulators, resulting in 
tissue-specific regulation of gene expression.
Pharmacologic Uses of Androgens  Andro-
gens and SARMs are being evaluated as anabolic thera-
pies for functional limitations associated with aging and 
chronic illness. Testosterone supplementation increases 
skeletal muscle mass, maximal voluntary strength, and 
muscle power in healthy men, hypogonadal men, older 
men with low testosterone levels, HIV-infected men 
with weight loss, and men receiving glucocorticoids. 
These anabolic effects of testosterone are related to tes-
tosterone dose and circulating concentrations. System-
atic reviews have confirmed that testosterone therapy in 
HIV-infected men with weight loss promotes improve-
ments in body weight, lean body mass, muscle strength, 
and depression indices, leading to the recommenda-
tion that testosterone be considered as an adjunctive 
therapy in HIV-infected men who are experiencing 
unexplained weight loss and have low testosterone lev-
els. Similarly, in glucocorticoid-treated men, testoster-
one therapy should be considered to maintain muscle 
mass and strength and vertebral bone mineral density. 
It is not known whether testosterone therapy in older 
men with functional limitations is safe and effective in 
improving physical function and health-related quality 
of life and reducing disability. Concerns about potential 
adverse effects of testosterone on prostate and cardio-
vascular event rates have encouraged the development 
of selective androgen receptor modulators that are pref-
erentially anabolic and spare the prostate.
Testosterone administration induces hypertrophy of 
both types 1 and 2 fibers and increases satellite cell (mus-
cle progenitor cells) and myonuclear numbers. Andro-
gens promote the differentiation of mesenchymal, mul-
tipotent progenitor cells into the myogenic lineage and 
inhibit their differentiation into the adipogenic lineage. 
Testosterone may have additional effects on satellite cell 
replication and muscle protein synthesis that may con-
tribute to an increase in skeletal muscle mass.
168
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
Other indications for androgen therapy are in 
selected patients with anemia due to bone marrow fail-
ure (an indication largely supplanted by erythropoietin) 
and for hereditary angioedema.
Male Hormonal Contraception Based on 
Combined Administration of Testoster­
one 
and 
Gonadotropin 
Inhibitors  Sup-
raphysiologic doses of testosterone (200 mg tes-
tosterone enanthate weekly) suppress LH and FSH 
secretion and induce azoospermia in 50% of white 
men and >95% of Asian men. The World Health Orga-
nization (WHO)-supported multicenter efficacy trials 
have demonstrated that suppression of spermato-
genesis to azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia 
(<3 million/mL) by administration of testosterone 
enanthate to men results in effective contraception. 
Because of concern about long-term adverse effects 
of supraphysiologic testosterone doses, regimens 
that combine other gonadotropin inhibitors such 
as GnRH antagonists and progestins, with replace-
ment doses of testosterone are being investigated. 
Oral etonogestrel daily in combination with intra-
muscular testosterone decanoate every 4–6 weeks 
induced azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia 
(sperm density <1 million/mL) in 99% of treated men 
over a 1-year period. This regimen was associated 
with weight gain, decreased testicular volume, and 
decreased plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol, and its long-term safety has not been 
demonstrated. Selective androgen receptor modula-
tors that are more potent inhibitors of gonadotropins 
than testosterone and spare the prostate hold prom-
ise for their contraceptive potential.
Recommended Regimens for Androgen 
Replacement  Testosterone esters are admin-
istered typically at doses of 75–100 mg intramus-
cularly every week or 150–200 mg every 2 weeks. 
One or two 5-mg nongenital testosterone patches 
can be applied daily over the skin of the back, 
thigh, or upper arm away from pressure areas. 
Testosterone gel typically is applied over a cov-
ered area of skin at a dose of 5–10 g daily; patients 
should wash their hands after gel application. 
Bioadhesive buccal testosterone tablets at a dose of 
30 mg typically are applied twice daily on the buccal  
mucosa.
Establishing 
Efficacy 
of 
Testosterone 
Replacement Therapy  Because a clinically use-
ful marker of androgen action is not available, restora-
tion of testosterone levels into the mid-normal range 
remains the goal of therapy. Measurements of LH and 
FSH are not useful in assessing the adequacy of testos-
terone replacement. Testosterone should be measured 
3 months after initiating therapy to assess adequacy of 
therapy. There is substantial interindividual variability in 
serum testosterone levels, presumably due to genetic 
differences in testosterone clearance. In patients who 
are treated with testosterone enanthate or cypionate, 
testosterone levels should be 350–600 ng/dL 1 week 
after the injection. If testosterone levels are outside this 
range, adjustments should be made either in the dose 
or in the interval between injections. In men on trans-
dermal patch or gel or buccal testosterone therapy, 
testosterone levels should be in the mid-normal range 
(500–700 ng/dL) 4–12 hours after application. If testos-
terone levels are outside this range, the dose should be 
adjusted.
Restoration of sexual function, secondary sex char-
acteristics, energy, and well-being and maintenance 
of muscle and bone health are important objectives of 
testosterone replacement therapy. The patient should 
be asked about sexual desire and activity, the pres-
ence of early-morning erections, and the ability to 
achieve and maintain erections adequate for sexual 
intercourse. Some hypogonadal men continue to com-
plain about sexual dysfunction even after testosterone 
replacement has been instituted; these patients may 
benefit from counseling. The hair growth in response 
to androgen replacement is variable and depends on 
ethnicity. Hypogonadal men with prepubertal onset of 
androgen deficiency who begin testosterone therapy 
in their late twenties or thirties may find it difficult to 
adjust to their newly found sexuality and may benefit 
from counseling. If the patient has a sexual partner, the 
partner should be included in counseling because of 
the dramatic physical and sexual changes that occur 
with androgen treatment.
Contraindications for Androgen Admini­
stration  Testosterone administration is contraindi-
cated in men with a history of prostate or breast cancer 
(Table 8-4). Testosterone therapy should not be admin-
istered without further urologic evaluation to men 
with a palpable prostate nodule or induration, or 
prostate-specific antigen >4 ng/mL or >3 ng/mL in 
men at high risk for prostate cancer such as blacks or 
men with first-degree relatives with prostate cancer  
or with severe lower urinary tract symptoms (American 
Urological Association lower urinary tract symptom 
score >19). Testosterone replacement should not be 
administered to men with baseline hematocrit ≥50%, 
severe untreated obstructive sleep apnea, uncontrolled 
or poorly controlled congestive heart failure, or recent 
myocardial infarction or unstable angina.
Monitoring Potential Adverse Experiences 
The clinical effectiveness and safety of testosterone 
replacement therapy should be assessed 3–6 months after 
initiating testosterone therapy and annually thereafter
169
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
(Table 8-5). Potential adverse effects include acne, 
oiliness of skin, erythrocytosis, breast tenderness and 
enlargement, leg edema, induction and exacerba-
tion of obstructive sleep apnea, and increased risk of 
detection of prostate disease. In addition, there may 
be formulation-specific adverse effects such as skin irri-
tation with transdermal patches, risk of gel transfer to 
a sexual partner with testosterone gels, buccal ulcer-
ation and gum problems with buccal testosterone, and 
pain and mood fluctuation with injectable testoster-
one esters.
Hemoglobin Levels  Administration of testoster-
one to androgen-deficient men typically is associated 
with a 3–5% increase in hemoglobin levels due to sup-
pression of hepcidin and increased iron availability for 
erythropoiesis. The magnitude of hemoglobin increase 
during testosterone therapy is greater in older men than 
younger men and in men who have sleep apnea, a sig-
nificant smoking history, or chronic obstructive lung 
disease. The frequency of erythrocytosis is higher in 
hypogonadal men treated with injectable testosterone 
esters than in those treated with transdermal formula-
tions, presumably due to the higher testosterone dose 
delivered by the typical regimens of testosterone esters. 
Erythrocytosis is the most common adverse event 
reported in testosterone trials in middle-aged and older 
men and also the most common cause of treatment 
Table 8-4
Conditions in Which Testosterone 
Administration is Associated With a Risk of 
Adverse Outcome
Conditions in Which Testosterone Administration is 
Associated with Very High Risk of Serious Adverse 
Outcomes:
  Metastatic prostate cancer
  Breast cancer
Conditions in Which Testosterone Administration is 
Associated with Moderate to High Risk of Adverse 
Outcomes:
  Undiagnosed prostate nodule or induration
  PSA >4 ng/mL (>3 ng/mL in individuals at high risk for 
  prostate cancer, such as blacks and men with first-
degree relatives who have prostate cancer)
  Erythrocytosis (hematocrit >50%)
  Severe lower urinary tract symptoms associated with  
    benign prostatic hypertrophy as indicated by the  
American Urological Association/International prostate 
symptom score >19
  Uncontrolled or poorly controlled congestive heart failure
Abbreviation: PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
Source: Reproduced from the Endocrine Society Guideline for 
Testosterone Therapy of Androgen Deficiency Syndromes in Men 
(S Bhasin et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:2536, 2010).
(continued )
Table 8-5
Monitoring Men Receiving Testosterone 
Therapy (Continued )
1.  Evaluate patient 3–6 months after treatment initiation 
and then annually to assess whether symptoms have 
responded to treatment and whether patient is experi-
encing any adverse effects.
2.  Monitor testosterone level 3–6 months after initiation of 
testosterone therapy:
    •  Therapy should aim to raise serum testosterone level 
into mid-normal range.
    •  Injectable testosterone enanthate or cypionate: 
Measure serum testosterone level midway 
between injections. If testosterone is >700 ng/dL 
(24.5 nmol/L) or <400 ng/dL (14.1 nmol/L), adjust 
dose or frequency.
    •  Transdermal patches: Assess testosterone level 
3–12 h after application of the patch; adjust  
dose to achieve testosterone level in mid-normal 
range.
    •  Buccal testosterone bioadhesive tablet: Assess  
level immediately before or after application of fresh 
system.
    •  Transdermal gels: Assess testosterone level any 
time after patient has been on treatment for at least 
1 week; adjust dose to achieve serum testosterone 
level in the mid-normal range.
    •  Testosterone pellets: Measure testosterone levels at 
the end of dosing interval. Adjust number of pellets 
and/or dosing interval to achieve serum testosterone 
levels in normal range.
    •  Oral testosterone undecanoatea: Monitor serum 
testosterone level 3 to 5 h after ingestion.
    •  Injectable testosterone undecanoate: Measure  
serum testosterone level just before each subse-
quent injection and adjust dosing interval to maintain 
serum testosterone in mid-normal range.
3.  Check hematocrit at baseline at 3–6 months and then 
annually. If hematocrit is >54%, stop therapy until 
hematocrit decreases to a safe level; evaluate patient 
for hypoxia and sleep apnea; reinitiate therapy with a 
reduced dose.
4.  Measure bone mineral density of lumbar spine and/or 
femoral neck after 1–2 years of testosterone therapy 
in hypogonadal men with osteoporosis or low trauma 
fracture, consistent with regional standard of care.
5.  In men 40 years of age or older with baseline PSA  
>0.6 ng/mL, perform digital rectal examination and 
check PSA level before initiating treatment at 3–6 months 
and then in accordance with guidelines for prostate can-
cer screening depending on age and race of patient.
6.  Obtain urologic consultation if there is:
    •  An increase in serum PSA concentration >1.4 ng/mL 
within any 12-month period of testosterone  
treatment
    •  A PSA velocity >0.4 ng/mL per year using PSA level 
after 6 months of testosterone administration as ref-
erence (applicable only if PSA data are available for a 
period exceeding 2 years)
    •  Detection of a prostatic abnormality on digital rectal 
examination
    •  An AUA/IPSS prostate symptom score >19
170
Section II
Reproductive Endocrinology
discontinuation in these trials. If hematocrit rises above 
54%, testosterone therapy should be stopped until 
hematocrit has fallen to <50%. After evaluation of the 
patient for hypoxia and sleep apnea, testosterone ther-
apy may be reinitiated at a lower dose.
Prostate and Serum PSA Levels  Testoster-
one replacement therapy increases prostate volume 
to the size seen in age-matched controls but does not 
increase prostate volume beyond that expected for age. 
There is no evidence that testosterone therapy causes 
prostate cancer. However, androgen administration can 
exacerbate preexisting metastatic prostate cancer. Many 
older men harbor microscopic foci of cancer in their 
prostates. It is not known whether long-term testoster-
one administration will induce these microscopic foci to 
grow into clinically significant cancers.
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels are lower in 
testosterone-deficient men and are restored to normal 
after testosterone replacement. There is considerable test-
retest variability in PSA measurements. Increments in PSA 
levels after testosterone supplementation in androgen-
deficient men are generally <0.5 ng/mL, and increments
>1 ng/mL over a 3- to 6-month period are unusual. The 90% 
confidence interval for the change in PSA values in men 
with benign prostatic hypertrophy measured 3–6 months 
apart is 1.4 ng/mL. Therefore, the Endocrine Society expert
panel suggests that an increase in PSA >1.4 ng/mL in 
any one year after starting testosterone therapy, if con-
firmed, should lead to urologic evaluation. PSA velocity 
criterion can be used for patients who have sequential 
PSA measurements for >2 years; a change of >0.40 ng/
mL per year merits closer urologic follow-up.
Cardiovascular Risk  In epidemiologic studies, 
testosterone concentrations are negatively related to 
the risk of diabetes mellitus, heart disease, and all-cause 
and cardiovascular mortality. A recent testosterone trial 
in older men with mobility limitation was stopped early 
because of the higher rates of cardiovascular events in 
the testosterone arm than in the placebo arm of the 
trial. Meta-analyses of testosterone trials have found no 
statistically significant increase in cardiovascular event 
rates in men receiving testosterone therapy, although 
nonsignificant increases have been noted. Inferences 
about adverse events from previous trials included in 
these meta-analyses were limited by poor ascertain-
ment, small numbers of events, and small numbers of 
participants. Adequately powered prospective stud-
ies are needed to determine the effect of testosterone 
replacement on cardiovascular risk.
Androgen Abuse by Athletes and Recre­
ational Bodybuilders  The illicit use of andro-
genic-anabolic steroids (AAS) to enhance athletic per-
formance first surfaced in the 1950s among power 
lifters and spread rapidly to other sports, professional as 
well as high school athletes, and recreational bodybuild-
ers. In the early 1980s, the use of AAS spread beyond 
the athletic community into the general population, 
and now as many as 2 million Americans, most of them 
men, probably have used these compounds. The most 
commonly used androgenic steroids include testoster-
one esters, nandrolone, stanozolol, methandienone, and 
methenolol. Athletes generally use increasing doses of 
multiple steroids in a practice known as stacking.
The adverse effects of long-term AAS abuse are 
poorly understood. Most of the information about the 
adverse effects of AAS has emerged from case reports, 
uncontrolled studies, or clinical trials that used replace-
ment doses of testosterone. The adverse event data 
from clinical trials using physiologic replacement doses 
of testosterone have been extrapolated unjustifiably 
to AAS users who may administer 10–100 times the 
replacement doses of testosterone over many years 
and to support the claim that AAS use is safe. A sub-
stantial fraction of androgenic steroid users also use 
other drugs that are perceived to be muscle building 
or performance enhancing such as growth hormone; 
IGF-I; insulin; stimulants such as amphetamine, clen-
buterol, cocaine, ephedrine, and thyroxine; and drugs 
perceived to reduce adverse effects such as hCG, aroma-
tase inhibitors, and estrogen antagonists. The men who 
Table 8-5
Monitoring Men Receiving Testosterone 
Therapy (Continued )
7.  Evaluate formulation-specific adverse effects at each 
visit:
    •  Buccal testosterone tablets: Inquire about alterations 
in taste and examine gums and oral mucosa for  
irritation.
    •  Injectable testosterone esters (enanthate, cypionate, 
and undecanoate): Ask about fluctuations in mood or 
libido and, rarely, cough after injections.
    •  Testosterone patches: Look for skin reaction at  
application site.
    •  Testosterone gels: Advise patients to cover applica-
tion sites with a shirt and wash skin with soap and 
water before having skin-to-skin contact because 
testosterone gels leave a testosterone residue on 
skin that can be transferred to a woman or child  
who comes in close contact. Serum testosterone  
levels are maintained when application site is 
washed 4–6 h after application of testosterone gel.
    •  Testosterone pellets: Look for signs of infection, 
fibrosis, or pellet extrusion.
aNot approved for clinical use in the United States.
Abbreviations: AUA/IPSS, American Urological Association Interna-
tional Prostate Symptom Score; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
Source: Reproduced with permission from the Endocrine Society 
Guideline for Testosterone Therapy of Androgen Deficiency Syndromes 
in Men (S Bhasin et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:2536, 2010).
171
 
CHAPTER 8
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System
abuse androgenic steroids are more likely to engage 
in other high-risk behaviors than are nonusers. The 
adverse events associated with AAS use may be due to 
AAS themselves, concomitant use of other drugs, high-
risk behaviors, and host characteristics that may render 
these individuals more susceptible to AAS use or other 
high-risk behaviors.
The high rates of mortality and morbidity observed 
in AAS users are alarming. One Finnish study reported 
4.6 times the risk of death among elite power lifters than 
among age-matched men from the general popula-
tion. The causes of death among power lifters included 
suicides, myocardial infarction, hepatic coma, and non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. A retrospective review of patient 
records in Sweden also reported higher standardized 
mortality ratios for AAS users than for nonusers.
Numerous reports of cardiac death among young AAS 
users raise concerns about the adverse cardiovascular 
effects of AAS. High doses of AAS may induce proathero-
genic dyslipidemia, increase thrombosis risk via effects 
on clotting factors and platelets, and induce vasospasm 
through their effects on vascular nitric oxide. The finding 
of androgen receptors on myocardial cells suggests that 
AAS may be directly toxic to myocardial cells.
Replacement doses of testosterone, when admin-
istered parenterally, are associated with only a small 
decrease in HDL cholesterol and little or no effect on 
total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) choles-
terol, and triglyceride levels. In contrast, supraphysi-
ologic doses of testosterone and orally administered, 
17α-alkylated, nonaromatizable AAS are associated with 
marked reductions in HDL cholesterol and increases in 
LDL cholesterol.
Long-term AAS use suppresses LH and FSH secretion 
and inhibits endogenous testosterone production and 
spermatogenesis. Men who have used AAS for more 
than a few months experience suppression of the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary-testicular (HPT) axis after stopping 
AAS that may be associated with sexual dysfunction, 
infertility, and depression; in some AAS users, gonado-
tropin suppression may last more than a year. The dys-
phoria caused by androgen withdrawal may cause some 
men to revert to using AAS, leading to continued use 
and AAS dependence. As many as 30% of AAS users 
develop a syndrome of AAS dependence that is charac-
terized by long-term AAS use despite adverse medical 
and psychiatric effects.
Unsafe injection practices, high-risk behaviors, 
and increased rates of incarceration put AAS users at 
increased risk of HIV and hepatitis B and C. In one sur-
vey, nearly 1 in 10 gay men had injected AAS or other 
substances, and AAS users were more likely to report 
high-risk unprotected anal sex than were other men.
Some AAS users develop manic symptoms during 
AAS exposure (sometimes associated with violence) and 
major depression (sometimes associated with suicidal-
ity) during AAS withdrawal. Users also may engage in 
other forms of illicit drug use, which may be potentiated 
or exacerbated by AAS.
Elevated liver enzymes, cholestatic jaundice, hepatic 
neoplasms, and peliosis hepatis have been reported 
with oral 17α-alkylated AAS. AAS use may cause mus-
cle hypertrophy without compensatory adaptations in 
tendons, ligaments, and joints, thus increasing the risk 
of tendon and joint injuries. AAS use is associated with 
acne and baldness, as well as increased body hair.
Accredited laboratories use gas chromatography–
mass spectrometry or liquid chromatography–mass 
spectrometry to detect anabolic steroid abuse. In 
recent years, the availability of high-resolution mass 
spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry has 
improved the sensitivity of detecting androgen abuse. 
Illicit testosterone use generally is detected by the 
application of the measurement of the ratio of urinary 
testosterone to epitestosterone and further confirmed 
by the use of the 13C:12C ratio in testosterone by the 
use of isotope ratio combustion mass spectrometry. 
Exogenous testosterone administration increases uri-
nary testosterone glucuronide excretion and conse-
quently the ratio of testosterone to epitestosterone. 
Ratios above 4 suggest exogenous testosterone use 
but can also reflect genetic variation. Synthetic tes-
tosterone has a lower 13C:12C ratio than endogenously 
produced testosterone, and these differences in the 
13C:12C ratio can be detected by isotope ratio com-
bustion mass spectrometry, which is used to confirm 
exogenous testosterone use in individuals with a high 
ratio of testosterone to epitestosterone.
 Robert J. Motzer  I   George J. Bosl 
172
 Primary germ cell tumors (GCTs) of the testis arising by 
the malignant transformation of primordial germ cells 
constitute 95% of all testicular neoplasms. Infrequently, 
GCTs arise from an extragonadal site, including the medi-
astinum, retroperitoneum, and, very rarely, the pineal 
gland. This disease is notable for the young age of the 
afﬂ icted patients, the totipotent capacity for differentiation 
of the tumor cells, and its curability; approximately 95% 
of newly diagnosed patients are cured. Experience in the 
management of GCTs leads to improved outcome. 
 inCidenCe and ePidemiology 
 In 2010, 8480 new cases of testicular GCT were diag-
nosed in the United States and 350 men died. The 
tumor occurs most frequently in men between the ages 
of 20 and 40 years. A testicular mass in a male ≥50 years 
should be regarded as a lymphoma until proved other-
wise. GCT is at least four to fi ve times more common 
in white than in African-American males, and a higher 
incidence has been observed in Scandinavia and New 
Zealand than in the United States. 
 etiology and genetiCs 
 Cryptorchidism is associated with a several-fold higher 
risk of GCT. Abdominal cryptorchid testes are at a 
higher risk than inguinal cryptorchid testes. Orchiopexy 
should be performed before puberty, if possible. Early 
orchiopexy reduces the risk of GCT and improves the 
ability to save the testis. An abdominal cryptorchid tes-
tis that cannot be brought into the scrotum should be 
removed. Approximately 2% of men with GCTs of one 
testis will develop a primary tumor in the other testis. 
Testicular feminization syndromes increase the risk of 
testicular GCT, and Klinefelter’s syndrome is associated 
with mediastinal GCT. 
 An isochromosome of the short arm of chromosome 
12 [i(12p)] is pathognomonic for GCT of all histologic 
types. Excess 12p copy number, either in the form of 
i(12p) or as increased 12p on aberrantly banded marker 
chromosomes, occurs in nearly all GCTs, but the 
gene(s) on 12p involved in the pathogenesis are not yet 
defi ned. 
 CliniCal Presentation 
 A painless testicular mass is pathognomonic for a testicu-
lar malignancy. More commonly, patients present with 
testicular discomfort or swelling suggestive of epididymitis 
and/or orchitis. In this circumstance, a trial of antibiotics 
is reasonable. However, if symptoms persist or a residual 
abnormality remains, then testicular ultrasound examina-
tion is indicated. 
 Ultrasound of the testis is indicated whenever a testic-
ular malignancy is considered and for persistent or painful 
testicular swelling. If a testicular mass is detected, a radi-
cal inguinal orchiectomy should be performed. Because 
the testis develops from the gonadal ridge, its blood sup-
ply and lymphatic drainage originate in the abdomen and 
descend with the testis into the scrotum. An inguinal 
approach is taken to avoid breaching anatomic barriers 
and permitting additional pathways of spread. 
 Back pain from retroperitoneal metastases is com-
mon and must be distinguished from musculoskeletal 
pain. Dyspnea from pulmonary metastases occurs infre-
quently. Patients with increased serum levels of human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) may present with gyne-
comastia. A delay in diagnosis is associated with a more 
advanced stage and possibly worse survival. 
 The staging evaluation for GCT includes a determi-
nation of serum levels of α fetoprotein (AFP), hCG, 
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). After orchiectomy, a 
chest radiograph and a CT scan of the abdomen and pel-
vis should be performed. A chest CT scan is required if 
 TESTICULAR CANCER 
 ChaPter 9 
 
Chapter 9
Testicular Cancer
173
pulmonary nodules or mediastinal or hilar disease is sus-
pected. Stage I disease is limited to the testis, epididymis, 
or spermatic cord. Stage II disease is limited to retroperi-
toneal (regional) lymph nodes. Stage III disease is disease 
outside the retroperitoneum, involving supradiaphragmatic 
nodal sites or viscera. The staging may be “clinical”— 
defined solely by physical examination, blood marker 
evaluation, and radiographs—or “pathologic”—defined 
by an operative procedure.
The regional draining lymph nodes for the testis are 
in the retroperitoneum, and the vascular supply originates 
from the great vessels (for the right testis) or the renal 
vessels (for the left testis). As a result, the lymph nodes 
that are involved first by a right testicular tumor are the 
interaortocaval lymph nodes just below the renal vessels. 
For a left testicular tumor, the first involved lymph nodes 
are lateral to the aorta (para-aortic) and below the left 
renal vessels. In both cases, further nodal spread is infe-
rior, contralateral, and, less commonly, above the renal 
hilum. Lymphatic involvement can extend cephalad to 
the retrocrural, posterior mediastinal, and supraclavicular 
lymph nodes. Treatment is determined by tumor histol-
ogy (seminoma versus nonseminoma) and clinical stage 
(Fig. 9–1).
Pathology
GCTs are divided into nonseminoma and seminoma 
subtypes. Nonseminomatous GCTs are most frequent 
in the third decade of life and can display the full spec-
trum of embryonic and adult cellular differentiation. 
This entity comprises four histologies: embryonal carci-
noma, teratoma, choriocarcinoma, and endodermal sinus 
(yolk sac) tumor. Choriocarcinoma, consisting of both 
cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, represents 
malignant trophoblastic differentiation and is invari-
ably associated with secretion of hCG. Endodermal sinus 
tumor is the malignant counterpart of the fetal yolk sac 
and is associated with secretion of AFP. Pure embryo-
nal carcinoma may secrete AFP or hCG, or both; this 
pattern is biochemical evidence of differentiation. Tera-
toma is composed of somatic cell types derived from two 
or more germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, or endo-
derm). Each of these histologies may be present alone or 
in combination with others. Nonseminomatous GCTs 
tend to metastasize early to sites such as the retroperi-
toneal lymph nodes and lung parenchyma. One-third of 
patients present with disease limited to the testis (stage I), 
one-third with retroperitoneal metastases (stage II), and 
one-third with more extensive supradiaphragmatic nodal 
or visceral metastases (stage III).
Seminoma represents approximately 50% of all 
GCTs, has a median age in the fourth decade, and gen-
erally follows a more indolent clinical course. Most 
patients (70%) present with stage I disease, approxi-
mately 20% with stage II disease, and 10% with stage 
III disease; lung or other visceral metastases are rare. 
When a tumor contains both seminoma and nonsemi-
noma components, patient management is directed by 
the more aggressive nonseminoma component.
Tumor Markers
Careful monitoring of the serum tumor markers AFP 
and hCG is essential in the management of patients with 
GCT, as these markers are important for diagnosis, as 
prognostic indicators, in monitoring treatment response, 
and in the detection of early relapse. Approximately 
70% of patients presenting with disseminated nonsemi-
nomatous GCT have increased serum concentrations of 
AFP and/or hCG. Although hCG concentrations may 
be increased in patients with either nonseminoma or 
seminoma histology, the AFP concentration is increased 
only in patients with nonseminoma. The presence of 
an increased AFP level in a patient whose tumor shows 
only seminoma indicates that an occult nonsemino-
matous component exists, and the patient should be 
treated for nonseminomatous GCT. LDH levels are not 
as specific as AFP or hCG but are increased in 50–60% 
of patients with metastatic nonseminoma and in up to 
80% of patients with advanced seminoma.
AFP, hCG, and LDH levels should be determined 
before and after orchiectomy. Increased serum AFP 
and hCG concentrations decay according to first-order 
kinetics; the half-life is 24–36 h for hCG and 5–7 d for 
AFP. AFP and hCG should be assayed serially during 
and after treatment. The reappearance of hCG and/or 
AFP or the failure of these markers to decline according 
to the predicted half-life is an indicator of persistent or 
recurrent tumor.
Treatment	
Testicular Cancer
Stage I Nonseminoma  If, after an orchiec-
tomy (for clinical stage I disease), radiographs and physi-
cal examination show no evidence of disease, and serum 
AFP and hCG concentrations are either normal or declin-
ing to normal according to the known half-life, patients 
may be managed by either a nerve-sparing retroperi-
toneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) or surveillance. 
The retroperitoneal lymph nodes are involved by GCT 
(pathologic stage II) in 20–50% of these patients. The 
choice of surveillance or RPLND is based on the pathol-
ogy of the primary tumor. If the primary tumor shows 
no evidence for lymphatic or vascular invasion and is 
limited to the testis (T1), then either option is reason-
able. If lymphatic or vascular invasion is present or the 
Reproductive Endocrinology
174
SECTION II
pT1
pT2
pT3
pT4
Tumor is limited to the testis and epididymis
without vascular/lymphatic invasion; tumor may
invade into the tunica albuginea but not the
tunica vaginalis.
Tumor invades the spermatic cord with or without 
vascular/lymphatic invasion.
Tumor invades the scrotum with or without
vascular/lymphatic invasion.
Tumor limited to the testis and epididymis with
vascular/lymphatic invasion; tumor extends
through the tunica albuginea with involvement
of the tunica vaginalis.
IA
IIA
IIC
IB
IIB
III
Testis only,
no vascular/lymphatic invasion (T1)
Observation
Chemotherapy
or RT
Observation
Chemotherapy
or RT
RPLND or
Observation
Retroperitoneal Nodes 2–5 cm
RT or
Chemotherapy
RT
Retroperitoneal Nodes <2 cm
RPLND +/– adjuvant
Chemotherapy
or Chemotherapy
followed by RPLND
Retroperitoneal Nodes >5 cm
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy, often
followed by RPLND
Common sites include distant
(or extra-abdominal) lymph nodes,
lung, liver, bone, and brain
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy, often
followed by surgery
(biopsy or resection)
Testis only, with vascular/lymphatic
invasion (T2), or extension through
tunica albuginea (T2), or involvement
of spermatic cord (T3) or scrotum (T4)
RPLND  or
Chemotherapy
Treatment Option
Extent of Disease 
Stage
Distant Metastases
Stage
Nonseminoma
Seminoma
Extent of Disease 
Tunica albuginea
Tunica vaginalis
Testis
Epididymis
Tail
Head
Body
Ductus (vas)
deferens
Spermatic cord
Chemotherapy, often
followed by RPLND
Figure 9-1
Germ cell tumor staging and treatment.
 
Chapter 9
Testicular Cancer
175
tumor extends into the tunica, spermatic cord, or scro-
tum (T2 through T4), then surveillance should not be 
offered. Either approach should cure >95% of patients.
RPLND is the standard operation for removal of the 
regional lymph nodes of the testis (retroperitoneal 
nodes). The operation removes the lymph nodes drain-
ing the primary site and the nodal groups adjacent to 
the primary landing zone. The standard (modified bilat-
eral) RPLND removes all node-bearing tissue down to 
the bifurcation of the great vessels, including the ipsi-
lateral iliac nodes. The major long-term effect of this 
operation is retrograde ejaculation and infertility. Nerve- 
sparing RPLND, usually accomplished by identifica-
tion and dissection of individual nerve fibers, may avoid 
injury to the sympathetic nerves responsible for ejacula-
tion. Normal ejaculation is preserved in ∼90% of patients. 
Patients with pathologic stage I disease are observed, 
and only the <10% who relapse require additional ther-
apy. If retroperitoneal nodes are found to be involved at 
RPLND, then a decision regarding adjuvant chemother-
apy is made on the basis of the extent of retroperitoneal 
disease (see “Chemotherapy for Advanced GCT” ).
Surveillance is an option in the management of clini-
cal stage I disease when no vascular/lymphatic invasion 
is found (T1). Only 20–30% of patients have pathologic 
stage II disease, implying that most RPLNDs in this situa-
tion are not therapeutic. Surveillance and RPLND lead to 
equivalent long-term survival rates. Patient compliance 
is essential if surveillance is to be successful. Patients 
must be carefully followed with periodic chest radiogra-
phy, physical examination, CT scan of the abdomen, and 
serum tumor marker determinations. The median time 
to relapse is approximately 7 months, and late relapses 
(>2 years) are rare. The 70–80% of patients who do not 
relapse require no intervention after orchiectomy; treat-
ment is reserved for those who do relapse. When the 
primary tumor is classified as T2 through T4 (extension 
beyond testis and epididymis or lymphatic/vascular 
invasion is identified), nerve-sparing RPLND is preferred. 
Approximately 50% of these patients have pathologic 
stage II disease and are destined to relapse without the 
RPLND.
Stage II Nonseminoma  Patients with lim-
ited, ipsilateral retroperitoneal adenopathy (nodes usu-
ally ≤3 cm in largest diameter) and normal levels of AFP 
and hCG generally undergo a modified bilateral RPLND 
as primary management. Increased levels of either AFP 
or hCG or both imply metastatic disease outside the 
retroperitoneum; chemotherapy is used in this setting. 
The local recurrence rate after a properly performed 
RPLND is very low. Depending on the extent of disease, 
the postoperative management options include either 
surveillance or two cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. 
Surveillance is the preferred approach for patients with 
resected “low-volume” metastases (tumor nodes ≤2 
cm in diameter and <6 nodes involved) because the 
probability of relapse is one-third or less. For those who 
relapse, risk-directed chemotherapy is indicated (see 
“Risk-Directed Chemotherapy”). Because relapse occurs 
in ≥50% of patients with “high-volume” metastases 
(>6 nodes involved, or any involved node >2 cm in larg-
est diameter, or extranodal tumor extension), two cycles 
of adjuvant chemotherapy should be considered, as it 
results in a cure in ≥98% of patients. Regimens consisting 
of etoposide (100 mg/m2 daily on days 1–5) plus cisplatin 
(20 mg/m2 daily on days 1–5) with or without bleomycin 
(30 units per day on days 2, 9, and 16) given at 3-week 
intervals are effective and well tolerated.
Stages I and II Seminoma  Inguinal orchiec-
tomy followed by retroperitoneal radiation therapy or 
surveillance cures nearly 100% of patients with stage I 
seminoma. Historically, radiation was the mainstay of 
treatment, but the reported association between radiation 
and secondary malignancies and the absence of a survival 
advantage of radiation over surveillance has led many to 
favor surveillance for patients committed to long-term 
follow-up. Studies have shown that approximately 15% 
of patients relapse, and rete testis involvement and size 
>4 cm have been associated with a higher relapse rate. 
The relapse is usually treated with chemotherapy. Long-
term follow-up is essential, because approximately 30% of 
relapses occur after 2 years and 5% after 5 years. A single 
dose of carboplatin has also been investigated as an alter-
native to radiation therapy; the outcome was similar, but 
long-term safety data are lacking, and the retroperito-
neum remained the most frequent site of relapse.
Nonbulky retroperitoneal disease (stage IIA and most 
IIB) is treated with retroperitoneal radiation therapy. 
Approximately 90% of patients achieve relapse-free sur-
vival with retroperitoneal masses <5 cm in diameter. 
Because at least one-third of patients with bulkier disease 
relapse, initial chemotherapy is preferred for all stage IIC 
and some stage IIB with bulkier or multifocal disease.
Chemotherapy 
for 
Advanced 
GCT  
Regardless of histology, patients with stage IIC and 
stage III GCT are treated with chemotherapy. Com-
bination chemotherapy programs based on cispla-
tin at doses of 100 mg/m2 plus etoposide at doses of 
500 mg/m2 per cycle cure 70–80% of such patients, with 
or without bleomycin, depending on risk stratification 
(see “Risk-Directed Chemotherapy”). A complete response 
(the complete disappearance of all clinical evidence of 
tumor on physical examination and radiography plus 
normal serum levels of AFP and hCG for ≥1 month) 
occurs after chemotherapy alone in ∼60% of patients, 
and another 10–20% become disease-free with surgical 
resection of residual masses containing viable GCT. Lower 
doses of cisplatin result in inferior survival rates.
The toxicity of four cycles of the bleomycin, etopo-
side, and cisplatin (BEP) regimen is substantial. Nausea, 
Reproductive Endocrinology
176
SECTION II
vomiting, and hair loss occur in most patients, although 
nausea and vomiting have been markedly ameliorated 
by modern antiemetic regimens. Myelosuppression is 
frequent, and symptomatic bleomycin pulmonary toxicity 
occurs in ∼5% of patients. Treatment-induced mortal-
ity due to neutropenia with septicemia or bleomycin- 
induced pulmonary failure occurs in 1–3% of patients. 
Dose reductions for myelosuppression are rarely indi-
cated. Long-term permanent toxicities include neph-
rotoxicity (reduced glomerular filtration and persistent 
magnesium wasting), ototoxicity, and peripheral neu-
ropathy. When bleomycin is administered by weekly 
bolus injection, Raynaud’s phenomenon appears in 
5–10% of patients. Other evidence of small blood vessel 
damage is seen less often, including transient ischemic 
attacks and myocardial infarction.
Risk-Directed 
Chemotherapy  Because 
not all patients are cured and treatment may cause 
significant toxicities, patients are stratified into “good-
risk” and “poor-risk” groups according to pretreatment 
clinical features. For good-risk patients, the goal is to 
achieve maximum efficacy with minimal toxicity. For 
poor-risk patients, the goal is to identify more effective 
therapy with tolerable toxicity.
The International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Group 
developed criteria to assign patients to three risk groups 
(good, intermediate, poor) (Table 9-1). The marker cut-
offs have been incorporated into the revised TNM (pri-
mary tumor, regional nodes, metastasis) staging of 
GCT. Hence, TNM stage groupings are now based on 
both anatomy (site and extent of disease) and biology 
(marker status and histology). Seminoma is either good 
or intermediate risk, based on the absence or presence 
of nonpulmonary visceral metastases. No poor-risk cat-
egory exists for seminoma. Marker levels play no role in 
defining risk for seminoma. Nonseminomas have good-, 
intermediate-, and poor-risk categories based on the 
site of the primary tumor, the presence or absence of 
nonpulmonary visceral metastases, and marker levels.
For ∼90% of patients with good-risk GCTs, four cycles 
of etoposide plus cisplatin (EP) or three cycles of BEP 
produce durable complete responses, with minimal 
acute and chronic toxicity. Pulmonary toxicity is absent 
when bleomycin is not used and is rare when therapy is 
limited to 9 weeks; myelosuppression with neutropenic 
fever is less frequent; and the treatment mortality rate 
is negligible. Approximately 75% of intermediate-risk 
patients and 45% of poor-risk patients achieve dura-
ble complete remission with four cycles of BEP, and no 
regimen has proved superior. More effective therapy is 
needed.
Postchemotherapy 
Surgery  Resection 
of residual metastases after the completion of chemo-
therapy is an integral part of therapy. If the initial histology 
is nonseminoma and the marker values have normalized, 
Table 9-1
IGCCCG Risk Classification for Advanced 
Germ Cell Tumors
Risk
Nonseminoma
Seminoma
Good
Gonadal or retroperito-
neal primary site
Any primary site
Absent  
nonpulmonary 
visceral  
metastases
Any LDH, hCG
Absent nonpulmonary 
visceral metastases
AFP <1000 ng/mL
b-hCG <5000 mIU/
mL
LDH <1.5 × upper limit 
or normal (ULN)
Intermediate
Gonadal or retroperito-
neal primary site
Absent nonpulmonary 
visceral metastases
AFP 1000–10,000 ng/mL
b-hCG 5000–50,000 
mIU/mL
LDH 1.5–10 × ULN
Any primary site
Presence of 
nonpulmonary 
visceral  
metastases
Any LDH, hCG
Poor
Mediastinal primary site
Presence of nonpulmo-
nary visceral  
metastases
AFP ≥10,000 ng/mL
b-hCG
>50,000 mIU/mL
LDH >10 × ULN
No patients 
classified as 
poor prognosis
Abbreviations: AFP, α fetoprotein; hCG, human chorionic gonado-
tropin; IGCCCG, International Germ Cell Consensus Classification 
Group; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase.
Source: From International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Group: 
J Clin Oncol 15:594, 1997.
all sites of residual disease should be resected. In gen-
eral, residual retroperitoneal disease requires a modified 
bilateral RPLND. Thoracotomy (unilateral or bilateral) and 
neck dissection are less frequently required to remove 
residual mediastinal, pulmonary parenchymal, or cervical 
nodal disease. Viable tumor (seminoma, embryonal carci-
noma, yolk sac tumor, or choriocarcinoma) will be present 
in 15%, mature teratoma in 40%, and necrotic debris and 
fibrosis in 45% of resected specimens. The frequency of 
teratoma or viable disease is highest in residual mediasti-
nal tumors. If necrotic debris or mature teratoma is pres-
ent, no further chemotherapy is necessary. If viable tumor 
is present but is completely excised, two additional cycles 
of chemotherapy are given.
If the initial histology is pure seminoma, mature tera-
toma is rarely present, and the most frequent finding is 
necrotic debris. For residual retroperitoneal disease, a 
complete RPLND is technically difficult owing to exten-
sive postchemotherapy fibrosis. Observation is rec-
ommended when no radiographic abnormality exists 
on CT scan. Positive findings on a positron emission 
tomography (PET) scan correlate with viable seminoma 
in residua, and mandate surgical excision or biopsy.
 
Chapter 9
Testicular Cancer
177
Salvage Chemotherapy  Of patients with 
advanced GCT, 20–30% fail to achieve a durable com-
plete response to first-line chemotherapy. A combina-
tion of vinblastine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin (VeIP) will 
cure approximately 25% of patients as a second-line 
therapy. Substitution of paclitaxel for vinblastine may 
be more effective in this setting. Patients are more likely 
to achieve a durable complete response if they had a 
testicular primary tumor and relapsed from a prior com-
plete remission to first-line cisplatin-containing che-
motherapy. In contrast, if the patient failed to achieve 
a complete response or has a primary mediastinal non-
seminoma, then standard-dose salvage therapy is rarely 
beneficial. Treatment options for such patients include 
dose-intensive treatment, experimental therapies, and 
surgical resection.
Chemotherapy consisting of dose-intensive, high-
dose carboplatin (≥1500 mg/m2) plus etoposide 
(≥1200 mg/m2), with or without cyclophosphamide, 
with peripheral blood stem cell support, induces a 
complete response in 25–40% of patients who have 
progressed after ifosfamide-containing salvage che-
motherapy. Approximately one-half of the complete 
responses will be durable. High-dose therapy is stan-
dard of care for this patient population and has been 
suggested as treatment of choice for all patients with 
relapsed or refractory disease. Paclitaxel is also active 
in previously treated patients and shows promise in 
high-dose combination programs. Cure is still possible 
in some relapsed patients.
Extragonadal GCT and Midline 
Carcinoma of Uncertain 
Histogenesis
The prognosis and management of patients with 
extragonadal GCT depends on the tumor histol-
ogy and site of origin. All patients with a diagnosis of 
extragonadal GCT should have a testicular ultrasound 
examination. Nearly all patients with retroperitoneal 
or mediastinal seminoma achieve a durable complete 
response to BEP or EP. The clinical features of patients 
with primary retroperitoneal nonseminoma GCT 
are similar to those of patients with a primary of tes-
tis origin, and careful evaluation will find evidence of 
a primary testicular GCT in about two-thirds of cases. 
In contrast, a primary mediastinal nonseminomatous 
GCT is associated with a poor prognosis; one-third of 
patients are cured with standard therapy (four cycles of 
BEP). Patients with newly diagnosed mediastinal non-
seminoma are considered to have poor-risk disease and 
should be considered for clinical trials testing regimens 
of possibly greater efficacy. In addition, mediastinal 
nonseminoma is associated with hematologic disorders, 
including acute myelogenous leukemia, myelodysplas-
tic syndrome, and essential thrombocytosis unrelated to 
previous chemotherapy. These hematologic disorders 
are very refractory to treatment. Nonseminoma of any 
primary site may change into other malignant histolo-
gies such as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma or adenocar-
cinoma. This is called malignant transformation. i(12p) has 
been identified in the transformed cell type, indicating 
GCT clonal origin.
A group of patients with poorly differentiated tumors 
of unknown histogenesis, midline in distribution, and 
not associated with secretion of AFP or hCG has been 
described; a few (10–20%) are cured by standard cisplatin- 
containing chemotherapy. i(12p) is present in ∼25% of 
such tumors (the fraction that are cisplatin responsive), 
confirming their origin from primitive germ cells. This 
finding is also predictive of the response to cisplatin-based 
chemotherapy and resulting long-term survival. These 
tumors are heterogeneous; neuroepithelial tumors and 
lymphoma may also present in this fashion.
Fertility
Infertility is an important consequence of the treat-
ment of GCTs. Preexisting infertility or impaired fertil-
ity is often present. Azoospermia and/or oligospermia 
are present at diagnosis in at least 50% of patients with 
testicular GCTs. Ejaculatory dysfunction is associated 
with RPLND, and germ cell damage may result from 
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. Nerve-sparing tech-
niques to preserve the retroperitoneal sympathetic 
nerves have made retrograde ejaculation less likely 
in the subgroups of patients who are candidates for 
this operation. Spermatogenesis does recur in some 
patients after chemotherapy. However, because of 
the significant risk of impaired reproductive capac-
ity, semen analysis and cryopreservation of sperm in 
a sperm bank should be recommended to all patients 
before treatment.
 Janet E. Hall 
178
 The female reproductive system regulates the hormonal 
changes responsible for puberty and adult reproduc-
tive function. Normal reproductive function in women 
requires the dynamic integration of hormonal signals 
from the hypothalamus, pituitary, and ovary, resulting 
in repetitive cycles of follicle development, ovulation, 
and preparation of the endometrial lining of the uterus 
for implantation should conception occur. 
 For further discussion of related topics, see the fol-
lowing chapters: hyperandrogenic disorders ( Chap. 13 ),
menstrual cycle disorders ( Chap. 11 ), gynecologic
malig nancies ( Chap. 14 ),  male hormonal contraception 
( Chap. 8 ), menopause ( Chap. 12 ), and sexual differ-
entiation ( Chap. 7 ). 
 Development of tHe ovary anD 
early follicular groWtH 
 The ovary orchestrates the development and release of a 
mature oocyte and also elaborates hormones (e.g., estro-
gen, progesterone, inhibin, relaxin) that are critical for 
pubertal development and preparation of the uterus for 
conception, implantation, and the early stages of preg-
nancy. To achieve these functions in repeated monthly 
cycles, the ovary undergoes some of the most dynamic 
changes of any organ in the body. Primordial germ cells
can be identifi ed by the third week of gestation, and 
their migration to the genital ridge is complete by 6 
weeks’ gestation. Germ cells persist within the genital 
ridge, are then referred to as  oogonia , and are essential 
for induction of ovarian development. Although one 
X chromosome undergoes X inactivation in somatic cells, 
it is reactivated in oogonia and genes on both X chro-
mosomes are required for normal ovarian development. 
A streak ovary containing only stromal cells is found in 
patients with 45,X Turner’s syndrome ( Chap. 7 ). 
 The germ cell population expands, and starting at 
∼8 weeks’ gestation, oogonia begin to enter prophase of 
the fi rst meiotic division and become primary oocytes. 
This allows the oocyte to be surrounded by a single layer 
of fl attened granulosa cells to form a primordial follicle 
( Fig. 10-1 ) . Granulosa cells are derived from mesoneph-
ric cells that invade the ovary early in its development, 
pushing the germ cells to the periphery. Although recent 
studies have reopened the debate, the weight of evidence 
strongly supports the concept that the ovary contains 
a nonrenewable pool of germ cells. Through the com-
bined processes of mitosis, meiosis, and atresia, the pop-
ulation of oogonia reaches its maximum of 6–7 million 
by 20 weeks’ gestation, after which there is a progressive 
loss of both oogonia and primordial follicles through the 
process of atresia. At birth, oogonia are no longer present 
in the ovary, and only 1–2 million germ cells remain in 
the form of primordial follicles  ( Fig. 10-2 ) . The oocyte 
persists in prophase of the fi rst meiotic division until just 
before ovulation, when meiosis resumes. 
 The quiescent primordial follicles are recruited to 
further growth and differentiation through a highly reg-
ulated process that limits the size of the developing cohort 
to ensure that folliculogenesis can continue throughout 
the reproductive life span. This initial recruitment of pri-
mordial follicles to form primary follicles ( Fig. 10-1 ) is 
characterized by growth of the oocyte and the transition 
from squamous to cuboidal granulosa cells. The theca 
interna cells that surround the developing follicle begin 
to form as the primary follicle grows. Acquisition of a 
zona pellucida by the oocyte and the presence of several 
layers of surrounding cuboidal granulosa cells mark the 
development of secondary follicles. It is at this stage that 
granulosa cells develop follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH), estradiol, and androgen receptors and communi-
cate with one another through the development of gap 
junctions. 
 THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM, 
INFERTILITY, AND CONTRACEPTION 
 cHapter 10 
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
179
Bidirectional signaling between the germ cells and 
the somatic cells in the ovary are a necessary component 
underlying the maturation of the oocyte and the capac-
ity for hormone secretion. For example, the oocyte-
derived factor in the germ line α(FIGα) is required 
for initial follicle formation. Anti-müllerian hormone 
[AMH, also known as müllerian inhibiting substance 
Migratory
germ cells
Oogonia
Genital ridge
Prophase of first
meiotic division
Granulosa
cells
Gonadotropin  independent
Theca cells
1° Oocytes
Primordial
follicles
Secondary
follicles
Ovulation
Resumption
of meiosis
Corpus
luteum
Mature
oocyte
FSH
LH
FSH
Antral follicles
Preovulatory
follicles
LH
Gonadotropin dependent
Menopause
Menarche
Birth
5m
2m
Migratory germ cells
Oogonia
Primary oocytes
4 x 105
2 x 106
7 x 106
Figure 10-2
Ovarian germ cell number is maximal at mid-gestation, 
then decreases precipitously.
(MIS)] and activins derived from somatic cells induce 
the development of primary follicles from primordial 
follicles. Oocyte-derived growth differentiation factor 9 
(GDF-9) is required for migration of pre-theca cells to 
the outer surface of the developing follicle. GDF-9 is 
also required for formation of secondary follicles, as are 
granulosa cell–derived KIT ligand (KITL) and the fork-
head transcription factor (FOXL2). All of these genes 
are potential candidates for premature ovarian failure 
in women, and mutations in the human FOXL2 gene 
have been shown to cause the syndrome of blepharo-
phimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus, which is associated 
with ovarian failure.
Development of a  
Mature Follicle
The early stages of follicle growth are primarily driven 
by intraovarian factors and may take up to a year from 
the time of initial recruitment. Maturation to the state 
required for ovulation, including the resumption of 
meiosis in the oocyte, requires the combined stimulus 
Figure 10-1
Stages of ovarian development from the arrival of the 
migratory germ cells at the genital ridge through gonadotro-
pin-independent and gonadotropin-dependent phases that 
ultimately result in ovulation of a mature oocyte. FSH, follicle- 
stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
180
of FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH) (Fig. 10-1) and 
can be accomplished within weeks. Recruitment of sec-
ondary follicles from the resting follicle pool requires 
the direct action of FSH. Accumulation of follicular fluid 
between the layers of granulosa cells creates an antrum 
that divides the granulosa cells into two functionally dis-
tinct groups: mural cells that line the follicle wall and 
cumulus cells that surround the oocyte (Fig. 10-3).
Recent evidence suggests that, in addition to its role in 
normal development of the müllerian system, the WNT 
signaling pathway is required for normal antral follicle 
development and may also play a role in ovarian ste-
roidogenesis. A single dominant follicle emerges from 
the growing follicle pool within the first 5–7 days after 
the onset of menses, and the majority of follicles fall off 
their growth trajectory and become atretic. Autocrine 
actions of activin and bone morphogenic protein 6 
(BMP-6), derived from the granulosa cells, and para-
crine actions of GDF-9, BMP-15, BMP-6, and Gpr149, 
derived from the oocyte, are involved in granulosa cell 
proliferation and modulation of FSH responsiveness. 
Differential exposure to these factors may explain why 
one follicle is selected for continued growth to the 
preovulatory stage. The dominant follicle can be dis-
tinguished by its size, evidence of granulosa cell prolif-
eration, large number of FSH receptors, high aromatase 
activity, and elevated concentrations of estradiol and 
inhibin A in follicular fluid.
The dominant follicle undergoes rapid expansion 
during the 5–6 days prior to ovulation, reflecting gran-
ulosa cell proliferation and accumulation of follicular 
Figure 10-3
Development of ovarian follicles. The Graffian follicle is 
also known as a tertiary or preovulatory follicle. (Courtesy of 
JH Eichhorn and D Roberts, Massachusetts General Hospital; 
with permission.)
fluid. FSH induces LH receptors on the granulosa 
cells, and the preovulatory, or Graffian, follicle moves 
to the outer ovarian surface in preparation for ovula-
tion. The LH surge triggers the resumption of meio-
sis, the suppression of granulosa cell proliferation, and 
the induction of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), prosta-
glandins, and the progesterone receptor, each of which 
is required for ovulation. EGF-like factors are thought 
to mediate these follicular responses to LH. Ovulation 
also involves production of extracellular matrix lead-
ing to expansion of the cumulus cell population that 
surrounds the oocyte and the controlled expulsion of 
the egg and follicular fluid. Both progesterone and 
prostaglandins (induced by the ovulatory stimulus) are 
essential for this process. After ovulation, luteinization 
is induced by LH in conjunction with the acquisi-
tion of a rich vascular network in response to vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fibroblast 
growth factor (basic FGF). Traditional regulators of 
central reproductive control, gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH) and its receptor (GnRHR), are also 
produced in the ovary and may be involved in corpus 
luteum function.
Regulation of Ovarian Function
Hypothalamic and Pituitary 
Secretion
GnRH neurons develop from epithelial cells outside the 
central nervous system and migrate, initially alongside 
the olfactory neurons, to the medial basal hypothalamus. 
Studies in GnRH-deficient patients who fail to undergo 
puberty have provided insights into genes that control the 
ontogeny and function of GnRH neurons (Fig. 10-4). 
KAL1, FGF8/FGFR1, PROK2/PROKR2, NELF and
CDH7 (Chap. 8) have been implicated in the migration of 
GnRH neurons to the hypothalamus. Approximately 
7000 GnRH neurons, scattered throughout the medial 
basal hypothalamus, establish contacts with capillaries 
of the pituitary portal system in the median eminence. 
GnRH is secreted into the pituitary portal system in dis-
crete pulses to stimulate synthesis and secretion of LH 
and FSH from pituitary gonadotropes, which comprise 
∼10% of cells in the pituitary (Chap. 2). Functional 
connections of GnRH neurons with the portal system 
are established by the end of the first trimester, coinciding 
with the production of pituitary gonadotropins. Thus, 
like the ovary, the hypothalamic and pituitary compo-
nents of the reproductive system are present before 
birth. However, the high levels of estradiol and proges-
terone produced by the placenta suppress hypothalamic- 
pituitary stimulation of ovarian hormonal secretion in 
the fetus.
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
181
After birth and the loss of placenta-derived steroids, 
gonadotropin levels rise. FSH levels are much higher in 
girls than in boys. This rise in FSH results in ovarian acti-
vation (evident on ultrasound) and increased inhibin B 
and estradiol levels. Studies that have identified muta-
tions in TAC3, which encodes neurokinin B, and its 
receptor, TAC3R, in patients with GnRH deficiency 
indicate that both are involved in control of GnRH 
secretion and may be particularly important at this 
early stage of development. By 12–20 months of age, 
the reproductive axis is again suppressed, and a period 
of relative quiescence persists until puberty (Fig. 10-5).
At the onset of puberty, pulsatile GnRH secretion 
induces pituitary gonadotropin production. In the early 
stages of puberty, LH and FSH secretion are apparent 
only during sleep, but as puberty develops, pulsatile 
gonadotropin secretion occurs throughout the day and 
night.
The mechanisms responsible for the childhood quies-
cence and pubertal reactivation of the reproductive axis 
remain incompletely understood. GnRH neurons in the 
hypothalamus respond to both excitatory and inhibitory 
factors. Increased sensitivity to the inhibitory influence 
of gonadal steroids has long been implicated in the inhi-
bition of GnRH secretion during childhood but has not 
been definitively established in the human. Metabolic 
KAL 1
FGR8/FGFR1
NELF
PROK2/PROKR2
Olfactory
placode
Pituitary
Hypothalamus
GnRH1
GnRHR
TAC3R
KISS1R
KISS1
TAC3
Migration
Function
Figure 10-4
Establishment of a functional GnRH system requires the 
participation of a number of genes that are essential for devel-
opment and migration of GnRH neurons from the olfactory 
placode to the hypothalamus in addition to genes involved in 
the functional control of GnRH secretion and action.
signals such as adipocyte-derived leptin play a permis-
sive role in reproductive function (Chap. 16). Stud-
ies of patients with isolated GnRH deficiency reveal 
that mutations in the G protein–coupled receptor 54 
(GPR54) gene (now known as KISS1R) preclude the 
onset of puberty. The ligand for this receptor, metas-
tin, is derived from the parent peptide, kisspeptin-1 
(KISS1), and is a powerful stimulant for GnRH 
release. A potential role for kisspeptin in the onset of 
puberty has been suggested by upregulation of KISS1 
and KISS1R transcripts in the hypothalamus at the 
time of puberty. The KISS1/KISS1R system may also 
be involved in estrogen feedback regulation of GnRH 
secretion.
Ovarian Steroids
Ovarian steroid–producing cells do not store hormones 
but produce them in response to LH and FSH dur-
ing the normal menstrual cycle. The sequence of steps 
and the enzymes involved in the synthesis of steroid 
hormones are similar in the ovary, adrenal, and testis. 
However, the enzymes required to catalyze specific 
steps are compartmentalized and may not be abundant 
or even present in all cell types. Within the develop-
ing ovarian follicle, estrogen synthesis from cholesterol 
requires close integration between theca and granulosa 
cells—sometimes called the two-cell model for steroido-
genesis (Fig. 10-6). FSH receptors are confined to the 
granulosa cells, whereas LH receptors are restricted to 
the theca cells until the late stages of follicular develop-
ment, when they are also found on granulosa cells. The 
theca cells surrounding the follicle are highly vascular-
ized and use cholesterol, derived primarily from circu-
lating lipoproteins, as the starting point for the synthesis 
of androstenedione and testosterone under the control 
of LH. Androstenedione and testosterone are transferred 
across the basal lamina to the granulosa cells, which 
50 yr
Menopause
10–14 yr
Puberty reproductive years
FSH
Childhood
Infancy
Birth−20 mo.
LH
Plasma gonadotropins
Figure 10-5
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hor-
mone (LH) are increased during the neonatal years but go 
through a period of childhood quiescence before increasing 
again during puberty. Gonadotropin levels are cyclic during 
the reproductive years and increase dramatically with the 
loss of negative feedback that accompanies menopause.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
182
receive no direct blood supply. The mural granulosa 
cells are particularly rich in aromatase and, under the 
control of FSH, produce estradiol, the primary steroid 
secreted from the follicular phase ovary and the most 
potent estrogen. Theca cell–produced androstenedi-
one and, to a lesser extent, testosterone are also secreted 
into peripheral blood, where they can be converted to 
dihydrotestosterone in skin and to estrogens in adipose 
tissue. The hilar interstitial cells of the ovary are func-
tionally similar to Leydig cells and are also capable of 
secreting androgens. Although stromal cells proliferate 
in response to androgens [as in polycystic ovarian syn-
drome (PCOS)], they do not secrete androgens.
Development of the rich capillary network following 
rupture of the follicle at the time of ovulation makes it 
possible for large molecules such as low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL) to reach the luteinized granulosa and theca 
lutein cells. As in the follicle, both cell types are required 
for steroidogenesis in the corpus luteum. The lutein-
ized granulosa cells are the main source of progester-
one production, whereas the theca lutein cells produce 
17-hydroxyprogesterone, a substrate for aromatization to 
estradiol by the luteinized granulosa cells. LH is critical 
for normal structure and function of the corpus luteum. 
Because LH and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 
bind to a common receptor, the role of LH in support of 
the corpus luteum can be replaced by hCG in the first 
10 weeks after conception, and hCG is commonly used 
for luteal phase support in the treatment of infertility.
Steroid hormone actions
Both estrogen and progesterone play critical roles in the 
expression of secondary sexual characteristics in women 
Granulosa cell
Theca cell
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Estrone
Estradiol
aromatase
FSH
Cholesterol
LH
pregnenolone
progesterone
17-OHP
3βHSD
17 hydroxylase
17,20 lyase
Androstenedione
Testosterone
17 β HSD
 
Figure 10-6
Estrogen production in the ovary requires the coopera-
tive function of the theca and granulosa cells under the 
control of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH). HSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; OHP, 
hydroxyprogesterone.
(Chap. 1). Estrogen promotes development of the 
ductule system in the breast, whereas progesterone is 
responsible for glandular development. In the repro-
ductive tract, estrogens create a receptive environment 
for fertilization and support pregnancy and parturition 
through carefully coordinated changes in the endome-
trium, thickening of the vaginal mucosa, thinning of the 
cervical mucus, and uterine growth and contractions. 
Progesterone induces secretory activity in the estrogen-
primed endometrium, increases the viscosity of cervical 
mucus, and inhibits uterine contractions. Both gonadal 
steroids play critical roles in the negative and positive 
feedback controls of gonadotropin secretion. Progester-
one also increases basal body temperature and has there-
fore been used clinically as a marker of ovulation.
The vast majority of circulating estrogens and andro-
gens are carried in the blood bound to carrier proteins, 
which restrain their free diffusion into cells and pro-
long their clearance, serving as a reservoir. High-affinity 
binding proteins include sex hormone–binding globulin 
(SHBG), which binds androgens with somewhat greater 
affinity than estrogens, and corticosteroid-binding globu-
lin (CBG), which also binds progesterone. Modulations 
in binding protein levels by insulin, androgens, and estro-
gens contribute to high bioavailable testosterone levels in 
PCOS and to high circulating estrogen and progesterone 
levels during pregnancy.
Estrogens act primarily through binding to the 
nuclear receptors, estrogen receptor (ER) α and β. 
Transcriptional coactivators and co-repressors modulate 
ER action (Chap. 1). Both ER subtypes are present in 
the hypothalamus, pituitary, ovary, and reproductive 
tract. Although ERα and -β exhibit some functional 
redundancy, there is also a high degree of specificity, 
particularly in cell type expression. For example, ERα 
functions in the ovarian theca cells, whereas ERβ is crit-
ical for granulosa cell function. There is also evidence 
for membrane-initiated signaling by estrogen. Similar 
signaling mechanisms pertain for progesterone with evi-
dence of transcriptional regulation through progesterone 
receptor (PR) A and B protein isoforms, as well as rapid 
membrane signaling.
Ovarian Peptides
Inhibin was initially isolated from gonadal fluids based 
on its ability to selectively inhibit FSH secretion from 
pituitary cells. Inhibin is a heterodimer composed of an 
α subunit and a βA or βB subunit to form inhibin A or 
inhibin B, both of which are secreted from the ovary. 
Activin is a homodimer of inhibin β subunits with the 
capacity to stimulate the synthesis and secretion of FSH. 
Inhibins and activins are members of the transform-
ing growth factor β (TGF-β) superfamily of growth 
and differentiation factors. During the purification of 
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
183
inhibin, follistatin, an unrelated monomeric protein that 
inhibits FSH secretion, was discovered. Within the pitu-
itary, follistatin inhibits FSH secretion indirectly through 
binding and neutralizing activin.
Inhibin B is secreted from the granulosa cells of small 
antral follicles, whereas inhibin A is present in both 
granulosa and theca cells and is secreted by dominant 
follicles. Inhibin A is also present in luteinized granu-
losa cells and is a major secretory product of the corpus 
luteum. Inhibin B is constitutively secreted by granu-
losa cells and increases in serum in conjunction with 
cycle recruitment to the pool of actively growing fol-
licles under the control of FSH. Inhibin B has been 
used clinically as a marker of ovarian reserve. Inhibin B 
is an important inhibitor of FSH, independent of 
estradiol, during the menstrual cycle. Although activin 
is also secreted from the ovary, the excess of follistatin 
in serum, combined with its nearly irreversible bind-
ing of activin, make it unlikely that ovarian activin plays 
an endocrine role in FSH regulation. However, there 
is evidence that activin plays an autocrine/paracrine 
role in the ovary, in addition to its intrapituitary role in 
modulation of FSH production.
AMH (also known as MIS) is important in ovar-
ian biology in addition to the function from which it 
derived it name (i.e., promotion of the degeneration 
of the müllerian system during embryogenesis in the 
male). AMH is produced by granulosa cells and, like 
inhibin B, is a marker of ovarian reserve. AMH may 
also inhibit the recruitment of primordial follicles into 
the follicle pool and appears to increase the effect of 
FSH on aromatase expression.
Relaxin, which is produced by the theca lutein cells 
of the corpus luteum, is thought to play a role in decid-
ualization of the endometrium and suppression of myo-
metrial contractile activity, both of which are essential 
for the early establishment of pregnancy.
Hormonal Integration of the 
Normal Menstrual Cycle
The sequence of changes responsible for mature repro-
ductive function is coordinated through a series of 
negative and positive feedback loops that alter pulsatile 
GnRH secretion, the pituitary response to GnRH, and 
the relative secretion of LH and FSH from the gonado-
trope. The frequency and amplitude of pulsatile GnRH 
secretion differentially modulate the synthesis and secre-
tion of LH and FSH, with slow frequencies favoring 
FSH synthesis and increased amplitudes favoring LH 
synthesis. Activin is produced in both pituitary gonado-
tropes and folliculostellate cells and stimulates the syn-
thesis and secretion of FSH. Inhibins function as potent 
antagonists of activins through sequestration of the 
activin receptors. Although inhibin is expressed in the 
pituitary, gonadal inhibin is the principal source of feed-
back inhibition of FSH.
For the majority of the cycle, the reproductive sys-
tem functions in a classic endocrine negative feedback 
mode. Estradiol and progesterone inhibit GnRH secre-
tion, and the inhibins act at the pituitary to selectively 
inhibit FSH synthesis and secretion (Fig. 10-7). This 
negative feedback control of FSH is critical for devel-
opment of the single mature oocyte that characterizes 
normal reproductive function in women. In addition to 
these negative feedback controls, the menstrual cycle is 
uniquely dependent on estrogen-induced positive feed-
back to produce an LH surge that is essential for ovula-
tion of a mature follicle. The neural signaling pathways 
that distinguish estrogen-negative versus -positive feed-
back are incompletely understood.
The Follicular Phase
The follicular phase is characterized by recruitment of 
a cohort of secondary follicles and the ultimate selec-
tion of a dominant preovulatory follicle (Fig. 10-8). 
The follicular phase begins, by convention, on the first 
day of menses. However, follicle recruitment is ini-
tiated by the rise in FSH that begins in the late luteal 
phase in conjunction with the loss of negative feed-
back of gonadal steroids and likely inhibin A. The fact 
that a 20–30% increase in FSH is adequate for follicu-
lar recruitment speaks to the marked sensitivity of the 
resting follicle pool to FSH. The resultant granulosa cell 
proliferation is responsible for increasing early follicular 
GnRH
FSH
LH
Estradiol
Negative Feedback
Positive Feedback
++
++
+
-
-
Estradiol
Inhibin B
Inhibin A
++
Estradiol
Progesterone
Figure 10-7
The reproductive system in women is critically dependent 
both on estrogen-negative feedback of gonadal steroids and 
inhibin to modulate follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion 
and on estrogen-positive feedback to generate the preovula-
tory luteinizing hormone (LH) surge. GnRH, gonadotropin- 
releasing hormone.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
184
phase levels of inhibin B. Inhibin B in conjunction 
with rising levels of estradiol, and probably inhibin A, 
restrain FSH secretion during this critical period such 
that only a single follicle matures in the vast majority of 
cycles. The increased risk of multiple gestation associ-
ated with the increased levels of FSH characteristic of 
advanced maternal age, or with exogenous gonadotro-
pin administration in the treatment of infertility, attest 
to the importance of the negative feedback regulation 
of FSH. With further growth of the dominant follicle, 
estradiol and inhibin A increase exponentially and the 
follicle acquires LH receptors. Increasing levels of estra-
diol are responsible for proliferative changes in the 
endometrium. The exponential rise in estradiol results 
in positive feedback on the pituitary, leading to the 
generation of an LH surge (and a smaller FSH surge), 
thereby triggering ovulation and luteinization of the 
granulosa cells.
The Luteal Phase
The luteal phase begins with the formation of the cor-
pus luteum from the ruptured follicle. Progesterone and 
inhibin A are produced from the luteinized granulosa 
cells, which continue to aromatize theca-derived andro-
gen precursors, producing estradiol. The combined 
actions of estrogen and progesterone are responsible for 
the secretory changes in the endometrium that are nec-
essary for implantation. The corpus luteum is supported 
by LH but has a finite life span because of diminished 
sensitivity to LH. The demise of the corpus luteum 
results in a progressive decline in hormonal support of 
the endometrium. Inflammation or local hypoxia and 
Follicular
phase
Luteal
phase
Secondary Antral
Ovarian follicles
FSH
LH
Inhibin B
Proliferative
Secretory
Inhibin A
E2
Prog
Endo
Dominant
Ovulation
Corpus
luteum
Corpus
albicans
Figure 10-8
Relationship between gonadotropins, follicle develop-
ment, gonadal secretion, and endometrial changes dur-
ing the normal menstrual cycle. FSH, follicle-stimulating 
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; E2, estradiol; Prog, pro-
gesterone; Endo, endometrium.
ischemia result in vascular changes in the endometrium 
leading to the release of cytokines, cell death, and shed-
ding of the endometrium.
If conception occurs, hCG produced by the tro-
phoblast binds to LH receptors on the corpus luteum, 
maintaining steroid hormone production and prevent-
ing involution of the corpus luteum. The corpus luteum 
is essential for the hormonal maintenance of the endo-
metrium during the first 6–10 weeks of pregnancy until 
this function is taken over by the placenta.
Clinical Assessment of  
Ovarian Function
Menstrual bleeding should become regular within 2 to 
4 years of menarche, although anovulatory and irregu-
lar cycles are common before that. For the remainder 
of adult reproductive life, the cycle length counted 
from the first day of menses to the first day of subse-
quent menses is ∼28 days, with a range of 25–35 days. 
However, cycle-to-cycle variability for an individual 
woman is ±2 days. Luteal phase length is relatively con-
stant between 12 and 14 days in normal cycles; thus, the 
major variability in cycle length is due to variations in 
the follicular phase. The duration of menstrual bleed-
ing in ovulatory cycles varies between 4 and 6 days. 
There is a gradual shortening of cycle length with age 
such that women over the age of 35 have cycles that are 
shorter than during their younger reproductive years. 
Anovulatory cycles increase as women approach the 
menopause, and bleeding patterns may be erratic.
Women who report regular monthly bleeding with 
cycles that do not vary by >4 days generally have ovula-
tory cycles, but several other clinical signs can be used 
to assess the likelihood of ovulation. Some women expe-
rience mittelschmerz, described as midcycle pelvic discom-
fort that is thought to be caused by the rapid expansion 
of the dominant follicle at the time of ovulation. A con-
stellation of premenstrual moliminal symptoms such 
as bloating, breast tenderness, and food cravings often 
occur several days before menses in ovulatory cycles, 
but their absence cannot be used as evidence of anovu-
lation. Methods that can be used to determine whether 
ovulation is likely to include a serum progesterone level 
>5 ng/mL ∼7 days before expected menses, an increase 
in basal body temperature of 0.24°C (>0.5°F) in the 
second half of the cycle due to the thermoregulatory 
effect of progesterone, or the detection of the urinary 
LH surge using ovulation predictor kits. Because ovula-
tion occurs ∼36 hours after the LH surge, urinary LH 
can be helpful in timing intercourse to coincide with 
ovulation.
Ultrasound can be used to detect the growth of the 
fluid-filled antrum of the developing follicle and to 
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
185
assess endometrial proliferation in response to increas-
ing estradiol levels in the follicular phase, as well as the 
characteristic echogenicity of the secretory endome-
trium of the luteal phase.
Puberty
Normal Pubertal  
Development in Girls
The first menstrual period (menarche) occurs relatively 
late in the series of developmental milestones that char-
acterize normal pubertal development (Table 10-1). 
Menarche is preceded by the appearance of pubic and 
then axillary hair as a result of maturation of the zona 
reticularis in the adrenal gland and increased adrenal 
androgen secretion, particularly dehydroepiandros-
terone (DHEA). The triggers for adrenarche remain 
unknown but may involve increases in body mass index 
as well as in utero and neonatal factors. Menarche is 
also preceded by breast development (thelarche), which 
is exquisitely sensitive to the very low levels of estro-
gen that result from peripheral conversion of adrenal 
androgens and the low levels of estrogen secreted from 
the ovary early in pubertal maturation. Breast devel-
opment precedes the appearance of pubic and axillary 
hair in ∼60% of girls. The interval between the onset of 
breast development and menarche is ∼2 years. There has 
been a gradual decline in the age of menarche over the 
past century, attributed in large part to improvement in 
nutrition, and there is a relationship between adipos-
ity and earlier sexual maturation in girls. In the United 
States, menarche occurs at an average age of 12.5 years 
(Table 10-1). Much of the variation in the timing of 
puberty is due to genetic factors, with heritability esti-
mates of 50–80%. Both adrenarche and breast devel-
opment occur ∼1 year earlier in black compared with 
white girls, although the timing of menarche differs by 
only 6 months between these ethnic groups.
Other important hormonal changes also occur in 
conjunction with puberty. Growth hormone (GH) lev-
els increase early in puberty, stimulated in part by the 
pubertal increases in estrogen secretion. GH increases 
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), which enhances 
linear growth. The growth spurt is generally less pro-
nounced in girls than in boys, with a peak growth 
velocity of ∼7 cm/year. Linear growth is ultimately lim-
ited by closure of epiphyses in the long bones as a result 
of prolonged exposure to estrogen. Puberty is also asso-
ciated with mild insulin resistance.
Disorders of Puberty
The differential diagnosis of precocious and delayed 
puberty is similar in boys (Chap. 8) and girls. However, 
there are differences in the timing of normal puberty 
and differences in the relative frequency of specific dis-
orders in girls compared with boys.
Precocious puberty
Traditionally, precocious puberty has been defined as 
the development of secondary sexual characteristics 
before the age of 8 in girls based on data from Marshall 
and Tanner in British girls studied in the 1960s. More 
recent studies led to recommendations that girls be eval-
uated for precocious puberty if breast development or 
pubic hair are present at <7 years of age for white girls 
or <6 years for black girls.
Precocious puberty is most often centrally medi-
ated (Table 10-2), resulting from early activation of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis. It is character-
ized by pulsatile LH secretion and an enhanced LH and 
FSH response to exogenous GnRH (two- to threefold 
stimulation) (Table 10-3). True precocity is marked 
by advancement in bone age of >2 SD, a recent history 
of growth acceleration, and progression of secondary 
sexual characteristics. In girls, centrally mediated preco-
cious puberty is idiopathic in ∼85% of cases; however, 
neurogenic causes must also be considered. GnRH ago-
nists that induce pituitary desensitization are the mainstay 
of treatment to prevent premature epiphyseal closure and 
preserve adult height, as well as to manage psychosocial 
repercussions of precocious puberty.
Peripherally mediated precocious puberty does not 
involve activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian 
axis and is characterized by suppressed gonadotropins 
in the presence of elevated estradiol. Management of 
Table 10-1 
Mean Age (Years) of Pubertal Milestones in Girls
Onset of Breast/
Pubic Hair 
Development
Age of Peak  
Height Velocity
Menarche
Final Breast/ 
Pubic Hair 
Development
Adult 
Height
White
10.2
11.9
12.6
14.3
17.1
Black
9.6
11.5
12
13.6
16.5
Source: From FM Biro et al: J Pediatr 148:234, 2006.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
186
peripheral precocious puberty involves treating the 
underlying disorder (Table 10-2) and limiting the effects 
of gonadal steroids using aromatase inhibitors, inhibitors 
of steroidogenesis, and estrogen receptor blockers. It is 
important to be aware that central precocious puberty can 
also develop in girls whose precocity was initially peripher-
ally mediated, as in McCune-Albright syndrome and con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia.
Incomplete and intermittent forms of precocious 
puberty may also occur. For example, premature breast 
development may occur in girls before the age of 2 years, 
with no further progression and without significant 
advancement in bone age, androgen production, or com-
promised height. Premature adrenarche can also occur in 
the absence of progressive pubertal development, but it 
must be distinguished from late-onset congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia and androgen-secreting tumors, in which case 
it may be termed heterosexual precocity. Premature adre-
narche may be associated with obesity, hyperinsulinemia, 
and the subsequent predisposition to PCOS.
Delayed puberty
Delayed puberty (Table 10-4) is defined as the absence 
of secondary sexual characteristics by age 13 in girls. 
The diagnostic considerations are very similar to those 
for primary amenorrhea (Chap. 11). Between 25 and 
40% of delayed puberty in girls is of ovarian origin, 
Table 10-2 
Differential Diagnosis of Precocious 
Puberty
Central  
(GnRH Dependent)
Peripheral  
(GnRH Independent)
Idiopathic
CNS tumors
Hamartomas
Astrocytomas
Adenomyomas
Gliomas
Germinomas
CNS infection
Head trauma
Iatrogenic
Radiation
Chemotherapy
Surgical
CNS malformation
Arachnoid or suprasellar 
cysts
Septo-optic dysplasia
Hydrocephalus
Congenital adrenal  
hyperplasia
Estrogen-producing tumors
Adrenal tumors
Ovarian tumors
Gonadotropin/hCG- 
producing tumors
Exogenous exposure to 
estrogen or androgen
McCune-Albright syndrome
Aromatase excess syndrome
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; GnRH, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin.
Table 10-3 
Evaluation of Precocious and Delayed 
Puberty
Precocious
Delayed
Initial Screening Tests
History and physical
×
×
Assessment of growth  
velocity
×
×
Bone age
×
×
LH, FSH
×
×
Estradiol, testosterone
×
×
DHEAS
×
×
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
×
TSH, T4
×
×
Complete blood count
×
Sedimentation rate, C-reactive 
protein
×
Electrolytes, renal function
×
Liver enzymes
×
IGF-I, IGFBP-3
×
Urinalysis
×
Secondary Tests
Pelvic ultrasound
×
×
Cranial MRI
×
×
β-hCG
×
GnRH/agonist stimulation test
×
×
ACTH stimulation test
×
Inflammatory bowel disease 
panel
×
×
Celiac disease panel
×
Prolactin
×
Karyotype
×
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; DHEAS, dehy-
droepiandrosterone sulfate; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; hCG, 
human chorionic gonadotropin; IGF-I, insulin-like growth factor-I; 
IGFBP-3, IGF-binding protein 3; LH, luteinizing hormone; TSH, thyroid- 
stimulating hormone; T4, thyroxine.
with Turner’s syndrome accounting for the majority of 
such patients. Functional hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism encompasses diverse etiologies such as systemic 
illnesses, including celiac disease and chronic renal dis-
ease, and endocrinopathies such as diabetes and hypo-
thyroidism. In addition, girls appear to be particularly 
susceptible to the adverse effects of abnormalities in energy 
balance that result from exercise, dieting, and/or eating 
disorders. Together these reversible conditions account 
for ∼25% of delayed puberty in girls. Congenital hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism in girls or boys can be caused 
by mutations in several different genes or combinations of 
genes (Fig. 10-4, Chap. 8, Table 8-2). Family studies 
suggest that genes identified in association with absent 
puberty may also cause delayed puberty, and recent 
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
187
reports have further suggested that a genetic susceptibil-
ity to environmental stresses such as diet and exercise 
may account for at least some cases of functional hypo-
thalamic amenorrhea. Although neuroanatomic causes 
of delayed puberty are considerably less common in 
girls than in boys, it is always important to rule these 
out in the setting of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Table 10-4 
Differential Diagnosis of Delayed Puberty
Hypergonadotropic
Ovarian
Turner’s syndrome
Gonadal dysgenesis
Chemotherapy/radiation therapy
Galactosemia
Autoimmune oophoritis
Congenital lipoid hyperplasia
Steroidogenic enzyme abnormalities
17α-hydroxylase deficiency
Aromatase deficiency
Gonadotropin/receptor mutations
FSHβ, LHR, FSHR
Androgen resistance syndrome
Hypogonadotropic
Genetic
Hypothalamic syndromes
Leptin/leptin receptor
HESX1 (septo-optic dysplasia)
PC1 (prohormone convertase)
IHH and Kallmann syndrome
KAL1, FGF8, FGFR1, NELF, PROK2, PROKR2
KISS1, KISS1R, TAC3, TAC3R, GnRH1, GnRHR
Abnormalities of pituitary development/function
PROP1
CNS tumors/infiltrative disorders
Craniopharyngioma
Astrocytoma, germinoma, glioma
Prolactinomas, other pituitary tumors
Histiocytosis X
Chemotherapy/radiation
Functional
Chronic diseases
Malnutrition
Excessive exercise
Eating disorders
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; FGF8, fibroblast 
growth factor 8; FGFR1, fibroblast growth factor 1 receptor; FSHβ, 
follicle-stimulating hormone β chain; FSHR, FSH receptor; GnRHR, 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor; HESX1, homeobox, 
embryonic stem cell expressed 1; IHH, idiopathic hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism; KAL, Kallmann; KISS1, kisspeptin 1; KISSR1, KISS1 
receptor; LHR, luteinizing hormone receptor; NELF, nasal embryonic 
LHRH factor; PROK2, prokineticin 2; PROKR2 prokineticin receptor 2; 
PROP1, prophet of Pit1, paired-like homeodomain transcription 
factor.
Infertility
Definition and Prevalence
Infertility is defined as the inability to conceive after 
12 months of unprotected sexual intercourse. In a 
study of 5574 English and American women who ulti-
mately conceived, pregnancy occurred in 50% within 
3 months, 72% within 6 months, and 85% within 12 
months. These findings are consistent with predic-
tions based on fecundability, the probability of achiev-
ing pregnancy in one menstrual cycle (approximately 
20–25% in healthy young couples). Assuming a fecund-
ability of 0.25, 98% of couples should conceive within 
13 months. Based on this definition, the National Sur-
vey of Family Growth reports a 14% rate of infertility 
in the United States in married women aged 15–44. 
The infertility rate has remained relatively stable over the 
past 30 years, although the proportion of couples without 
children has risen, reflecting a trend to delay childbearing. 
This trend has important implications because of an age-
related decrease in fecundability, which begins at age 35 and 
decreases markedly after age 40. It is estimated that ∼8% of 
women in the United States have received medical assis-
tance for infertility; of these, 74% received counseling, ∼60% 
underwent infertility testing of the female and/or male part-
ner, and ∼46% used ovulation-inducing medication.
Causes of Infertility
The spectrum of infertility ranges from reduced con-
ception rates or the need for medical intervention 
to irreversible causes of infertility. Infertility can be 
attributed primarily to male factors in 25%, female fac-
tors in 58%, and is unexplained in about 17% of cou-
ples (Fig. 10-9). Not uncommonly, both male and 
female factors contribute to infertility.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Infertility
Initial Evaluation  In all couples presenting 
with infertility, the initial evaluation includes discussion 
of the appropriate timing of intercourse and discus-
sion of modifiable risk factors such as smoking, alcohol, 
caffeine, and obesity. The range of required investiga-
tions should be reviewed as well as a brief description 
of infertility treatment options, including adoption. Ini-
tial investigations are focused on determining whether 
the primary cause of the infertility is male, female, or 
both. These investigations include a semen analysis in 
the male, confirmation of ovulation in the female, and, 
in the majority of situations, documentation of tubal 
patency in the female. In some cases, after an extensive 
workup excluding all male and female factors, a specific 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
188
cause cannot be identified and infertility may ultimately 
be classified as unexplained.
Psychological Aspects of Infertility  
Infertility is invariably associated with psychological 
stress related not only to the diagnostic and therapeu-
tic procedures themselves but also to repeated cycles of 
hope and loss associated with each new procedure or 
cycle of treatment that does not result in the birth of a 
child. These feelings are often combined with a sense of 
isolation from friends and family. Counseling and stress-
management techniques should be introduced early in 
the evaluation of infertility. Importantly, infertility and 
its treatment do not appear to be associated with long-
term psychological sequelae.
Female 
Causes  Abnormalities in menstrual 
function constitute the most common cause of female 
infertility. These disorders, which include ovulatory dys-
function and abnormalities of the uterus or outflow 
tract, may present as amenorrhea or as irregular or short 
menstrual cycles. A careful history and physical exami-
nation and a limited number of laboratory tests will 
help to determine whether the abnormality is (1) hypo-
thalamic or pituitary (low FSH, LH, and estradiol with 
or without an increase in prolactin), (2) PCOS (irregular 
cycles and hyperandrogenism in the absence of other 
causes of androgen excess), (3) ovarian (low estra-
diol with increased FSH), or (4) uterine or outflow tract 
abnormality. The frequency of these diagnoses depends 
on whether the amenorrhea is primary or occurs after 
normal puberty and menarche (see Fig. 11-2).
Infertility
14% of reproductive-aged women
5 million couples in the U.S.
Female causes
58%
Male causes
25%
Unexplained
17%
Amenorrhea/
ovulatory
dysfunction
46%
Hypothalamic/
pituitary
causes
51%
Polycystic
ovary
syndrome
30%
Premature
ovarian
failure
12%
Tubal
defect
38%
Primary
hypogonadism
(   FSH)
30–40%
Secondary
hypogonadism
(   FSH,    LH)
2%
Disordered
sperm
transport
10–20%
Unknown
40–50%
Endometriosis
9%
Other
7%
Uterine or
outflow tract
disorders
7%
The approach to further evaluation of these disor-
ders is described in detail in Chap. 11.
Ovulatory Dysfunction  In women with a his-
tory of regular menstrual cycles, evidence of ovulation 
should be sought as described above. An endometrial 
biopsy to exclude luteal phase insufficiency is no lon-
ger considered a usual part of the infertility workup. 
Even in the presence of ovulatory cycles, evaluation of 
ovarian reserve is recommended for women aged >35 
years. Measurement of FSH on day 3 of the cycle (an 
FSH level <10 IU/mL on cycle day 3 predicts adequate 
ovarian oocyte reserve) or in response to clomiphene 
(blocks estrogen negative feedback on FSH), antral fol-
licle count, and serum levels of inhibin B and AMH have 
all been used for this purpose.
Tubal Disease  Tubal dysfunction may result from 
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), appendicitis, endo-
metriosis, pelvic adhesions, tubal surgery, previous use 
of an intrauterine device (IUD), and a previous ectopic 
pregnancy. However, a cause is not identified in up to 
50% of patients with documented tubal factor infertil-
ity. Because of the high prevalence of tubal disease, 
evaluation of tubal patency by hysterosalpingogram 
(HSG) or laparoscopy should occur early in the major-
ity of couples with infertility. Subclinical infections with 
Chlamydia trachomatis may be an underdiagnosed 
cause of tubal infertility and requires the treatment of 
both partners.
Endometriosis  Endometriosis is defined as the 
presence of endometrial glands or stroma outside the 
endometrial cavity and uterine musculature. Its pres-
ence is suggested by a history of dyspareunia (painful 
intercourse), worsening dysmenorrhea that often begins 
before menses, or by a thickened rectovaginal septum or 
deviation of the cervix on pelvic examination. The patho-
genesis of the infertility associated with endometriosis is 
unclear but may involve effects on fertilization and nor-
mal function of the endometrium, as well as adhesions. 
Endometriosis is often clinically silent, however, and can 
only be excluded definitively by laparoscopy.
Male Causes  (See also Chap. 8.) Known causes 
of male infertility include primary testicular disease, 
disorders of sperm transport, and hypothalamic- 
pituitary disease resulting in secondary hypogonad-
ism. However, the etiology is not ascertained in up to 
one-half of men with suspected male factor infertil-
ity. The key initial diagnostic test is a semen analysis. 
Testosterone levels should be measured if the sperm 
count is low on repeated examination or if there is clin-
ical evidence of hypogonadism. Gonadotropin levels 
will help to determine a gonadal versus a central cause 
of hypogonadism.
Figure 10-9
Causes of infertility. FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, 
luteinizing hormone.
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
189
Treatment	
Infertility
In addition to addressing the negative impact of smok-
ing on fertility and pregnancy outcome, counseling 
about nutrition and weight is a critical part of infertility 
and pregnancy management. Both low and increased 
body mass index (BMI) are associated with infertility 
in women and with increased morbidity during preg-
nancy. Obesity has also been associated with infertility 
in men. The treatment of infertility should be tailored to 
the problems unique to each couple. In many situations, 
including unexplained infertility, mild to moderate 
endometriosis, and/or borderline semen parameters, 
a stepwise approach to infertility is optimal, begin-
ning with low-risk interventions and moving to more 
invasive, higher risk interventions only if necessary. 
After determination of all infertility factors and their 
correction, if possible, this approach might include, in 
increasing order of complexity: (1) expectant manage-
ment, (2) clomiphene citrate (see below) with or with-
out intrauterine insemination (IUI), (3) gonadotropins 
with or without IUI, and (4) in vitro fertilization (IVF). 
The time used to complete the evaluation, correction, 
and expectant management can be longer in women 
aged <30 years, but this process should be advanced 
rapidly in women aged >35 years. In some situa-
tions, expectant management will not be appropriate.
Ovulatory Dysfunction  Treatment of ovu-
latory dysfunction should first be directed at identification 
of the etiology of the disorder to allow specific manage-
ment when possible. Dopamine agonists, for example, 
may be indicated in patients with hyperprolactinemia 
(Chap. 2); lifestyle modification may be successful in 
women with obesity, low body weight, or a history of 
intensive exercise.
Medications used for ovulation induction include 
clomiphene citrate, gonadotropins, and pulsatile GnRH. 
Clomiphene citrate is a nonsteroidal estrogen antagonist 
that increases FSH and LH levels by blocking estrogen 
negative feedback at the hypothalamus. The efficacy of 
clomiphene for ovulation induction is highly dependent 
on patient selection. It induces ovulation in ∼60% of 
women with PCOS and is the initial treatment of choice. 
It may be combined with agents that modify insulin levels 
such as metformin. Clomiphene citrate is less success-
ful in patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Aromatase inhibitors have also been investigated for 
the treatment of infertility. Initial studies are promising, 
but these medications have not been approved for this 
indication.
Gonadotropins are highly effective for ovulation 
induction in women with hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism and PCOS and are used to induce the devel-
opment of multiple follicles in unexplained infertility
and in older reproductive-age women. Disadvantages 
include a significant risk of multiple gestation and the 
risk of ovarian hyperstimulation. Careful monitoring and 
a conservative approach to ovarian stimulation reduce 
these risks. Currently available gonadotropins include 
urinary preparations of LH and FSH, highly purified FSH, 
and recombinant FSH. Though FSH is the key compo-
nent, there are growing data that the addition of some 
LH (or hCG) may improve results, and this is particularly 
important in hypogonadotropic patients.
None of these methods are effective in women with 
premature ovarian failure in whom donor oocyte or 
adoption are the methods of choice.
Tubal Disease  If hysterosalpingography sug-
gests a tubal or uterine cavity abnormality, or if a 
patient is aged ≥35 at the time of initial evaluation, 
laparoscopy with tubal lavage is recommended, often 
with a hysteroscopy. Although tubal reconstruc-
tion may be attempted if tubal disease is identified, 
it is generally being replaced by the use of IVF. These 
patients are at increased risk of developing an ectopic 
pregnancy.
Endometriosis  Though 60% of women with 
minimal or mild endometriosis may conceive within 
1 year without treatment, laparoscopic resection or abla-
tion appears to improve conception rates. Medical man-
agement of advanced stages of endometriosis is widely 
used for symptom control but has not been shown to 
enhance fertility. In moderate to severe endometriosis, 
conservative surgery is associated with pregnancy rates 
of 50 and 39%, respectively, compared with rates of 
25 and 5% with expectant management alone. In some 
patients, IVF may be the treatment of choice.
Male Factor Infertility  The treatment 
options for male factor infertility have expanded greatly 
in recent years (Chap. 8). Secondary hypogonadism is 
highly amenable to treatment with pulsatile GnRH or 
gonadotropins. In vitro techniques have provided new 
opportunities for patients with primary testicular failure 
and disorders of sperm transport. Choice of initial treat-
ment options depends on sperm concentration and 
motility. Expectant management should be attempted 
initially in men with mild male factor infertility (sperm 
count of 15 to 20 × 106/mL and normal motility). Moder-
ate male factor infertility (10 to 15 × 106/mL and 20–40% 
motility) should begin with IUI alone or in combination 
with treatment of the female partner with clomiphene 
or gonadotropins, but it may require IVF with or without 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). For men with a 
severe defect (sperm count of <10 × 106/mL, 10% motil-
ity), IVF with ICSI or donor sperm should be used. If ICSI 
is performed because of azoospermia due to congenital 
bilateral absence of the vas deferens, genetic testing 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
190
and counseling should be provided because of the risk 
of cystic fibrosis.
Assisted Reproductive Technologies
The development of assisted reproductive technologies 
(ARTs) has dramatically altered the treatment of male 
and female infertility. IVF is indicated for patients with 
many causes of infertility that have not been success-
fully managed with more conservative approaches. IVF 
or ICSI is often the treatment of choice in couples with 
a significant male factor or tubal disease, whereas IVF 
using donor oocytes is used in patients with prema-
ture ovarian failure and in women of advanced repro-
ductive age. Success rates depend on the age of the 
woman and the cause of the infertility. The number 
of cycles canceled increases from approximately 10% 
in women aged <35 years to 24% in women aged >40 
while the birth rate decreases from ∼39% of cycles in 
which embryos were transferred in women aged <35 
to 24% in women aged 38–40 and only 10% in women 
aged >40. Though often effective, IVF is expensive 
and requires careful monitoring of ovulation induc-
tion and invasive techniques, including the aspiration 
of multiple follicles. IVF is associated with a significant 
risk of multiple gestation, particularly in women aged 
<35, in whom it can be as high as 40%.
Table 10-5
Effectiveness of Different Forms of Contraception
Method of 
Contraception
Theoreticala  
Effectiveness, %
Actuala 
Effectiveness, %
Percent Continuing 
Use at 1 Yearb
Contraceptive Methods 
Used by U.S. Womenc
Barrier methods
  Condoms
98
88
63
18
  Diaphragm
94
82
58
2
  Cervical cap
94
82
50
<1
Spermicides
97
79
43
1
Sterilization
  Male
99.9
99.9
100
9
  Female
99.8
99.6
100
27
Intrauterine device
1
  Copper T380
99
97
78
  Progestasert
98
97
81
  Mirena
99.9
99.8
Hormonal  
contraceptives
99.7
92
72
31
  Combination pill
  Progestin only pill
Transdermal patch
  Vaginal ring
Long-acting  
progestins
  Depo-Provera
99.7
99.7
70
9
aAdapted from J Trussel et al: Obstet Gynecol 76:558, 1990.
bAdapted from Contraceptive Technology Update. Contraceptive Technology 17(1):13–24, 1996.
cAdapted from LJ Piccinino and WD Mosher: Fam Plan Perspective 30:4, 1998.
Contraception
Only 15% of couples in the United States report hav-
ing unprotected sexual intercourse in the past 3 months. 
However, despite the wide availability and wide-
spread use of a variety of effective methods of con-
traception, approximately one-half of all births in the 
United States are the result of unintended pregnancy. 
Teenage pregnancies continue to represent a serious 
public health problem in the United States, with >1 
million unintended pregnancies each year—a signifi-
cantly greater incidence than in other industrialized 
nations.
Of the contraceptive methods available (Table 10-5), 
a reversible form of contraception is used by >50% of 
couples, while sterilization (male or female) has been 
employed as a permanent form of contraception by over 
one-third of couples. Pregnancy termination is relatively 
safe when directed by health care professionals, but is 
rarely the option of choice.
No single contraceptive method is ideal, although all 
are safer than carrying a pregnancy to term. The effec-
tiveness of a given method of contraception does not 
just depend on the efficacy of the method itself. Dis-
crepancies between theoretical and actual effectiveness 
emphasize the importance of patient education and 
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
191
compliance when considering various forms of contra-
ception (Table 10-5). Knowledge of the advantages and 
disadvantages of each contraceptive is essential for coun-
seling an individual about the methods that are safest 
and most consistent with his or her lifestyle. The World 
Health Organization (WHO) has extensive family plan-
ning resources for the physician and patient that can 
be accessed online. Similar resources for determining 
medical eligibility are available through the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Considerations 
for contraceptive use in obese patients and after bariatric 
surgery are discussed below.
Barrier Methods
Barrier contraceptives (such as condoms, diaphragms, 
and cervical caps) and spermicides are easily avail-
able, reversible, and have fewer side effects than hor-
monal methods. However, their effectiveness is highly 
dependent on adherence and proper use (Table 10-5). 
A major advantage of barrier contraceptives is the pro-
tection provided against sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs). Consistent use is associated with a decreased 
risk of HIV, gonorrhea, nongonococcal urethritis, and 
genital herpes, probably due in part to the concomitant 
use of spermicides. Natural membrane condoms may be 
less effective than latex condoms, and petroleum-based 
lubricants can degrade condoms and decrease their effi-
cacy for preventing HIV infection. A highly effective 
female condom, which also provides protection against 
STIs, was approved in 1994 but has not achieved wide-
spread use.
Sterilization
Sterilization is the method of birth control most fre-
quently chosen by fertile men and multiparous women 
>30 (Table 10-5). Sterilization refers to a procedure 
that prevents fertilization by surgical interruption of the 
fallopian tubes in women or the vas deferens in men. 
Although tubal ligation and vasectomy are potentially 
reversible, these procedures should be considered per-
manent and should not be undertaken without patient 
counseling.
Several methods of tubal ligation have been developed, 
all of which are highly effective with a 10-year cumulative 
pregnancy rate of 1.85 per 100 women. However, when 
pregnancy does occur, the risk of ectopic pregnancy may 
be as high as 30%. The success rate of tubal reanastomo-
sis depends on the method used, but even after success-
ful reversal, the risk of ectopic pregnancy remains high. 
In addition to prevention of pregnancy, tubal ligation 
reduces the risk of ovarian cancer, possibly by limiting the 
upward migration of potential carcinogens.
Vasectomy is a highly effective outpatient surgical 
procedure that has little risk. The development of azo-
ospermia may be delayed for 2–6 months, and other 
forms of contraception must be used until two sperm-
free ejaculations provide proof of sterility. Reanastomosis 
may restore fertility in 30–50% of men, but the suc-
cess rate declines with time after vasectomy and may be 
influenced by factors such as the development of anti-
sperm antibodies.
Intrauterine Devices
IUDs inhibit pregnancy primarily through a spermicidal 
effect caused by a sterile inflammatory reaction induced 
by the presence of a foreign body in the uterine cavity 
(copper IUDs) or by the release of progestins (Proges-
tasert, Mirena). IUDs provide a high level of efficacy in 
the absence of systemic metabolic effects, and ongoing 
motivation is not required to ensure efficacy once the 
device has been placed. However, only 1% of women 
in the United States use this method compared to a uti-
lization rate of 15–30% in much of Europe and Canada, 
despite evidence that the newer devices are not associ-
ated with increased rates of pelvic infection and infertil-
ity, as occurred with earlier devices. An IUD should not 
be used in women at high risk for development of STI 
or in women at high risk for bacterial endocarditis. The 
IUD may not be effective in women with uterine leio-
myomas because they alter the size or shape of the uterine 
cavity. IUD use is associated with increased menstrual 
blood flow, although this is less pronounced with the 
progestin-releasing IUD, which is associated with a 
more frequent occurrence of spotting or amenorrhea.
Hormonal Methods
Oral contraceptive pills
Because of their ease of use and efficacy, oral contra-
ceptive pills are the most widely used form of hor-
monal contraception. They act by suppressing ovulation, 
changing cervical mucus, and altering the endometrium. 
The current formulations are made from synthetic estro-
gens and progestins. The estrogen component of the 
pill consists of ethinyl estradiol or mestranol, which is 
metabolized to ethinyl estradiol. Multiple synthetic pro-
gestins are used. Norethindrone and its derivatives are 
used in many formulations. Low-dose norgestimate and 
the more recently developed progestins (desogestrel, 
gestodene, drospirenone) have a less androgenic pro-
file; levonorgestrel appears to be the most androgenic of 
the progestins and should be avoided in patients with 
hyperandrogenic symptoms. The three major formula-
tions of oral contraceptives are (1) fixed-dose estrogen-
progestin combination, (2) phasic estrogen-progestin 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
192
combination, and (3) progestin only. Each of these for-
mulations is administered daily for 3 weeks followed 
by a week of no medication during which menstrual 
bleeding generally occurs. Two extended oral contra-
ceptives are approved for use in the United States; Sea-
sonale is a 3-month preparation with 84 days of active 
drug and 7 days of placebo, and Lybrel is a continuous 
preparation containing 90 μg of levonorgestrel and 10 μg 
of ethinyl estradiol. Current doses of ethinyl estradiol 
range from 20 to 50 μg. However, indications for the 
50-μg dose are rare, and the majority of formulations 
contain 35 μg of ethinyl estradiol. The reduced estro-
gen and progestin content in the second- and third-
generation pills has decreased both side effects and risks 
associated with oral contraceptive use (Table 10-6). 
At the currently used doses, patients must be cautioned 
not to miss pills due to the potential for ovulation. Side 
effects, including breakthrough bleeding, amenorrhea, 
breast tenderness, and weight gain, often respond to a 
change in formulation.
The microdose progestin-only minipill is less effec-
tive as a contraceptive, having a pregnancy rate of 2–7 
per 100 women-years. However, it may be appropriate 
for women with cardiovascular disease or for women 
who cannot tolerate synthetic estrogens.
New methods
A weekly contraceptive patch (Ortho Evra) is available and 
has similar efficacy to oral contraceptives but may be 
associated with less breakthrough bleeding. Approxi-
mately 2% of patches fail to adhere, and a similar per-
centage of women have skin reactions. Efficacy is lower 
in women weighing >90 kg. The amount of estrogen 
delivered may be comparable to that of a 40-μg ethi-
nyl estradiol oral contraceptive, raising the possibility 
of increased risk of venous thromboembolism, which 
must be balanced against potential benefits for women 
not able to successfully use other methods. A monthly 
contraceptive estrogen/progestin injection (Lunelle) is highly 
effective, with a first-year failure rate of <0.2%, but it 
may be less effective in obese women. Its use is associ-
ated with bleeding irregularities that diminish over time. 
Fertility returns rapidly after discontinuation. A monthly 
vaginal ring (NuvaRing) that is intended to be left in 
place during intercourse is also available for contracep-
tive use. It is highly effective, with a 12-month failure 
rate of 0.7%. Ovulation returns within the first recovery 
cycle after discontinuation.
Long-term contraceptives
Long-term progestin administration acts primarily by 
inhibiting ovulation and causing changes in the endo-
metrium and cervical mucus that result in decreased 
Table 10-6
Oral Contraceptives: Contraindications 
and Disease Risk
Contraindications
Absolute
Previous thromboembolic event or stroke
History of an estrogen-dependent tumor
Active liver disease
Pregnancy
Undiagnosed abnormal uterine bleeding
Hypertriglyceridemia
Women aged >35 years who smoke heavily
Relative
Hypertension
Women receiving anticonvulsant drug therapy
Women following bariatric surgery (malapsorptive  
procedure)
Disease Risks
Increased
Coronary heart disease—increased in smokers >35; no 
relation to progestin type
Hypertension—relative risk 1.8 (current users) and  
1.2 (previous users)
Venous thrombosis—relative risk ∼4; may be higher with 
third-generation progestin, drosperinone, and patch; 
compounded by obesity (tenfold increased risk com-
pared with nonobese, no OCP); markedly increased 
with factor V Leiden or prothrombin-gene mutations 
Stroke—slight increase; unclear relation to migraine 
headache
Cerebral vein thrombosis—relative risk ∼13–15; 
synergistic with prothrombin-gene mutation
Cervical cancer—relative risk 2–4 
Breast cancer—may increase risk in carriers of BRCA1 
and possibly BRCA2
Decreased
Ovarian cancer—50% reduction in risk
Endometrial cancer—40% reduction in risk
Abbreviation: OCP, oral contraceptive pill.
implantation and sperm transport. Depot medroxy-
progesterone acetate (Depo Provera, DMPA), the only 
injectable form available in the United States, is effec-
tive for 3 months, but return of fertility after discon-
tinuation may be delayed for up to 12–18 months. 
DMPA is now available for both SC and IM injection. 
Irregular bleeding, amenorrhea, and weight gain are the 
most common side effects. This form of contraception 
may be particularly good for women in whom an estrogen- 
containing contraceptive is contraindicated (e.g., migraine 
exacerbation, sickle-cell anemia, fibroids).
Postcoital Contraception
Postcoital contraceptive methods prevent implantation 
or cause regression of the corpus luteum and are highly 
 
CHAPTER 10
The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and Contraception
193
efficacious if used appropriately. Unprotected inter-
course without regard to the time of the month carries 
an 8% incidence of pregnancy, an incidence that can be 
reduced to 2% by the use of emergency contraceptives 
within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse. A notice 
published in 1997 by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) indicated that certain oral contraceptive 
pills could be used within 72 hours of unprotected inter-
course [Ovral (2 tablets, 12 hours apart) and Lo/Ovral 
(4 tablets, 12 hours apart)]. Preven (50 mg ethinyl estra-
diol and 0.25 mg levonorgestrel) and Plan B or Next 
Choice (0.75 mg levonorgestrel) are now approved for 
postcoital contraception and are available over the coun-
ter for women aged >17 years. Levonorgestrel is more 
effective and is associated with fewer side effects than the 
combination estrogen-progestin regimens. Ulipristal ace-
tate is a progesterone antagonist that has been developed 
for emergency contraception. It is available in Europe 
and was approved by the FDA for prescription use in 
2010. This medication is effective for up to 5 days after 
unprotected intercourse. Mifepristone is also a progester-
one antagonist that is available for medical termination 
of intrauterine pregnancy but is not approved for emer-
gency contraception in the United States. Insertion of a 
copper IUD within 5 days after unprotected intercourse 
is also a highly effective method.
Impact of Obesity on  
Contraceptive Choice
Approximately one-third of adults in the United States 
are obese. While obesity is associated with some reduc-
tion in fertility, the vast majority of obese women can 
conceive. The risk of pregnancy-associated complications 
is higher in obese women. Intrauterine contraception 
may be more effective than oral or transdermal meth-
ods for obese women. The WHO guidelines provide no 
restrictions (class 1) for the use of intrauterine contracep-
tion, DMPA, and progestin-only pills for obese women 
(BMI ≥30) in the absence of coexistent medical prob-
lems, whereas methods that include estrogen (pill, patch, 
ring) are considered class 2 (advantages generally out-
weigh theoretical or proven risks) due to the increased 
risk of thromboembolic disease. There are no restric-
tions to the use of any contraceptive methods following 
restrictive bariatric surgery procedures, but both com-
bined and progestin-only pills are relatively less effective 
following procedures associated with malabsorption.
 Janet E. Hall 
194
 Menstrual dysfunction can signal an underlying abnor-
mality that may have long-term health consequences. 
Although frequent or prolonged bleeding usually 
prompts a woman to seek medical attention, infrequent 
or absent bleeding may seem less troubling and the 
patient may not bring it to the attention of the physi-
cian. Thus, a focused menstrual history is a critical part 
of every encounter with a female patient. Pelvic pain is 
a common complaint that may relate to an abnormal-
ity of the reproductive organs but also may be of gas-
trointestinal, urinary tract, or musculoskeletal origin. 
Depending on its cause, pelvic pain may require urgent 
surgical attention. 
 MenSTRUal DiSORDeRS 
 Definition anD PRevalence 
 Amenorrhea refers to the absence of menstrual periods. 
Amenorrhea is classifi ed as  primary if menstrual bleed-
ing has never occurred in the absence of hormonal 
treatment or  secondary if menstrual periods are absent 
for 3–6 months. Primary amenorrhea is a rare disorder 
that occurs in <1% of the female population. How-
ever, between 3 and 5% of women experience at least 
3 months of secondary amenorrhea in any specifi c year. 
There is no evidence that race or ethnicity infl uences 
the prevalence of amenorrhea. However, because of 
the importance of adequate nutrition for normal repro-
ductive function, both the age at menarche and the 
prevalence of secondary amenorrhea vary signifi cantly 
in different parts of the world. 
 Oligomenorrhea is defi ned as a cycle length >35 days 
or <10 menses per year. Both the frequency and the 
amount of vaginal bleeding are irregular in oligomen-
orrhea. It is often associated with anovulation, which 
also can occur with intermenstrual intervals <24 days or 
vaginal bleeding for >7 days. Frequent or heavy irregu-
lar bleeding is termed  dysfunctional uterine bleeding if ana-
tomic uterine lesions or a bleeding diathesis has been 
excluded. 
 Primary amenorrhea 
 The absence of menses by age 16 has been used tradi-
tionally to defi ne primary amenorrhea. However, other 
factors, such as growth, secondary sexual characteris-
tics, the presence of cyclic pelvic pain, and the secular 
trend toward an earlier age of menarche, particularly in 
African-American girls, also infl uence the age at which 
primary amenorrhea should be investigated. Thus, an 
evaluation for amenorrhea should be initiated by age 
15 or 16 in the presence of normal growth and second-
ary sexual characteristics; age 13 in the absence of sec-
ondary sexual characteristics or if height is less than the 
third percentile; age 12 or 13 in the presence of breast 
development and cyclic pelvic pain; or within 2 years 
of breast development if menarche, defi ned by the fi rst 
menstrual period, has not occurred. 
 Secondary amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea 
 Anovulation and irregular cycles are relatively com-
mon for up to 2 years after menarche and for 1–2 years 
before the fi nal menstrual period. In the intervening 
years, menstrual cycle length is ∼28 days, with an inter-
menstrual interval normally ranging between 25 and 
35 days. Cycle-to-cycle variability in an individual woman 
who is ovulating consistently is generally +/− 2 days. 
Pregnancy is the most common cause of amenorrhea 
and should be excluded early in any evaluation of men-
strual irregularity. However, many women occasionally 
miss a single period. Three or more months of second-
ary amenorrhea should prompt an evaluation, as should 
 MENSTRUAL DISORDERS AND PELVIC PAIN 
 cHaPTeR 11 
 
CHAPTER 11
Menstrual Disorders and Pelvic Pain
195
a history of intermenstrual intervals >35 or <21 days or 
bleeding that persists for >7 days.
Diagnosis
Evaluation of menstrual dysfunction depends on under-
standing the interrelationships between the four critical 
components of the reproductive tract: (1) the hypothala-
mus, (2) the pituitary, (3) the ovaries, and (4) the uterus 
and outflow tract (Fig. 11-1; Chap. 10). This system is 
maintained by complex negative and positive feedback 
loops involving the ovarian steroids (estradiol and pro-
gesterone) and peptides (inhibin B and inhibin A) and 
the hypothalamic [gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH)] and pituitary [follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)] components of 
this system (Fig. 11-1).
Disorders of menstrual function can be thought of in 
two main categories: disorders of the uterus and outflow 
tract and disorders of ovulation. Many of the conditions 
that cause primary amenorrhea are congenital but go unrec-
ognized until the time of normal puberty (e.g., genetic, 
chromosomal, and anatomic abnormalities). All causes of 
secondary amenorrhea also can cause primary amenorrhea.
Disorders of the uterus or outflow tract
Abnormalities of the uterus and outflow tract typically 
present as primary amenorrhea. In patients with normal 
pubertal development and a blind vagina, the differen-
tial diagnosis includes obstruction by a transverse vaginal 
septum or imperforate hymen; müllerian agenesis (Mayer-
Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome), which has been 
associated with mutations in the WNT4 gene; and andro-
gen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), which is an X-linked 
recessive disorder that accounts for ∼10% of all cases of 
primary amenorrhea (Chap. 8). Patients with AIS have 
a 46,XY karyotype, but because of the lack of androgen 
receptor responsiveness, they have severe underandro-
genization and female external genitalia. The absence of 
pubic and axillary hair distinguishes them clinically from 
patients with müllerian agenesis. Asherman syndrome pres-
ents as secondary amenorrhea or hypomenorrhea and 
results from partial or complete obliteration of the uter-
ine cavity by adhesions that prevent normal growth and 
shedding of the endometrium. Curettage performed for 
pregnancy complications accounts for >90% of cases; 
genital tuberculosis is an important cause in regions 
where it is endemic.
Hypothalamus
27%
36%
Pituitary
2%
15%
PCOS
7%
30%
Ovary
43%
12%
Uterus/outflow tract
19%
7%
Primary
Secondary
GnRH
LH
Estradiol
Progesterone
FSH
−
−
+
Inhibin B
Inhibin A
Figure 11-1 
Role of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in the 
etiology of amenorrhea. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) secretion from the hypothalamus stimulates follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) 
secretion from the pituitary to induce ovarian folliculogenesis 
and steroidogenesis. Ovarian secretion of estradiol and pro-
gesterone controls the shedding of the endometrium, result-
ing in menses, and, in combination with the inhibins, provides 
feedback regulation of the hypothalamus and pituitary to con-
trol secretion of FSH and LH. The prevalence of amenorrhea 
resulting from abnormalities at each level of the reproductive 
system (hypothalamus, pituitary, ovary, uterus, and outflow 
tract) varies depending on whether amenorrhea is primary or 
secondary. PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
196
TREATMENT	
Disorders of the Uterus or Outflow Tract
Obstruction of the outflow tract requires surgical cor-
rection. The risk of endometriosis is increased with this 
condition, perhaps because of retrograde menstrual 
flow. Müllerian agenesis also may require surgical inter-
vention, although vaginal dilatation is adequate in some 
patients. Because ovarian function is normal, assisted 
reproductive techniques can be used with a surrogate 
carrier. Androgen resistance syndrome requires gonad-
ectomy because there is risk of gonadoblastoma in the 
dysgenetic gonads. Whether this should be performed 
in early childhood or after completion of breast devel-
opment is controversial. Estrogen replacement is indi-
cated after gonadectomy, and vaginal dilatation may be 
required to allow sexual intercourse.
Disorders of ovulation
Once uterus and outflow tract abnormalities have been 
excluded, other causes of amenorrhea involve disorders of 
ovulation. The differential diagnosis is based on the results 
of initial tests, including a pregnancy test, gonadotropins 
(to determine whether the cause is likely to be ovarian or 
central), and assessment of hyperandrogenism (Fig. 11-2).
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Low estrogen levels in combination with normal or low 
levels of LH and FSH are seen with anatomic, genetic, 
or functional abnormalities that interfere with hypotha-
lamic GnRH secretion or normal pituitary responsive-
ness to GnRH. Although relatively uncommon, tumors 
and infiltrative diseases should be considered in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
(Chap. 2). These disorders may present with primary or 
secondary amenorrhea. They may occur in association 
with other features suggestive of hypothalamic or pitu-
itary dysfunction, such as short stature, diabetes insipidus, 
galactorrhea, and headache. Hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism also may be seen after cranial irradiation. In the 
postpartum period, it may be caused by pituitary necro-
sis (Sheehan’s syndrome) or lymphocytic hypophysitis. 
Because reproductive dysfunction is commonly associated 
with hyperprolactinemia from neuroanatomic lesions or 
medications, prolactin should be measured in all patients 
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (Chap. 2).
Isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) 
occurs in women, although it is more common in men. 
IHH generally presents with primary amenorrhea and 
is associated with anosmia in about 50% of women 
(termed Kallmann syndrome). Genetic causes of IHH 
Neuroanatomic abnormality or idiopathic 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Hypothalamic 
amenorrhea
R/O; discuss diet, exercise, 
stress
2° amenorrhea
R/O drugs, ↑ TSH
1° amenorrhea, 
short stature or 
clinical 
suspicion
Hyperandrogenism
↑ testosterone, 
hirsutism, acne
R/O tumor
R/O 21 hydroxylase 
deficiency
Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
Increased
MRI
Normal
PRL
Ovarian
insufficiency
Normal or low
Increased (x2)
Uterus and outflow tract
GYN referral
GYN referral
Asherman’s
syndrome
FSH
β-HCG
Pregnancy
Normal
Abnormal
AMENORRHEA/OLIGOMENORRHEA
Normal PRL, 
FSH
Negative trial of 
estrogen/ 
progesterone
Müllerian 
agenesis, cervical 
stenosis, vaginal 
septum, imperfo-
rate hymen
Uterine
instrumentation
Androgen
insensitivity
syndrome
–
+
Figure 11-2
Algorithm for evaluation of amenorrhea. β-hCG, beta human chorionic gonadotropin; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; 
PRL, prolactin; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
 
CHAPTER 11
Menstrual Disorders and Pelvic Pain
197
have been identified in approximately 35% of patients 
(Chaps. 8 and 10).
Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (HA) is caused 
by a mismatch between energy expenditure and energy 
intake. Recent studies suggest that variants in genes 
associated with IHH may increase susceptibility to these 
environmental inputs, accounting in part for the clini-
cal variability in this disorder. Leptin secretion may play 
a key role in transducing the signals from the periph-
ery to the hypothalamus in HA. The hypothalamic- 
pituitary-adrenal axis also may play a role. The diagnosis 
of HA generally can be made on the basis of a care-
ful history, a physical examination, and the demon-
stration of low levels of gonadotropins and normal 
prolactin levels. Eating disorders and chronic disease 
must be specifically excluded. An atypical history, 
headache, signs of other hypothalamic dysfunction, or 
hyperprolactinemia, even if mild, necessitates cranial 
imaging with CT or MRI to exclude a neuroanatomic 
cause.
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
Ovarian failure is considered premature when it occurs 
in women <40 years old and accounts for ∼10% of sec-
ondary amenorrhea. Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) 
has generally replaced the terms premature menopause and 
premature ovarian failure in recognition that this disor-
der represents a continuum of impaired ovarian func-
tion. Ovarian insufficiency is associated with the loss of 
negative-feedback restraint on the hypothalamus and 
pituitary, resulting in increased FSH and LH levels. FSH 
is a better marker of ovarian failure as its levels are less 
variable than those of LH. As with natural menopause, 
POI may wax and wane, and serial measurements may 
be necessary to establish the diagnosis.
Once the diagnosis of POI has been established, fur-
ther evaluation is indicated because of other health 
problems that may be associated with POI. For example, 
POI occurs in association with a variety of chromosomal 
abnormalities, including Turner syndrome, autoimmune 
polyglandular failure syndromes, radio- and chemother-
apy, and galactosemia. The recognition that early ovar-
ian failure occurs in premutation carriers of the fragile 
X syndrome is important because of the increased risk of 
severe mental retardation in male children with FMR1 
mutations. In the majority of cases, however, a cause for 
POI is not determined.
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism occurs rarely in 
other disorders, such as mutations in the FSH or LH 
receptors. Aromatase deficiency and 17α-hydroxylase 
deficiency are associated with elevated gonadotropins 
with hyperandrogenism and hypertension, respectively. 
Gonadotropin-secreting tumors in women of reproduc-
tive age generally present with high, rather than low, 
estrogen levels and cause ovarian hyperstimulation or 
dysfunctional bleeding.
Treatment	
Hypo- and Hypergonadotropic Causes of 
Amenorrhea
Amenorrhea almost always is associated with chroni-
cally low levels of estrogen, whether it is caused by 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism or ovarian insuf-
ficiency. Development of secondary sexual char-
acteristics requires gradual titration of estradiol 
replacement with eventual addition of progestin. 
Symptoms of hypoestrogenism can be treated with 
hormone replacement therapy or oral contraceptive 
pills. Patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
who are interested in fertility require treatment with 
pulsatile GnRH or exogenous FSH and LH, whereas 
patients with ovarian failure can consider oocyte 
donation, which has a high chance of success in this 
population.
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
PCOS is diagnosed on the basis of a combination of 
clinical or biochemical evidence of hyperandrogen-
ism, amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, and the ultrasound 
appearance of polycystic ovaries. Approximately half 
of patients with PCOS are obese, and abnormalities in 
insulin dynamics are common, as is metabolic syndrome. 
Symptoms generally begin shortly after menarche and 
are slowly progressive. Lean patients with PCOS gener-
ally have high LH levels in the presence of normal to 
low levels of FSH and estradiol. The LH/FSH ratio is 
less pronounced in obese patients in whom insulin resis-
tance is a more prominent feature.
Treatment	
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome
A major abnormality in patients with PCOS is the 
failure of regular, predictable ovulation. Thus, these 
patients are at risk for the development of dysfunc-
tional bleeding and endometrial hyperplasia associ-
ated with unopposed estrogen exposure. Endometrial 
protection can be achieved with the use of oral contra-
ceptives or progestins (medroxyprogesterone acetate, 
5–10 mg, or prometrium, 200 mg daily for 10–14 days 
of each month). Oral contraceptives are also useful 
for management of hyperandrogenic symptoms, as 
is spironolactone, which functions as a weak andro-
gen receptor antagonist. Management of the asso-
ciated metabolic syndrome may be appropriate 
for some patients (Chap. 18). For patients inter-
ested in fertility, weight control is a critical first step.  
Clomiphene citrate is highly effective as a first-line 
treatment, with or without the addition of metformin. 
Exogenous gonadotropins can be used by experienced  
practitioners.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
198
Pelvic Pain
The mechanisms that cause pelvic pain are similar to 
those that cause abdominal pain and include inflam-
mation of the parietal peritoneum, obstruction of hol-
low viscera, vascular disturbances, and pain originating 
in the abdominal wall. Pelvic pain may reflect pelvic 
disease per se but also may reflect extrapelvic disorders 
that refer pain to the pelvis. In up to 60% of cases, pel-
vic pain can be attributed to gastrointestinal problems, 
including appendicitis, cholecystitis, infections, intestinal 
obstruction, diverticulitis, and inflammatory bowel dis-
ease. Urinary tract and musculoskeletal disorders are also 
common causes of pelvic pain.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Pelvic Pain
A thorough history that includes the type, location, radi-
ation, and status with respect to increasing or decreas-
ing severity can help identify the cause of acute pelvic 
pain. Specific associations with vaginal bleeding, sexual 
activity, defecation, urination, movement, or eating 
should be specifically sought. A careful menstrual his-
tory is essential to assess the possibility of pregnancy. 
Determination of whether the pain is acute versus 
chronic and cyclic versus noncyclic will direct further 
investigation (Table 11-1). However, disorders that 
cause cyclic pain occasionally may cause noncyclic pain, 
and the converse is also true.
Acute Pelvic Pain
Pelvic inflammatory disease most commonly presents with 
bilateral lower abdominal pain. It is generally of recent 
onset and is exacerbated by intercourse or jarring move-
ments. Fever is present in about half of these patients; 
abnormal uterine bleeding occurs in about one-third. 
New vaginal discharge, urethritis, and chills may be 
present but are less specific signs. Adnexal pathology can 
present acutely and may be due to rupture, bleeding or 
torsion of cysts, or, much less commonly, neoplasms of 
the ovary, fallopian tubes, or paraovarian areas. Fever 
may be present with ovarian torsion. Ectopic pregnancy 
is associated with right- or left-sided lower abdominal 
pain and vaginal bleeding, with clinical signs generally 
appearing 6–8 weeks after the last normal menstrual 
period. Orthostatic signs and fever may be present. 
Risk factors include the presence of known tubal dis-
ease, previous ectopic pregnancies, a history of infertil-
ity, diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure of the mother in 
utero, or a history of pelvic infections. Uterine pathology 
includes endometritis and, less frequently, degenerating 
leiomyomas (fibroids). Endometritis often is associated 
with vaginal bleeding and systemic signs of infection. It 
occurs in the setting of sexually transmitted infections, 
uterine instrumentation, or postpartum infection.
A sensitive pregnancy test, complete blood count with 
differential, urinalysis, tests for chlamydial and gonococ-
cal infections, and abdominal ultrasound aid in making 
the diagnosis and directing further management.
Treatment	
Acute Pelvic Pain
Treatment of acute pelvic pain depends on the sus-
pected etiology but may require surgical or gyneco-
logic intervention. Conservative management is an 
important consideration for ovarian cysts, if torsion 
is not suspected, to avoid unnecessary pelvic surgery 
and the subsequent risk of infertility due to adhesions. 
The majority of unruptured ectopic pregnancies are 
now treated with methotrexate, which is effective in 
84–96% of cases. However, surgical treatment may be 
required.
Chronic Pelvic Pain
Some women experience discomfort at the time of ovu-
lation (mittelschmerz). The pain can be quite intense but 
is generally of short duration. The mechanism is thought 
to involve rapid expansion of the dominant follicle, 
although it also may be caused by peritoneal irritation by 
follicular fluid released at the time of ovulation. Many 
women experience premenstrual symptoms such as breast 
discomfort, food cravings, and abdominal bloating or dis-
comfort. These moliminal symptoms are a good predictor 
of ovulation, although their absence is less helpful.
Table 11-1 
Causes of Pelvic Pain
Acute
Chronic
Cyclic pelvic 
pain
Premenstrual  
symptoms
Mittelschmerz
Dysmenorrhea
Endometriosis
Noncyclic 
pelvic pain
Pelvic inflamma-
tory disease
Pelvic congestion 
syndrome
Ruptured or hem-
orrhagic ovarian 
cyst or ovarian 
torsion
Adhesions and  
retroversion of the 
uterus
Pelvic malignancy
Vulvodynia
History of sexual 
abuse
Ectopic  
pregnancy
Endometritis
Acute growth or 
degeneration of 
uterine myoma
 
CHAPTER 11
Menstrual Disorders and Pelvic Pain
199
Dysmenorrhea
Dysmenorrhea refers to the crampy lower abdominal dis-
comfort that begins with the onset of menstrual bleeding 
and gradually decreases over the next 12–72 h. It may 
be associated with nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, and head-
ache and occurs in 60–93% of adolescents, beginning 
with the establishment of regular ovulatory cycles. Its 
prevalence decreases after pregnancy and with the use of 
oral contraceptives.
Primary dysmenorrhea results from increased stores 
of prostaglandin precursors, which are generated by 
sequential stimulation of the uterus by estrogen and 
progesterone. During menstruation these precursors are 
converted to prostaglandins, which cause intense uter-
ine contractions, decreased blood flow, and increased 
peripheral nerve hypersensitivity, resulting in pain.
Secondary dysmenorrhea is caused by underlying pel-
vic pathology. Endometriosis results from the presence of 
endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. These 
deposits of ectopic endometrium respond to hormonal 
stimulation and cause dysmenorrhea, which generally pre-
cedes menstruation by several days. Endometriosis also 
may be associated with painful intercourse, painful bowel 
movements, and tender nodules in the uterosacral ligament. 
Fibrosis and adhesions can produce lateral displacement 
of the cervix. The CA125 level may be increased, but it 
has low negative predictive value. Definitive diagnosis 
requires laparoscopy. Symptomatology does not always 
predict the extent of endometriosis. Other secondary 
causes of dysmenorrhea include adenomyosis, a condition 
caused by the presence of ectopic endometrial glands and 
stroma within the myometrium. Cervical stenosis may 
result from trauma, infection, or surgery.
Treatment	
Dysmenorrhea
Local application of heat; use of vitamins B1, B6, and 
E and magnesium; acupuncture; yoga; and exercise 
are of some benefit for the treatment of dysmenor-
rhea. However, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) are the most effective treatment and provide 
>80% sustained response rates. Ibuprofen, naproxen, 
ketoprofen, mefanamic acid, and nimesulide are all 
superior to placebo. Treatment should be started a 
day before expected menses and generally is con-
tinued for 2–3 days. Oral contraceptives also reduce 
symptoms of dysmenorrhea. Failure of response to 
NSAIDs and oral contraceptives is suggestive of a pel-
vic disorder such as endometriosis, and diagnostic 
laparoscopy should be considered to guide further 
treatment.
 JoAnn E. Manson  I   Shari S. Bassuk 
200
 Menopause is the permanent cessation of menstrua-
tion due to loss of ovarian follicular function. It is diag-
nosed retrospectively after 12 months of amenorrhea. 
The average age at menopause is 51 years among U.S. 
women.  Perimenopause refers to the time period pre-
ceding menopause, when fertility wanes and menstrual 
cycle irregularity increases, until the fi rst year after ces-
sation of menses. The onset of perimenopause precedes 
the fi nal menses by 2 to 8 years, with a mean duration 
of four years. Smoking accelerates the menopausal tran-
sition by 2 years. 
 Although the peri- and postmenopausal transi-
tions share many symptoms, the physiology and clini-
cal management differ. Low-dose oral contraceptives 
have become a therapeutic mainstay in perimenopause, 
whereas postmenopausal hormone therapy (HT) has 
been a common method of symptom alleviation after 
menstruation ceases. 
 perIMenopause 
 PHysiology 
 Ovarian mass and fertility decline sharply after age 35 
and even more precipitously during perimenopause; 
depletion of primary follicles, a process that begins before 
birth, occurs steadily until menopause ( Chap. 10 ). In 
perimenopause, intermenstrual intervals shorten signif-
icantly (typically by 3 days) due to an accelerated fol-
licular phase. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels 
rise due to altered folliculogenesis and reduced inhibin 
secretion. In contrast to the consistently high FSH and 
low estradiol levels seen in menopause, perimenopause 
is characterized by “irregularly irregular” hormone lev-
els. The propensity for anovulatory cycles can produce 
a hyperestrogenic, hypoprogestagenic environment that 
may account for the increased incidence of endometrial 
hyperplasia or carcinoma, uterine polyps, and leiomy-
oma observed among women of perimenopausal age. 
Mean serum levels of selected ovarian and pituitary hor-
mones during the menopausal transition are shown in 
Fig. 12-1 . With transition into menopause, estradiol 
levels fall markedly, whereas estrone levels are rela-
tively preserved, refl ecting peripheral aromatization 
of adrenal and ovarian androgens. FSH levels increase 
more than those of luteinizing hormone (LH), presum-
ably because of the loss of inhibin, as well as estrogen 
feedback. 
 diagnostic tests 
 Because of their extreme intraindividual variability, 
FSH and estradiol levels are imperfect diagnostic indica-
tors of perimenopause in menstruating women. How-
ever, a low FSH in the early follicular phase (days 2 
through 5) of the menstrual cycle is inconsistent with a 
diagnosis of perimenopause. FSH measurement can also 
aid in assessing fertility; levels of <20 mIU/mL, 20 to 
<30 mIU/mL, and ≥30 mIU/mL measured on day 3 
of the cycle indicate a good, fair, and poor likelihood of 
achieving pregnancy, respectively. 
 syMPtoMs 
 Determining whether symptoms that develop in midlife 
are due to ovarian senescence or to other age-related 
changes is diffi cult. There is strong evidence that the 
menopausal transition can cause hot fl ashes, night 
sweats, irregular bleeding, and vaginal dryness, and 
moderate evidence that it can cause sleep disturbances 
in some women. There is inconclusive or insuffi cient 
evidence that ovarian aging is a major cause of mood 
swings, depression, impaired memory or concentra-
tion, somatic symptoms, urinary incontinence, or sexual 
 THE MENOPAUSE TRANSITION AND 
POSTMENOPAUSAL HORMONE THERAPY 
 CHapter 12 
 
CHAPTER 12
The Menopause Transition and Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
201
dysfunction. In one U.S. study, nearly 60% of women 
reported hot flashes in the 2 years before their final 
menses. Symptom intensity, duration, frequency, and 
effects on quality of life are highly variable.
Treatment	
Perimenopause
For women with irregular or heavy menses or hormone-
related symptoms that impair quality of life, low-dose 
combined oral contraceptives are a staple of therapy. 
Static doses of estrogen and progestin (e.g., 20 μg of 
ethinyl estradiol and 1 mg of norethindrone acetate 
daily for 21 days each month) can eliminate vasomo-
tor symptoms and restore regular cyclicity. Oral contra-
ceptives provide other benefits, including protection 
against ovarian and endometrial cancers and increased 
bone density, although it is not clear whether use dur-
ing perimenopause decreases fracture risk later in life. 
Moreover, the contraceptive benefit is important, given 
that the unintentional pregnancy rate among women in 
their forties rivals that of adolescents. Contraindications 
to oral contraceptive use include cigarette smoking, 
liver disease, a history of thromboembolism or cardio-
vascular disease, breast cancer, or unexplained vaginal 
bleeding. Progestin-only formulations (e.g., 0.35 mg 
norethindrone daily) or medroxyprogesterone (Depo-
Provera) injections (e.g., 150 mg IM every 3 months) may 
provide an alternative for the treatment of perimeno-
pausal menorrhagia in women who smoke or have car-
diovascular risk factors. Although progestins neither 
regularize cycles nor reduce the number of bleeding 
days, they reduce the volume of menstrual flow.
Nonhormonal strategies to reduce menstrual flow 
include use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents 
such as mefenamic acid (initial dose of 500 mg at start 
of menses, then 250 mg qid for 2–3 days) or, when
medical approaches fail, endometrial ablation. It should 
be noted that menorrhagia requires an evaluation to 
rule out uterine disorders. Transvaginal ultrasound with 
saline enhancement is useful for detecting leiomyo-
mata or polyps, and endometrial aspiration can identify 
hyperplastic changes.
Transition to Menopause  For sexually 
active women using contraceptive hormones to allevi-
ate perimenopausal symptoms, the question of when 
and if to switch to HT must be individualized. Doses of 
estrogen and progestogen (either synthetic proges-
tins or natural forms of progesterone) in HT are lower 
than those in oral contraceptives and have not been 
documented to prevent pregnancy. Although a 1-year 
absence of spontaneous menses reliably indicates ovu-
lation cessation, it is not possible to assess the natural 
menstrual pattern while a woman is taking an oral con-
traceptive. Women willing to switch to a barrier method 
of contraception should do so; if menses occur spon-
taneously, oral contraceptive use can be resumed. The 
average age of final menses among relatives can serve 
as a guide for when to initiate this process, which can be 
repeated yearly until menopause has occurred.
Menopause and Postmenopausal 
Hormone Therapy
One of the most complex health care decisions facing 
women is whether to use postmenopausal HT. Once 
prescribed primarily to relieve vasomotor symptoms, 
HT has been promoted as a strategy to forestall vari-
ous disorders that accelerate after menopause, includ-
ing osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease. In 2000, 
nearly 40% of postmenopausal women age 50–74 in 
the United States had used HT. This widespread use 
occurred despite the paucity of conclusive data, until 
recently, on the health consequences of such therapy. 
Although many women rely on their health care pro-
viders for a definitive answer to the question of whether 
to use postmenopausal hormones, balancing the benefits 
and risks for an individual patient is challenging.
Although observational studies suggest that HT pre-
vents cardiovascular and other chronic diseases, the 
apparent benefits may result at least in part from differ-
ences between women who opt to take postmenopausal 
hormones and women who do not. Those choosing 
HT tend to be healthier, have greater access to medi-
cal care, are more compliant with prescribed treatments, 
and maintain a more health-promoting lifestyle. Ran-
domized trials, which eliminate these confounding factors, 
have not consistently confirmed the benefits found in 
observational studies. Indeed, the largest HT trial to date, 
the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI), which examined 
LH or FSH, IU/L
80
70
0
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
FSH (IU/L)
LH (IU/L)
Estradiol or estrone, pg/mL
Estrone (pg/mL)
Estradiol (pg/mL)
8
Menopause, years
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Figure 12-1
Mean serum levels of ovarian and pituitary hormones 
during the menopausal transition. FSH, follicle-stimulating 
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone. (From JL Shifren, I Schiff: 
J Womens Health Gend Based Med 9 Suppl 1:S3, 2000, with 
permission.)
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
202
more than 27,000 postmenopausal women aged 50–79 
(mean age, 63) for an average of 5–7 years, was stopped 
early because of an overall unfavorable risk-benefit ratio 
in the estrogen-progestin arm and an excess risk of stroke 
that was not offset by a reduced risk of coronary heart 
disease (CHD) in the estrogen-only arm.
The following summary offers a decision-making guide 
based on a synthesis of currently available evidence. Pre-
vention of cardiovascular disease is eliminated from the 
equation due to lack of evidence for such benefits in 
recent randomized clinical trials.
Benefits and Risks of 
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
(Table 12-1)
Definite benefits
Symptoms of menopause
Compelling evidence, including data from randomized 
clinical trials, indicates that estrogen therapy is highly 
effective for controlling vasomotor and genitourinary 
symptoms. Alternative approaches, including the use 
of antidepressants (such as venlafaxine, 75–150 mg/d), 
gabapentin (300–900 mg/d), clonidine (0.1–0.2 mg/d), 
or vitamin E (400–800 IU/d), or the consumption of 
soy-based products or other phytoestrogens, may also 
alleviate vasomotor symptoms, although they are less 
effective than HT. For genitourinary symptoms, the 
efficacy of vaginal estrogen is similar to that of oral or 
transdermal estrogen.
Osteoporosis
(See also Chap. 28)
Bone density
By reducing bone turnover and resorption rates, estro-
gen slows the aging-related bone loss experienced by 
most postmenopausal women. More than 50 random-
ized trials have demonstrated that postmenopausal estro-
gen therapy, with or without a progestogen, rapidly 
increases bone mineral density at the spine by 4–6% and 
at the hip by 2–3%, and maintains those increases dur-
ing treatment.
Fractures
Data from observational studies indicate a 50–80% 
lower risk of vertebral fracture and a 25–30% lower risk 
of hip, wrist, and other peripheral fractures among cur-
rent estrogen users; addition of a progestogen does not 
appear to modify this benefit. In the WHI, 5–7 years 
of either combined estrogen-progestin or estrogen-
only therapy was associated with a 30–40% reduction 
in hip fracture and 20–30% fewer total fractures among 
a population unselected for osteoporosis. Bisphospho-
nates (such as alendronate, 10 mg/d or 70 mg once per 
week; risedronate, 5 mg/d or 35 mg once per week; or 
ibandronate, 2.5 mg/d or 150 mg once per month or 
3 mg every 3 months IV) and raloxifene (60 mg/d), a 
selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), have 
been shown in randomized trials to increase bone mass 
density and decrease fracture rates. A recently available 
option for treatment of osteoporosis is parathyroid hor-
mone (teriparatide, 20 μg/d SC). These agents, unlike 
estrogen, do not appear to have adverse effects on the 
endometrium or breast. Increased physical activity and 
adequate calcium (1000–1200 mg/d through diet or 
supplements in two to three divided doses) and vita-
min D (600–1000 IU/d) intakes may also reduce the 
risk of osteoporosis-related fractures. (Blood levels of 
25-hydroxyvitamin D of ≥75 nmol/L are optimal for 
bone-density maintenance and fracture prevention.) 
The Fracture Risk Assessment (FRAX®) score, an algo-
rithm that combines an individual’s bone-density score 
with age and other risk factors to predict her 10-year 
risk of hip and major osteoporotic fracture, may be of 
use in guiding decisions about pharmacologic treatment 
(see http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/index.htm).
Definite risks
Endometrial cancer (with estrogen alone)
A combined analysis of 30 observational studies found 
a tripling of endometrial cancer risk among short-term 
(1–5 years) users of unopposed estrogen and a nearly 
tenfold increased risk among users for 10 or more years. 
These findings are supported by results from the ran-
domized Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interven-
tions (PEPI) trial, in which 24% of women assigned 
to unopposed estrogen for 3 years developed atypical 
endometrial hyperplasia, a premalignant lesion, com-
pared with only 1% of women assigned to placebo. Use 
of a progestogen, which opposes the effects of estrogen 
on the endometrium, eliminates these risks.
Venous thromboembolism
A meta-analysis of 12 studies—8 case-control, 1 cohort, 
and 3 randomized trials—found that current estrogen 
use was associated with a doubling of venous thrombo-
embolism risk in postmenopausal women. Relative risks 
of thromboembolic events were even greater (2.7–5.1) 
in the three trials included in the meta-analysis. Results 
from the WHI indicate a twofold increase in risk of 
venous and pulmonary thromboembolism associated 
with estrogen-progestin and a one-third increase in this 
risk with estrogen-only therapy. Transdermal estrogen, 
taken alone or with certain progestogens (micronized 
progesterone or pregnane derivatives), appears to be a 
safer alternative with respect to thrombotic risk.
Breast cancer (with estrogen-progestin)
An increased risk of breast cancer has been found 
among current or recent estrogen users in observational 
 
CHAPTER 12
The Menopause Transition and Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
203
Table 12-1
Benefits and Risks of Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy (HT) in Primary Prevention Settingsa
Benefit or Risk
Relative
Absolute
Outcome
Effect
Observational 
Studies
WHIb, Except Where 
Noted
WHIb, Except Where Noted
Definite Benefits
Symptoms of 
menopause
Definite improvement
↓ 70–80% decreased 
risk
↓65–90% decreased 
riskc
Osteoporosis
Definite increase in 
bone mineral density 
and decrease in  
fracture risk
↓ 20–50% decreased 
risk for fracture
E+P: ↓ 33% decreased 
risk for hip fracture
E+P: 50 fewer hip fractures 
(110 vs 160) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: ↓ 39% decreased 
risk for hip fracture
E: 60 fewer hip fractures  
(110 vs 170) per 100,000 
woman-years
Definite Risks
Endometrial  
cancer
Definite increase in 
risk with estrogen 
alone; no increase in 
risk with estrogen-
progestin
E+P: No increase in 
risk
E: ↑ >300% 
increased risk (1–5 
years); >600% 
increased risk (≥5 
years)
E+P: No increase in 
risk
E: Not applicable
E+P: No difference in risk
E: 46 excess cases per 
100,000 woman-years with 
unopposed estrogen  
(observational studies)d
Venous thrombo-
embolism
Definite increase in 
risk
↑ 110% increased 
risk
E+P: ↑ 106% 
increased risk
E+P: 180 excess cases 
(350 vs 170) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: ↑ 32% increased 
risk
E: 80 excess cases (300 vs 
220) per 100,000  
woman-years
Breast cancer
Increase in risk with 
long-term use  
(≥5 years) of 
estrogen-progestin
E+P: ↑ 63% 
increased risk  
(≥5 years)
E: ↑ 20% increased 
risk (≥5 years)
E+P: ↑ 24% increased 
risk
E: No increase in risk
10–30 excess cases per 
10,000 women using HT 
for 5 years; 30–90 excess 
cases per 10,000 women 
after 10 years’ use; 50–200 
excess cases per 10,000 
women after 15 years’ use 
(estimate derived from 
observational data and 
WHI E+P findings)
Gallbladder  
disease
Definite increase in 
risk
↑ 110% increased 
risk
E+P: ↑ 67% increased 
risk
E+P: 180 excess cases 
(460 vs 280) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: ↑ 93% increased 
risk
E: 310 excess cases  
(650 vs 340) per 100,000 
woman-years
Probable or Uncertain Risks and Benefits
Coronary heart 
disease
Probable increase 
in risk among older 
women and women 
many years past 
menopause; possible 
decrease in risk or no 
effect in younger or 
recent menopausal 
women
E+P: ↓36% 
decreased risk
E: ↓ 45% decreased 
risk
E+P: ↑ 24% 
increased risk
E: No increase or 
decrease in risk
E+P: 60 excess cases 
(390 vs 330) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: No difference in risk
(continued)
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
204
studies; this risk is directly related to duration of use. In 
a meta-analysis of 51 case-control and cohort studies, 
short-term use (<5 years) of postmenopausal HT did 
not appreciably elevate breast cancer incidence, whereas 
long-term use (≥5 years) was associated with a 35% 
increase in risk. In contrast to findings for endometrial 
cancer, combined estrogen-progestin regimens appear 
to increase breast cancer risk more than estrogen alone. 
Data from randomized trials also indicate that estrogen-
progestin raises breast cancer risk. In the WHI, women 
assigned to receive combination hormones for an 
average of 5.6 years were 24% more likely to develop 
breast cancer than women assigned to placebo, but 7.1 
years of estrogen-only therapy did not increase risk. 
Indeed, the WHI showed a trend toward a reduction 
in breast cancer risk with estrogen alone, although it is 
unclear whether this finding would pertain to formu-
lations of estrogen other than conjugated equine estro-
gens or to treatment durations longer than 7 years. In 
the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study 
(HERS), 4 years of combination therapy was associated 
with a 27% increase in breast cancer risk. Although the 
Table 12-1
Benefits and Risks of Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy (HT) in Primary Prevention Settingsa 
(Continued)
Benefit or Risk
Relative
Absolute
Outcome
Effect
Observational 
Studies
WHIb, Except Where 
Noted
WHIb, Except Where 
Noted
Stroke
Probable increase in 
risk
↑ 12% increased risk
E+P: ↑ 31% 
increased risk
E+P: 70 excess cases 
(310 vs 240) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: ↑ 39% increased 
risk
E: 120 excess cases  
(440 vs 320) per 100,000 
woman-years
Ovarian cancer
Probable increase in 
risk with long-term 
use (≥5 years)
E+P: No effect (<4 
years use)
E+P: ↑ 58% increased 
riske
E+P: 10 excess cases 
(40 vs 30) per 100,000 
woman-yearse
E: ↑ 80% increased 
risk (≥10 years)
E: Not yet available
Colorectal  
cancer
Probable decrease in 
risk with estrogen-
progestin
↓ 34% decreased risk
E+P: ↓ 37% 
decreased risk
E+P: 70 fewer cases 
(90 vs 160) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: No increase or 
decrease in risk
E: No difference in risk
Diabetes mellitus
Probable decrease in 
risk
↓ 20% decreased risk
E+P: ↓ 21% 
decreased risk
E+P: 150 fewer cases 
(610 vs 760) per 100,000 
woman-years
E: ↓ 12% decreased 
riske
E: 140 fewer cases  
(1160 vs 1300) per 100,000 
woman-yearse
Cognitive  
dysfunction
Unproven decrease in 
risk (inconsistent data 
from observational 
studies and random-
ized trials)
↓ 34% decreased risk
↑ 76% increased risk 
for dementia at age 
≥65
120–230 excess cases of 
dementia per 100,000 
woman-years
aE, estrogen alone; E+P, estrogen plus progestin. Most studies have assessed conjugated equine estrogen alone or in combination with 
medroxyprogesterone acetate.
bWHI, Women’s Health Initiative. The estrogen–plus–progestin arm of the WHI assessed 5.6 years of conjugated equine estrogen (0.625 mg/d) 
plus medroxyprogesterone acetate (2.5 mg/d) versus placebo. The estrogen–alone arm of the WHI assessed 7.1 years of conjugated equine 
estrogen (0.625 mg/d) versus placebo.
cData are from other randomized trials. The WHI was not designed to assess effect of HT on menopausal symptoms.
dJE Manson, KA Martin: N Engl J Med 345:34, 2001.
eNot statistically significant.
 
CHAPTER 12
The Menopause Transition and Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
205
latter finding was not statistically significant, the totality 
of evidence strongly implicates estrogen-progestin ther-
apy in breast carcinogenesis.
Gallbladder disease
Large observational studies report a two- to threefold 
increased risk of gallstones or cholecystectomy among 
postmenopausal women taking oral estrogen. In the WHI, 
women randomized to estrogen-progestin or estro-
gen alone had a 67 and 93% greater risk, respectively, 
of undergoing cholecystectomy than those assigned to 
placebo. Increased risks were also observed in HERS. 
Transdermal HT might be a safer alternative, but fur-
ther research is needed.
Probable or uncertain risks and benefits
Coronary heart disease/stroke
Until recently, HT had been enthusiastically recom-
mended as a possible cardioprotective agent. In the 
past 3 decades, multiple observational studies sug-
gested, in the aggregate, that estrogen use leads to a 
35–50% reduction in CHD incidence among post-
menopausal women. The biologic plausibility of such 
an association is supported by data from randomized 
trials demonstrating that exogenous estrogen lowers 
plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and 
raises high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels 
by 10–15%. Administration of estrogen also favorably 
affects lipoprotein(a) levels, LDL oxidation, endothelial 
vascular function, fibrinogen, and plasminogen activa-
tor inhibitor-1. However, estrogen therapy also has 
unfavorable effects on other biomarkers of cardiovas-
cular risk: it boosts triglyceride levels; promotes coag-
ulation via factor VII, prothrombin fragments 1 and 2, 
and fibrinopeptide A elevations; and raises levels of the 
inflammatory marker C-reactive protein.
Randomized trials of estrogen or combined estrogen-
progestin in women with preexisting cardiovascular dis-
ease (CVD) have not confirmed the benefits reported in 
observational studies. In HERS, a secondary prevention 
trial designed to test the efficacy and safety of estrogen-
progestin therapy on clinical cardiovascular outcomes, 
the 4-year incidence of coronary mortality and nonfa-
tal myocardial infarction was similar in the active treat-
ment and placebo groups, and a 50% increase in risk of 
coronary events was noted during the first year of the 
study among participants assigned to the active treat-
ment group. Although it is possible that progestin may 
mitigate estrogen’s benefits, the Estrogen Replacement 
and Atherosclerosis (ERA) trial indicated that angio-
graphically determined progression of coronary athero-
sclerosis was unaffected by either opposed or unopposed 
estrogen treatment. Moreover, the Papworth Hormone 
Replacement Therapy Atherosclerosis Study, a trial of 
transdermal estradiol with and without norethindrone; 
the Women’s Estrogen for Stroke Trial (WEST), a trial 
of oral 17β-estradiol; and the EStrogen in the Preven-
tion of ReInfarction Trial (ESPRIT), a trial of oral 
estradiol valerate, found no cardiovascular benefits of 
the regimens studied. Thus, in clinical trials, HT has not 
proved effective for the secondary prevention of CVD 
in postmenopausal women.
Primary prevention trials also suggest an early increase 
in cardiovascular risk and absence of cardioprotection 
with postmenopausal HT. Results from the WHI sug-
gest a deleterious cardiovascular effect of HT. Women 
assigned to 5.6 years of estrogen-progestin therapy were 
24% more likely to develop CHD and 31% more likely 
to suffer a stroke than those assigned to placebo. In the 
estrogen-only arm of the WHI, a similar increase in 
stroke and no effect on CHD were observed.
However, a closer look at available data suggests that 
timing of initiation of HT may critically influence the 
association between such therapy and CHD. Estro-
gen may slow early stages of atherosclerosis but have 
adverse effects on advanced atherosclerotic lesions. It 
has been hypothesized that the prothrombotic and pro-
inflammatory effects of estrogen manifest themselves 
predominantly among women with subclinical lesions 
who initiate HT well after the menopausal transition, 
whereas women with less arterial damage who start HT 
early in menopause may derive cardiovascular benefit 
because they have not yet developed advanced lesions. 
Nonhuman primate data support this concept. Conju-
gated estrogens had no effect on the extent of coronary 
artery plaque in cynomolgus monkeys assigned to estro-
gen alone or combined with progestin starting 2 years 
(approximately 6 human years) after oophorectomy and 
well after the establishment of atherosclerosis. However, 
administration of exogenous hormones immediately 
after oophorectomy, during the early stages of athero-
sclerosis, reduced the extent of plaque by 70%.
Lending further credence to this hypothesis are 
results of subgroup analyses of observational and clini-
cal trial data. For example, among women who entered 
the WHI trial with a better cholesterol profile, estro-
gen with or without progestin led to a 40% lower risk 
for incident CHD. Among women who entered with 
a worse cholesterol profile, therapy resulted in a 73% 
higher risk (p for interaction = 0.02). Moreover, although 
there was no association between estrogen-only ther-
apy and CHD in the WHI trial cohort as a whole, such 
therapy was associated with a CHD risk reduction of 
37% among participants aged 50–59. By contrast, a risk 
reduction of only 8% was observed among those aged 
60–69, and a risk increase of 11% was found among 
those aged 70–79. Due to the relatively small number 
of cases of myocardial infarction or coronary death (the 
primary definition of CHD in the WHI), especially in 
the younger women, these intra- and inter-age group 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
206
differences were not statistically significant. However, 
when the definition of CHD was widened to include 
coronary bypass surgery or percutaneous coronary inter-
ventions, estrogen-only therapy was associated with a 
significant 45% reduction in CHD among women in 
the youngest age group. Moreover, estrogen was asso-
ciated with lower levels of coronary artery calcified 
plaque.
Although age did not have a similar effect in the 
estrogen-progestin arm of the WHI, CHD risks steadily 
increased with years since menopause. Estrogen-progestin 
was associated with an 11% risk reduction for women 
less than 10 years beyond menopause, but was associ-
ated with a 22% increase in risk for women 10–19 
years from menopause, and a 71% increase in risk for 
women 20 years or more from menopause (only the lat-
ter was statistically significant). In the large observational 
Nurses’ Health Study, women who chose to start HT 
within 4 years of menopause experienced a lower risk 
of CHD than did nonusers, whereas those who began 
therapy 10 or more years after menopause appeared to 
receive little coronary benefit. Because observational 
studies include a high proportion of women who begin 
HT within 3–4 years of menopause and clinical trials 
include a high proportion of women 12 or more years 
past menopause, these findings help to reconcile some 
of the apparent discrepancies between the two types of 
studies.
Whether or not age at initiation of HT influences 
stroke risk is not well understood. In the WHI and 
the Nurses’ Health Study, HT was associated with an 
excess risk of stroke in all age groups. Further research is 
needed on age, time since menopause, and other clini-
cal characteristics as well as on biomarkers that predict 
increases or decreases in cardiovascular risk associated 
with exogenous HT. Furthermore, it remains uncer-
tain whether different doses, formulations, or routes of 
administration of HT will produce different cardiovas-
cular effects.
Colorectal cancer
Observational studies have suggested that HT reduces 
risks of colon and rectal cancer, although the estimated 
magnitudes of the relative benefits ranged from 8 to 
34% in various meta-analyses. In the WHI, the sole trial 
to examine the issue, estrogen-progestin was associated 
with a significant 44% reduction in colorectal cancer 
over a 5.6-year period, although no benefit was seen 
with 7 years of estrogen-only therapy.
Cognitive decline and dementia
A meta-analysis of ten case-control and two cohort 
studies suggested that postmenopausal HT is associ-
ated with a 34% decreased risk of dementia. Subse-
quent randomized trials, including the WHI, however, 
have failed to demonstrate any benefit of estrogen or 
estrogen-progestin therapy on the progression of mild 
to moderate Alzheimer’s disease and/or have indicated 
a potential adverse effect of HT on the incidence of 
dementia, at least in women aged 65 and older. Deter-
mining whether timing of initiation of HT influences 
cognitive outcomes will require further study.
Ovarian cancer and other disorders
On the basis of limited observational and randomized 
data, it has been hypothesized that HT increases the risk 
of ovarian cancer and reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. Results from the WHI support these hypoth-
eses. The WHI also found that estrogen-progestin use 
was associated with increased lung cancer mortality.
Changes in health status after discontinuation 
of hormone therapy
In the WHI cohort as a whole, the elevated risks for 
CHD, stroke, and venous thromboembolism associated 
with active use of estrogen-progestin disappeared within 
2.4 years after discontinuation of therapy, as did the 
benefits, including amelioration of hot flashes and pro-
tection against osteoporotic fractures and colorectal can-
cer. A slightly elevated risk for breast cancer persisted, 
and a suggestion of higher risks for lung cancer, total 
cancer, and total mortality emerged. Postintervention 
results stratified by age or time since menopause onset 
are not yet available.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
The rational use of postmenopausal HT requires bal-
ancing the potential benefits and risks. Figure 12-2 
provides one approach to decision making. The clini-
cian should first determine whether the patient has 
moderate to severe menopausal symptoms, the only 
indication for initiating systemic HT (urogenital symp-
toms in the absence of vasomotor symptoms may be 
treated with vaginal estrogen). The benefits and risks 
of such therapy should then be reviewed with the 
patient, giving more emphasis to absolute than to rela-
tive measures of effect, and pointing out uncertainties 
in clinical knowledge where relevant. Because chronic 
disease rates generally increase with age, absolute risks 
tend to be greater in older women, even when relative 
risks remain similar. Potential side effects—especially 
vaginal bleeding that may result from use of combined 
estrogen-progestogen formulations recommended for 
women with an intact uterus—should be noted. The 
patient’s own preference regarding therapy should be 
elicited and factored into the decision. Contraindica-
tions to HT should be assessed routinely and include 
unexplained vaginal bleeding, active liver disease, 
venous thromboembolism, history of endometrial can-
cer (except stage 1 without deep invasion) or breast 
cancer, and history of CHD, stroke, transient ischemic 
attack, or diabetes. Relative contraindications include
 
CHAPTER 12
The Menopause Transition and Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
207
No
Yes
1. Significant symptoms of menopause (moderate to 
severe hot flashes, night sweats)?b
No HT
No HT
2. Contraindications to HT?c
Years since final menstrual periode
No HTg
Very low (<5%)
Low  (5 to <10%)
Moderate (10 to <20%)
High (≥20%)
≤5
Go to Q4
Go to Q4
Go to Q4f
No HT
6–10
Go to Q4
Go to Q4f
No HT
No HT
>10
No HT
No HT
No HT
No HT
4. Increased risk of stroke (e.g., Framingham Stroke 
Risk Score of ≥10% over a 10-year period)?
No
Yes
No
Yes
3. Assess CHD risk and years since final menstrual period
Below average 
or average
Above average
<5 years
HT OK
Avoid HTl
<7 years
HT OK
Avoid HTl
Estrogen plus
progestogen
Estrogen alone
6. Only if response to Q5 above is “uncertain,”
then consider:
At increased risk of osteoporotic fracture?n
If no, convert “uncertain” in Q5 to “No HT.”
If yes, convert “uncertain” in Q5 to “HT OK.”
 
≥5 years
Uncertain; 
go to Q6k
No HTm
≥7 yearsj
Uncertain; 
go to Q6
No HTm
5. Select duration of HT useh based on type of therapy and breast cancer risk
Breast Cancer Riski
CHD risk over 10 years 
(Framingham 
CHD risk score)d
CHART TO IDENTIFY CANDIDATES FOR HTa
Figure 12-2
Chart for identifying appropriate candidates for postmeno-
pausal hormone therapy (HT). CHD, coronary heart disease.
aReassess each step at least once every 6–12 months (assuming 
patient’s continued preference for HT).
bWomen who have vaginal dryness without moderate to severe 
vasomotor symptoms may be candidates for vaginal estrogen.
cTraditional contraindications: unexplained vaginal bleeding; active 
liver disease; history of venous thromboembolism due to pregnancy, 
oral contraceptive use, or unknown etiology; blood clotting disor-
der; history of breast or endometrial cancer; history of CHD, stroke, 
transient ischemic attack, or diabetes. For other contraindications, 
including high triglycerides (>400 mg/dL); active gallbladder disease; 
and history of venous thromboembolism due to past immobility, sur-
gery, or bone fracture; oral HT should be avoided but transdermal 
HT may be an option (see f below).
d10-year risk of CHD, based on Framingham Coronary Heart Disease 
Risk Score (Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of 
High Blood Cholesterol in Adults: JAMA 285:2486, 2001), as modi-
fied by JE Manson, with SS Bassuk: Hot Flashes, Hormones & Your 
Health. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2007.
eWomen >10 years past menopause are not good candidates for 
starting (first use of) HT.
fAvoid oral HT. Transdermal HT may be an option because it has a 
less adverse effect on clotting factors, triglyceride levels, and inflam-
mation factors than oral HT.
gConsider selective serotonin or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitor, gabapentin, clonidine, soy, or alternative.
hHT should be continued only if moderate to severe menopausal 
symptoms persist. The recommended cutpoints for duration are 
based on results of the Women’s Health Initiative estrogen-progestin 
and estrogen-alone trials, which lasted 5.6 and 7.1 years, respec-
tively. For longer durations of HT use, balance of benefits and risks 
is not known.
iAbove-average risk of breast cancer: one or more first-degree rela-
tives with breast cancer; susceptibility genes such as BRCA1 or 
BRCA2; or a personal history of breast biopsy demonstrating atypia.
jWomen with premature surgical menopause may take HT until aver-
age age at menopause (age 51 in the United States) and then follow 
flowchart for subsequent decision making.
kIf progestogen is taken daily, avoid extending duration. If progestogen 
is cyclical or infrequent, avoid extending duration more than 1–2 years.
lIf menopausal symptoms are severe, estrogen plus progestin can be 
taken for 2–3 years maximum and estrogen alone for 4–5 years maximum.
mIf at high risk of osteoporotic fracture (see Q6), consider bisphos-
phonate, raloxifene, or alternative.
nIncreased risk of osteoporotic fracture: documented osteopenia, 
personal or family history of nontraumatic fracture, current smoking, 
or weight <125 lbs.
Source: Adapted from JE Manson with SS Bassuk: Hot Flashes, 
Hormones & Your Health. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2007.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
208
hypertriglyceridemia (>400 mg/dL) and active gallblad-
der disease; in such cases, transdermal estrogen may be 
an option. Primary prevention of heart disease should 
not be viewed as an expected benefit of HT, and an 
increase in stroke and a small early increase in coronary 
artery disease risk should be considered. Nevertheless, 
such therapy may be appropriate if the noncoronary 
benefits of treatment clearly outweigh risks. A woman 
who suffers an acute coronary event or stroke while on 
HT should stop therapy immediately.
Short-term use (<5 years) of HT is appropriate for relief 
of menopausal symptoms among women without con-
traindications to such use. However, such therapy should 
be avoided among women with an elevated baseline 
risk of future cardiovascular events. Women who have 
contraindications or are opposed to HT may derive 
benefit from the use of certain antidepressants (includ-
ing venlafaxine, fluoxetine, or paroxetine), gabapentin, 
clonidine, soy, or black cohosh, and, for genitourinary 
symptoms, intravaginal estrogen creams or devices.
Long-term use (≥5 years) of HT, especially estrogen-
progestogen, is more problematic because a heightened 
risk of breast cancer must be factored into the decision. 
Reasonable candidates for such use include a small 
percentage of postmenopausal women and comprise 
those who have persistent severe vasomotor symp-
toms along with an increased risk of osteoporosis (e.g., 
those with osteopenia, a personal or family history of 
nontraumatic fracture, or a weight below 125 lbs), who 
also have no personal or family history of breast cancer 
in a first-degree relative or other contraindications, and
who have a strong personal preference for therapy. Poor 
candidates are women with elevated cardiovascular risk, 
those at increased risk of breast cancer (e.g., women 
who have a first-degree relative with breast cancer, sus-
ceptibility genes such as BRCA1 or BRCA2, or a personal 
history of cellular atypia detected by breast biopsy), and 
those at low risk of osteoporosis. Even in reasonable can-
didates, strategies to minimize dose and duration of use 
should be employed. For example, women using HT to 
relieve intense vasomotor symptoms in early postmeno-
pause should consider discontinuing therapy before 
5 years, resuming it only if such symptoms persist. 
Because of the role of progestogens in increasing breast 
cancer risk, regimens that employ cyclic rather than con-
tinuous progestogen exposure should be considered if 
treatment is extended. For prevention of osteoporosis, 
alternative therapies such as bisphosphonates or SERMs 
should be considered. Research on androgen-containing 
preparations has been limited, particularly in terms 
of long-term safety. Additional research on the effects of 
these agents on CVD, glucose tolerance, and breast can-
cer will be of particular interest.
In addition to HT, control of symptoms and preven-
tion of chronic disease can be accomplished by lifestyle 
choices, including smoking abstention, adequate physi-
cal activity, and a healthy diet. An expanding array of 
pharmacologic options (e.g., bisphosphonates, SERMs, 
and other agents for osteoporosis, and cholesterol-
lowering or antihypertensive agents for CVD should also 
reduce the widespread reliance on hormone use. How-
ever, short-term HT may still benefit some women.
 David A. Ehrmann 
209
 Hirsutism , which is defi ned as androgen-dependent 
excessive male-pattern hair growth, affects approximately 
10% of women. Hirsutism is most often idiopathic or the 
consequence of androgen excess associated with the 
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Less frequently, 
it may result from adrenal androgen overproduction 
as occurs in nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperpla-
sia (CAH)  ( Table 13-1 ) . Rarely, it is a harbinger of a 
serious underlying condition. Cutaneous manifestations 
commonly associated with hirsutism include acne and 
male-pattern balding (androgenic alopecia).  Virilization
refers to a condition in which androgen levels are suf-
fi ciently high to cause additional signs and symptoms, 
such as deepening of the voice, breast atrophy, increased 
muscle bulk, clitoromegaly, and increased libido; viril-
ization is an ominous sign that suggests the possibility of 
an ovarian or adrenal neoplasm. 
 Hair folliClE GroWtH anD 
DiffErEntiation 
 Hair can be categorized as either  vellus (fi ne, soft, and 
not pigmented) or  terminal (long, coarse, and pigmented). 
The number of hair follicles does not change over an 
individual’s lifetime, but the follicle size and type of hair 
can change in response to numerous factors, particularly 
androgens. Androgens are necessary for terminal hair and 
sebaceous gland development, and mediate differentiation 
of pilosebaceous units (PSUs) into either a terminal hair 
follicle or a sebaceous gland. In the former case, andro-
gens transform the vellus hair into a terminal hair; in the 
latter case, the sebaceous component proliferates and the 
hair remains vellus. 
 There are three phases in the cycle of hair growth: 
(1)  anagen (growth phase), (2)  catagen (involution phase), 
and (3)  telogen (rest phase). Depending on the body site, 
hormonal regulation may play an important role in the 
hair growth cycle. For example, the eyebrows, eye-
lashes, and vellus hairs are androgen insensitive, whereas 
the axillary and pubic areas are sensitive to low levels 
of androgens. Hair growth on the face, chest, upper 
abdomen, and back requires higher levels of androgens 
and is therefore more characteristic of the pattern typi-
cally seen in men. Androgen excess in women leads 
to increased hair growth in most androgen-sensitive 
sites except in the scalp region, where hair loss occurs 
because androgens cause scalp hairs to spend less time in 
the anagen phase. 
 Although androgen excess underlies most cases of 
hirsutism, there is only a modest correlation between 
androgen levels and the quantity of hair growth. This 
is due to the fact that hair growth from the follicle also 
depends on local growth factors, and there is variability 
in end organ (PSU) sensitivity. Genetic factors and eth-
nic background also inﬂ uence hair growth. In general, 
dark-haired individuals tend to be more hirsute than 
blond or fair individuals. Asians and Native Ameri-
cans have relatively sparse hair in regions sensitive to 
high androgen levels, whereas people of Mediterranean 
descent are more hirsute. 
 CliniCal assEssmEnt 
 Historic elements relevant to the assessment of hirsutism 
include the age at onset and rate of progression of hair 
growth and associated symptoms or signs (e.g., acne). 
Depending on the cause, excess hair growth typically is 
fi rst noted during the second and third decades of life. 
The growth is usually slow but progressive. Sudden 
development and rapid progression of hirsutism suggest 
the possibility of an androgen-secreting neoplasm, in 
which case virilization also may be present. 
 The age at onset of menstrual cycles (menarche) and 
the pattern of the menstrual cycle should be ascertained; 
 HIRSUTISM AND VIRILIZATION 
 CHAPTER 13 
﻿
210
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
irregular cycles from the time of menarche onward are 
more likely to result from ovarian rather than adrenal 
androgen excess. Associated symptoms such as galactor-
rhea should prompt evaluation for hyperprolactinemia 
(Chap. 2) and possibly hypothyroidism (Chap. 4). Hyper-
tension, striae, easy bruising, centripetal weight gain, and 
weakness suggest hypercortisolism (Cushing’s syndrome; 
Chap. 5). Rarely, patients with growth hormone excess 
(i.e., acromegaly) present with hirsutism. Use of medi-
cations such as phenytoin, minoxidil, and cyclosporine 
may be associated with androgen-independent excess hair 
growth (i.e., hypertrichosis). A family history of infertil-
ity and/or hirsutism may indicate disorders such as non-
classic CAH (Chap. 5).
Physical examination should include measurement of 
height and weight and calculation of body mass index 
(BMI). A BMI >25 kg/m2 is indicative of excess weight 
for height, and values >30 kg/m2 are often seen in asso-
ciation with hirsutism, probably the result of increased 
conversion of androgen precursors to testosterone. Nota-
tion should be made of blood pressure, as adrenal causes 
may be associated with hypertension. Cutaneous signs 
sometimes associated with androgen excess and insulin 
resistance include acanthosis nigricans and skin tags.
An objective clinical assessment of hair distribu-
tion and quantity is central to the evaluation in any 
woman presenting with hirsutism. This assessment per-
mits the distinction between hirsutism and hypertricho-
sis and provides a baseline reference point to gauge the 
response to treatment. A simple and commonly used 
method to grade hair growth is the modified scale of 
Ferriman and Gallwey (Fig. 13-1), in which each of nine 
androgen-sensitive sites is graded from 0 to 4. Approxi-
mately 95% of white women have a score below 8 on 
this scale; thus, it is normal for most women to have 
some hair growth in androgen-sensitive sites. Scores 
above 8 suggest excess androgen-mediated hair growth, 
a finding that should be assessed further by means of 
hormonal evaluation (see below). In racial/ethnic 
groups that are less likely to manifest hirsutism (e.g., 
Asian women), additional cutaneous evidence of andro-
gen excess should be sought, including pustular acne 
and thinning scalp hair.
Hormonal Evaluation
Androgens are secreted by the ovaries and adrenal 
glands in response to their respective tropic hormones: 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH). The principal circulating steroids 
involved in the etiology of hirsutism are testosterone, 
androstenedione, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) 
and its sulfated form (DHEAS). The ovaries and adrenal 
glands normally contribute about equally to testosterone 
production. Approximately half of the total testoster-
one originates from direct glandular secretion, and the 
remainder is derived from the peripheral conversion of 
androstenedione and DHEA (Chap. 8).
Although it is the most important circulating andro-
gen, testosterone is in effect the penultimate androgen 
in mediating hirsutism; it is converted to the more 
potent dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by the enzyme 
5α-reductase, which is located in the PSU. DHT 
has a higher affinity for, and slower dissociation from, 
the androgen receptor. The local production of DHT 
allows it to serve as the primary mediator of androgen 
action at the level of the pilosebaceous unit. There are 
two isoenzymes of 5α-reductase: Type 2 is found in the 
prostate gland and in hair follicles, and type 1 is found 
primarily in sebaceous glands.
One approach to testing for hyperandrogenemia is 
depicted in Fig. 13-2. In addition to measuring blood 
levels of testosterone and DHEAS, it is important to 
measure the level of free (or unbound) testosterone. 
The fraction of testosterone that is not bound to its car-
rier protein, sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), is 
biologically available for conversion to DHT and bind-
ing to androgen receptors. Hyperinsulinemia and/or 
androgen excess decrease hepatic production of SHBG, 
Table 13-1 
Causes of Hirsutism
Gonadal hyperandrogenism
  Ovarian hyperandrogenism
Polycystic ovary syndrome/functional ovarian  
hyperandrogenism
Ovarian steroidogenic blocks
Syndromes of extreme insulin resistance
Ovarian neoplasms
Adrenal hyperandrogenism
Premature adrenarche
Functional adrenal hyperandrogenism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (nonclassic and classic)
Abnormal cortisol action/metabolism
Adrenal neoplasms
Other endocrine disorders
Cushing′s syndrome
Hyperprolactinemia
Acromegaly
Peripheral androgen overproduction
Obesity
Idiopathic
Pregnancy-related hyperandrogenism
Hyperreactio luteinalis
Thecoma of pregnancy
Drugs
Androgens
Oral contraceptives containing androgenic progestins
Minoxidil
Phenytoin
Diazoxide
Cyclosporine
True hermaphroditism
 
CHAPTER 13
Hirsutism and Virilization
211
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
1
1
Upper lip
Chin
Chest
Abdomen
Pelvis
Upper back
Lower back
Upper arms
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Thighs
Figure 13-1 
Hirsutism scoring scale of Ferriman and Gallwey. The 
nine body areas that have androgen-sensitive areas are 
graded from 0 (no terminal hair) to 4 (frankly virile) to obtain 
a total score. A normal hirsutism score is <8. (Modified from 
DA Ehrmann et al: Hyperandrogenism, hirsutism, and poly-
cystic ovary syndrome, in LJ DeGroot and JL Jameson [eds], 
Endocrinology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2006; with 
permission.)
﻿
212
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
resulting in levels of total testosterone within the high-
normal range, whereas the unbound hormone is ele-
vated more substantially. Although there is a decline in 
ovarian testosterone production after menopause, ovar-
ian estrogen production decreases to an even greater 
extent, and the concentration of SHBG is reduced. 
Consequently, there is an increase in the relative pro-
portion of unbound testosterone, and it may exacerbate 
hirsutism after menopause.
A baseline plasma total testosterone level >12 nmol/L 
(>3.5 ng/mL) usually indicates a virilizing tumor, 
whereas a level >7 nmol/L (>2 ng/mL) is suggestive. 
A basal DHEAS level >18.5 μmol/L (>7000 μg/L) 
suggests an adrenal tumor. Although DHEAS has been 
proposed as a “marker” of predominant adrenal andro-
gen excess, it is not unusual to find modest elevations 
in DHEAS among women with PCOS. Computed 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) should be used to localize an adrenal mass, and 
ultrasound usually suffices to identify an ovarian mass 
if clinical evaluation and hormonal levels suggest these 
possibilities.
PCOS is the most common cause of ovarian andro-
gen excess (Chap. 10). An increased ratio of LH to fol-
licle-stimulating hormone is characteristic in carefully 
studied patients with PCOS. However, because of the 
pulsatile nature of gonadotropin secretion, this find-
ing may be absent in up to half of women with PCOS. 
Transvaginal ultrasound classically shows enlarged ovaries 
and increased stroma in women with PCOS. How-
ever, cystic ovaries also may be found in women with-
out clinical or laboratory features of PCOS. Although 
usually limited to a research setting, a gonadotropin-
releasing hormone agonist test can be used to make a 
specific diagnosis of ovarian hyperandrogenism. A peak 
17-hydroxyprogesterone level ≥7.8 nmol/L (≥2.6 μg/L) 
after the administration of 100 μg nafarelin (or 10 μg/kg 
leuprolide) subcutaneously is virtually diagnostic of 
ovarian hyperandrogenism.
Because adrenal androgens are readily suppressed by low 
doses of glucocorticoids, the dexamethasone androgen- 
suppression test may broadly distinguish ovarian from 
adrenal androgen overproduction. A blood sample is 
obtained before and after the administration of dexa-
methasone (0.5 mg orally every 6 h for 4 days). An 
adrenal source is suggested by suppression of unbound 
testosterone into the normal range; incomplete suppres-
sion suggests ovarian androgen excess. An overnight 
1-mg dexamethasone suppression test, with measure-
ment of 8:00 a.m. serum cortisol, is useful when there is 
clinical suspicion of Cushing’s syndrome (Chap. 5).
Nonclassic CAH is most commonly due to 
21-hydroxylase deficiency but also can be caused by 
autosomal recessive defects in other steroidogenic enzymes 
necessary for adrenal corticosteroid synthesis (Chap. 5). 
Because of the enzyme defect, the adrenal gland cannot 
secrete glucocorticoids (especially cortisol) efficiently. 
This results in diminished negative feedback inhibition 
CLINICAL EVALUATION OF HIRSUTISM
Idiopathic
Other causes
see Table 13-1
• Nonclassic CAH
• Functional adrenal
  hyperandrogenism
Laboratory Evaluation
• Total, free testosterone
• DHEAS
Reassurance
Nonpharmacologic 
approaches
Hirsutism
significant
Virilization
Rapid progression
Rule out ovarian or
adrenal neoplasm
Normal
Increased
Final diagnosis
• PCOS
• Functional ovarian
  hyperandrogenism
Treat empirically
   or
Consider further testing
• Dexamethasone suppression → adrenal vs ovarian causes; R/O Cushing’s
• ACTH stimulation → assess nonclassic CAH
Marked elevation
Total testosterone >7 nmol/L
(>2 ng/mL)
DHEAS >18.5 µmol/L (>7000 µg/L)
Yes
No
Figure 13-2 
Algorithm for the evaluation and differential diagnosis 
of hirsutism. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CAH,
congenital adrenal hyperplasia; DHEAS, sulfated form of 
dehydroepiandrosterone; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome.
 
CHAPTER 13
Hirsutism and Virilization
213
of ACTH, leading to compensatory adrenal hyperpla-
sia and the accumulation of steroid precursors that sub-
sequently are converted to androgen. Deficiency of 
21-hydroxylase can be reliably excluded by determining 
a morning 17-hydroxyprogesterone level <6 nmol/L 
(<2 μg/L) (drawn in the follicular phase). Alternatively, 
21-hydroxylase deficiency can be diagnosed by measure-
ment of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 1 h after the admin-
istration of 250 μg of synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin) 
intravenously.
Treatment	
Hirsutism
Treatment of hirsutism may be accomplished pharma-
cologically or by mechanical means of hair removal. 
Nonpharmacologic treatments should be considered in 
all patients either as the only treatment or as an adjunct 
to drug therapy.
Nonpharmacologic treatments include (1) bleach-
ing, (2) depilatory (removal from the skin surface) such 
as shaving and chemical treatments, and (3) epilatory 
(removal of the hair including the root) such as pluck-
ing, waxing, electrolysis, and laser therapy. Despite per-
ceptions to the contrary, shaving does not increase the 
rate or density of hair growth. Chemical depilatory treat-
ments may be useful for mild hirsutism that affects only 
limited skin areas, though they can cause skin irritation. 
Wax treatment removes hair temporarily but is uncom-
fortable. Electrolysis is effective for more permanent 
hair removal, particularly in the hands of a skilled elec-
trologist. Laser phototherapy appears to be efficacious 
for hair removal. It delays hair regrowth and causes per-
manent hair removal in most patients. The long-term 
effects and complications associated with laser treat-
ment are being evaluated.
Pharmacologic therapy is directed at interrupting 
one or more of the steps in the pathway of androgen 
synthesis and action: (1) suppression of adrenal and/
or ovarian androgen production; (2) enhancement of 
androgen-binding to plasma-binding proteins, particu-
larly SHBG; (3) impairment of the peripheral conver-
sion of androgen precursors to active androgen; and (4) 
inhibition of androgen action at the target tissue level. 
Attenuation of hair growth is typically not evident until 
4–6 months after initiation of medical treatment and 
in most cases leads to only a modest reduction in hair 
growth.
Combination estrogen-progestin therapy in the form 
of an oral contraceptive is usually the first-line endo-
crine treatment for hirsutism and acne, after cosmetic 
and dermatologic management. The estrogenic com-
ponent of most oral contraceptives currently in use is 
either ethinyl estradiol or mestranol. The suppression of 
LH leads to reduced production of ovarian androgens.
The reduced androgen levels also result in a dose-
related increase in SHBG, thus lowering the fraction of 
unbound plasma testosterone. Combination therapy 
also has been demonstrated to decrease DHEAS, per-
haps by reducing ACTH levels. Estrogens also have a 
direct, dose-dependent suppressive effect on seba-
ceous cell function.
The choice of a specific oral contraceptive should be 
predicated on the progestational component, as pro-
gestins vary in their suppressive effect on SHBG levels 
and in their androgenic potential. Ethynodiol diacetate 
has relatively low androgenic potential, whereas pro-
gestins such as norgestrel and levonor-gestrel are par-
ticularly androgenic, as judged from their attenuation 
of the estrogen-induced increase in SHBG. Norgestimate 
exemplifies the newer generation of progestins that are 
virtually nonandrogenic. Drospirenone, an analogue of 
spironolactone that has both antimineralocorticoid and 
antiandrogenic activities, has been approved for use 
as a progestational agent in combination with ethinyl 
estradiol.
Oral contraceptives are contraindicated in women 
with a history of thromboembolic disease and women with 
increased risk of breast or other estrogen-dependent 
cancers (Chap. 12). There is a relative contraindication 
to the use of oral contraceptives in smokers and those 
with hypertension or a history of migraine headaches. In 
most trials, estrogen-progestin therapy alone improves 
the extent of acne by a maximum of 50–70%. The effect 
on hair growth may not be evident for 6 months, and the 
maximum effect may require 9–12 months owing to the 
length of the hair growth cycle. Improvements in hirsut-
ism are typically in the range of 20%, but there may be an 
arrest of further progression of hair growth.
Adrenal androgens are more sensitive than cortisol 
to the suppressive effects of glucocorticoids. Therefore, 
glucocorticoids are the mainstay of treatment in patients 
with CAH. Although glucocorticoids have been reported 
to restore ovulatory function in some women with PCOS, 
this effect is highly variable. Because of side effects from 
excessive glucocorticoids, low doses should be used. 
Dexamethasone (0.2–0.5 mg) or prednisone (5–10 mg) 
should be taken at bedtime to achieve maximal suppres-
sion by inhibiting the nocturnal surge of ACTH.
Cyproterone acetate is the prototypic antiandrogen. 
It acts mainly by competitive inhibition of the bind-
ing of testosterone and DHT to the androgen receptor. 
In addition, it may enhance the metabolic clearance of 
testosterone by inducing hepatic enzymes. Although 
not available for use in the United States, cyproterone 
acetate is widely used in Canada, Mexico, and Europe.
Cyproterone (50–100 mg) is given on days 1–15 and 
ethinyl estradiol (50 μg) is given on days 5–26 of the 
menstrual cycle. Side effects include irregular uterine 
﻿
214
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
bleeding, nausea, headache, fatigue, weight gain, and 
decreased libido.
Spironolactone, which usually is used as a mineralo-
corticoid antagonist, is also a weak antiandrogen. It is 
almost as effective as cyproterone acetate when used at 
high enough doses (100–200 mg daily). Patients should 
be monitored intermittently for hyperkalemia or hypo-
tension, though these side effects are uncommon. 
Pregnancy should be avoided because of the risk of 
feminization of a male fetus. Spironolactone can also 
cause menstrual irregularity. It often is used in combina-
tion with an oral contraceptive, which suppresses ovar-
ian androgen production and helps prevent pregnancy.
Flutamide is a potent nonsteroidal antiandrogen that 
is effective in treating hirsutism, but concerns about 
the induction of hepatocellular dysfunction have lim-
ited its use. Finasteride is a competitive inhibitor of 
5α-reductase type 2. Beneficial effects on hirsutism have 
been reported, but the predominance of 5α-reductase 
type 1 in the PSU appears to account for its limited effi-
cacy. Finasteride would also be expected to impair sex-
ual differentiation in a male fetus, and it should not be 
used in women who may become pregnant.
Eflornithine cream (Vaniqa) has been approved as 
a novel treatment for unwanted facial hair in women, 
but long-term efficacy remains to be established. It can 
cause skin irritation under exaggerated conditions of 
use. Ultimately, the choice of any specific agent(s) must 
be tailored to the unique needs of the patient being 
treated. As noted previously, pharmacologic treatments 
for hirsutism should be used in conjunction with non-
pharmacologic approaches. It is also helpful to review 
the pattern of female hair distribution in the normal 
population to dispel unrealistic expectations.
5α-reductase type 2. Beneficial effects on hirsutism have 
been reported, but the predominance of 5α-reductase 
type 1 in the PSU appears to account for its limited effi-
cacy. Finasteride would also be expected to impair sex-
ual differentiation in a male fetus, and it should not be 
used in women who may become pregnant.
Eflornithine cream (Vaniqa) has been approved as 
a novel treatment for unwanted facial hair in women, 
but long-term efficacy remains to be established. It can 
cause skin irritation under exaggerated conditions of 
use. Ultimately, the choice of any specific agent(s) must 
be tailored to the unique needs of the patient being 
treated. As noted previously, pharmacologic treatments 
for hirsutism should be used in conjunction with non-
pharmacologic approaches. It is also helpful to review 
the pattern of female hair distribution in the normal 
population to dispel unrealistic expectations.
 Michael V. Seiden 
215
 ovarian CanCer 
 incidence and PatHology 
 Ovarian cancer is the most lethal malignancy of gyne-
cologic origin in the United States and other coun-
tries that have organized and effective cervical cancer 
screening programs. In 2010, 21,880 cases of ovarian 
cancer with 13,850 deaths are expected in the United 
States. The ovary is a complex and dynamic organ and, 
between the ages of approximately 11 and 50 years, is 
responsible for follicle maturation associated with egg 
maturation, ovulation, and cyclical sex steroid hormone 
production. These complex and linked biologic func-
tions are coordinated through a variety of cells within 
the ovary, each of which possesses neoplastic potential. 
By far the most common and most lethal of the ovar-
ian neoplasms arise from the ovarian epithelium found 
both on the surface of the ovary and in subsurface loca-
tions known as cortical inclusion cysts, believed to be 
entrapped epithelium from the healing associated with 
prior follicle rupture during ovulation. The ovarian epi-
thelium in good health appears as a simple epithelium, 
but with neoplastic transformation, it undergoes meta-
plastic changes into what is termed  müllerian epithelium . 
The müllerian epithelium has a variety of subtypes each 
of which provide a specifi c phenotype of the tumor and 
in some cases different clinical presentations. Epithelial 
tumors are the most common ovarian neoplasm; they 
may be benign (50%), malignant (33%), or of borderline 
malignancy (16%). Age infl uences risk of malignancy; 
tumors in younger women are more likely benign. The 
most common of the ovarian epithelial malignancies 
are serous tumors (50%); tumors of mucinous (25%), 
endometrioid (15%), clear cell (5%), and transitional cell 
histology or Brenner tumor (1%) represent smaller propor-
tions of epithelial ovarian tumors. In contrast, stromal 
tumors arise from the steroid hormone–producing cells 
and likewise have different phenotypes and clinical pre-
sentations largely dependent on the type and quantity of 
hormone production. Tumors arising in the germ cell 
are most similar in biology and behavior to testicular 
tumors in males  ( Chap. 9 ) . 
 Tumors may also metastasize to the ovary from breast, 
colon, gastric, and pancreatic primaries. Bilateral ovarian 
masses from metastatic mucin-secreting gastrointestinal 
cancers are termed  Krukenberg tumors . 
 ovarian cancer of ePitHelial origin 
 Epidemiology 
 A female has approximately a 1 in 72 lifetime risk (1.6%)
of developing ovarian cancer, with the majority of 
affected women developing epithelial tumors. Epithelial
tumors of the ovary have a peak incidence in women 
in their sixties, although age at presentation can range 
across the extremes of adult life, with cases being reported 
in women in their twenties to nineties. Known risk fac-
tors that increase the chance of subsequent ovarian can-
cer include epidemiologic, environmental, and genetic 
factors such as nulliparity, use of talc agents applied to 
the perineum, obesity, and probably hormone replace-
ment therapy. Protective factors include the use of oral
contraceptives, multiparity, and breast-feeding. These 
protective factors are thought to work through sup-
pression of ovulation and perhaps reduction of ovarian 
infl ammation and damage associated with the repair of 
the ovarian cortex associated with ovulation, and perhaps
suppression of gonadotropins. Other protective factors, 
such as fallopian tube ligation, are thought to protect 
the ovarian epithelium (or perhaps the distal fallopian 
tube fi mbriae) from carcinogens that migrate from the 
vagina to the tubes and ovarian surface epithelium 
(see “Fallopian Tube Cancer”). 
 GYNECOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES 
 ChapTer 14 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
216
Genetic risk factors
A variety of genetic syndromes substantially increases a 
woman’s risk of developing ovarian cancer. Approxi-
mately 10% of women with ovarian cancer have a 
somatic mutation in one of two DNA repair genes: 
BRCA1 (chromosome 17q12-21) or BRCA2 (chro-
mosome 13q12-13). Individuals inheriting a single 
copy of a mutant allele have a very high incidence of 
breast and ovarian cancer. Most of these women have 
a family history that is notable for multiple cases of 
breast and/or ovarian cancer, although inheritance 
through male members of the family can camouflage 
this genotype through several generations. The most 
common malignancy in these women is breast carci-
noma, although women harboring germ-line BRCA1 
mutations have a marked increased risk of developing 
ovarian malignancies in their forties and fifties, with 
a 30–50% lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer. 
Women harboring a mutation in BRCA2 have a lower 
penetrance of ovarian cancer with perhaps a 20–40% 
chance of developing this malignancy, with onset typi-
cally in their fifties or sixties. Women with a BRCA2 
mutation also are at slightly increased risk of pancreatic 
cancer. Screening studies in this select population sug-
gest that current screening techniques, including serial 
evaluation of the CA-125 tumor marker and ultra-
sound, are insufficient at detecting early-stage and cur-
able disease, so women with these germ-line mutations 
are advised to undergo prophylactic removal of ovaries 
and fallopian tubes typically after completing childbear-
ing and ideally before ages 35–40. Early prophylactic 
oophorectomy also protects these women from subse-
quent breast cancer with a reduction of breast cancer 
risk of approximately 50%.
Ovarian cancer is also one form of cancer (along with 
colorectal and endometrial cancer) that may develop in 
women with Lynch syndrome, type II, caused by muta-
tions in DNA mismatch repair genes (MSH2, MLH1, 
MLH6, PMS1, PMS2). Ovarian cancer may appear in 
women younger than 50 years of age in this syndrome.
Presentation
Neoplasms of the ovary tend to be painless unless they 
undergo torsion. Symptoms are therefore typically related 
to compression of local organs or are due to symptoms 
from metastatic disease. Women with tumors local-
ized to the ovary do have an increased incidence of 
symptoms including pelvic discomfort, bloating, 
and perhaps changes in typical urinary or bowel pat-
tern. Unfortunately, these symptoms are frequently 
dismissed by either the woman or her health care 
team. It is believed that high-grade tumors metas-
tasize early in the neoplastic process. Unlike other 
epithelial malignancies, these tumors tend to exfoli-
ate throughout the peritoneal cavity and thus present 
with symptoms associated with disseminated intraperi-
toneal tumors. The most common symptoms at pre-
sentation include a multimonth period of progressive 
complaints that typically include some combination 
of heartburn, nausea, early satiety, indigestion, con-
stipation, and abdominal pain. Signs include the rapid 
increase in abdominal girth due to the accumulation 
of ascites that typically alerts the patient and her physi-
cian that the concurrent gastrointestinal symptoms are 
likely associated with serious pathology. Radiologic 
evaluation typically demonstrates a complex adnexal 
mass and ascites. Laboratory evaluation demonstrates 
a markedly elevated CA-125, a shed mucin (Muc 
16) associated with, but not specific for, ovarian can-
cer. Hematogenous and lymphatic spread are seen but 
are not the typical presentation. Ovarian cancers are 
divided into four stages, with stage I tumors confined 
to the ovary, stage II malignancies confined to the 
pelvis, and stage III confined to the peritoneal cavity 
(Table 14-1). These three stages are subdivided, with 
the most common presentation, stage IIIc, defined as 
tumors with bulky intraperitoneal disease. About 70% 
of women present with stage IIIc disease. Stage IV 
disease includes women with parenchymal metastases 
(liver, lung, spleen) or, alternatively, abdominal wall or 
pleural disease. The 30% not presenting with stage IIIc 
disease are roughly evenly distributed among the other 
stages.
Screening
Ovarian cancer is the fifth most lethal malignancy in 
women in the United States, curable in early stages, 
and seldom curable in advanced stages; hence, screen-
ing is of considerable interest. Furthermore the ovary 
is well visualized with a variety of imaging techniques, 
most notably transvaginal ultrasound. Early-stage 
tumors often produce proteins that can be measured 
in the blood such as CA-125 and HE-4. Nevertheless, 
the incidence of ovarian cancer in the middle-aged 
female population is low, with only approximately 1 in 
2000 women between the ages of 50 and 60 carrying 
an asymptomatic and undetected tumor. Thus, effec-
tive screening techniques must be sensitive but, more 
importantly, highly specific to minimize the number of 
false positives. Even a screening test with 98% specific-
ity and 50% sensitivity would have a positive predictive 
value of only about 1%. Despite these formidable bar-
riers, ongoing studies are evaluating the utility of vari-
ous screening strategies. However, screening for ovarian 
cancer is currently not recommended outside of a clini-
cal trial.
 
CHAPTER 14
Gynecologic Malignancies
217
Treatment	
Ovarian Cancer
In women presenting with a localized ovarian mass, 
the principal diagnostic and therapeutic maneuver 
is to determine if the tumor is benign or malignant 
and, in the event that the tumor is malignant, whether 
the tumor arises in the ovary or is a site of metastatic 
disease. Metastatic disease to the ovary can be seen 
from primary tumors of the colon, appendix, stom-
ach (Krukenberg tumors), and breast. Typically women 
undergo a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and if 
pathology reveals a primary ovarian malignancy, then 
the procedure is followed by a hysterectomy, removal of 
the remaining tube and ovary, omentectomy, and pelvic 
node sampling along with some random biopsies of the 
peritoneal cavity. This extensive surgical procedure is 
performed because approximately 30% of tumors that 
by visual inspection appear to be confined to the ovary 
have already disseminated to the peritoneal cavity and/
or surrounding lymph nodes.
If there is evidence of bulky intraabdominal disease, a 
comprehensive attempt at maximal tumor cytoreduction 
is attempted even if it involves partial bowel resection, 
splenectomy, and in certain cases more extensive upper 
abdominal surgery. The ability to debulk metastatic ovar-
ian cancer to minimal visible disease is associated with an 
improved prognosis as compared to women left with vis-
ible disease. Patients without gross residual disease after 
resection have a median survival of 39 months, compared 
to 17 months for those left with macroscopic tumor. Once 
tumors have been surgically debulked, women receive 
therapy with a platinum agent typically with a taxane. 
Debate continues as to whether this therapy should 
be delivered intravenously or, alternatively, some of 
the therapy should be delivered directly into the perito-
neal cavity via a catheter. Three randomized studies have 
demonstrated improved survival with intraperitoneal 
therapy, but this approach is still not widely accepted due 
to technical challenges associated with this delivery route 
and increased toxicity. In women who present with bulky 
disease, an alternative approach is to treat with platinum 
plus a taxane for several cycles (neoadjuvant therapy). 
Subsequent surgical procedures are more effective at 
leaving the patient without gross residual tumor, and sur-
vival is comparable to surgery followed by chemotherapy.
With optimal debulking surgery and platinum-based 
chemotherapy [usually carboplatin dosed to an area 
under the curve (AUC) of 7.5 plus paclitaxel 175 mg/m2
by 3-h infusion in monthly cycles], 70% of women 
who present with advanced-stage tumors respond, and 
40–50% experience a complete remission with normal-
ization of their CA-125, CT scans, and physical examina-
tion. Unfortunately, only half of the complete responders 
remain in remission. Disease recurs within 1 to 4 years 
from the completion of their primary therapy in half of 
the complete responders. CA-125 levels often increase 
as a first sign of relapse; however, data are not clear 
that early intervention influences survival. Recurrent 
disease is effectively managed, but not cured, with a 
variety of chemotherapeutic agents. Eventually all of 
these women develop chemotherapy-refractory disease 
at which point refractory ascites, poor bowel motility, 
and obstruction or pseudoobstruction due to a tumor-
infiltrated aperistaltic bowel are common. Limited sur-
gery to relieve intestinal obstruction, localized radiation 
therapy to relieve pressure or pain from masses, or pal-
liative chemotherapy may be helpful. Agents with >15% 
response rates include gemcitabine, topotecan, liposo-
mal doxorubicin, and bevacizumab. Approximately 20% 
Table 14-1
Staging and Survival in Gynecologic Malignancies
Stage
Ovarian
5-Year 
Survival,  
%
Endometrial
5-Year 
Survival,  
%
Cervix
5-Year 
Survival,  
%
0
—
—
Carcinoma in situ
100
I
Confined to ovary
90–95
Confined to corpus
89
Confined to uterus
85
II
Confined to pelvis
70–80
Involves corpus and 
cervix
73
Invades beyond  
uterus but not to  
pelvic wall
65
III
Intraabdominal 
spread
20–50
Extends outside  
the uterus but not 
outside the true 
pelvis
52
Extends to pelvic  
wall and/or lower  
third of vagina, or  
hydronephrosis
35
IV
Spread outside 
abdomen
1–5
Extends outside  
the true pelvis or  
involves the blad­
der or rectum
17
Invades mucosa of  
bladder or rectum  
or extends beyond  
the true pelvis
7
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
218
of ovarian cancers are HER2/neu positive, and trastu-
zumab may induce responses in this subset.
Five-year survival correlates with the stage of disease: 
stage I, 90–95%; stage II, 70–80%; stage III, 20–50%; 
stage IV, 1–5% (Table 14-1). Prognosis is also influenced 
by histologic grade: 5-year survival is 88% for well-
differentiated tumors, 58% for moderately differenti-
ated tumors, and 27% for poorly differentiated tumors. 
Histologic type has less influence on outcome. Patients 
with tumors of low malignant potential are managed 
by surgery; chemotherapy and radiation therapy do not 
improve survival.
Ovarian Sex Cord and  
Stromal Tumors
Epidemiology, presentation, and  
predisposing syndromes
Approximately 7% of ovarian neoplasms are stromal or 
sex cord tumors, with approximately 1800 cases expected 
each year in the United States. Ovarian stromal tumors 
or sex cord tumors are most common in women in their 
fifties or sixties, but tumors can present in the extremes 
of age, including the pediatric population. These tumors 
arise from the mesenchymal components of the ovary, 
including steroid-producing cells as well as fibroblasts. 
Essentially all of these tumors are of low malignant 
potential and present as unilateral solid masses. Three 
clinical presentations are common: the detection of an 
abdominal mass; abdominal pain due to ovarian torsion, 
intratumoral hemorrhage, or rupture; or signs and symp-
toms due to hormonal production by these tumors.
The most common hormone-producing tumors 
include thecomas, granulosa cell tumor, or juvenile 
granulosa tumors in children. These estrogen-producing 
tumors often present with breast tenderness as well as 
isosexual precocious pseudopuberty in children; meno-
metrorrhagia, oligomenorrhea, or amenorrhea in pre-
menopausal women; or alternatively as postmenopausal 
bleeding in older women. In some women, estrogen-
associated secondary malignancies, such as endometrial 
or breast cancer, may present as synchronous malignan-
cies. Alternatively, endometrial cancer may serve as the 
presenting malignancy with evaluation subsequently iden-
tifying a unilateral solid ovarian neoplasm that proves to 
be an occult granulosa cell tumor. Sertoli-Leydig tumors 
often present with hirsutism, virilization, and occasion-
ally Cushing’s syndrome due to increased production of 
testosterone, androstenedione, or other 17-ketosteroids. 
Hormonally inert tumors include fibroma that presents as 
a solitary mass often in association with ascites and occa-
sionally hydrothorax also known as Meigs’ syndrome. 
A subset of these tumors present in individuals with a 
variety of inherited disorders that predispose them to 
mesenchymal neoplasia. Associations include juve-
nile granulosa cell tumors and perhaps Sertoli-Leydig 
tumors with Ollier’s disease (multiple enchondroma-
tosis) or Maffucci’s syndrome, ovarian sex cord tumors 
with annular tubules with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and 
fibromas with Gorlin disease.
Treatment	
Sex Cord Tumors
The mainstay of treatment for sex cord tumors is surgi-
cal resection. Most women present with tumors con-
fined to the ovary. For the small subset of women who 
present with metastatic disease or develop evidence 
of tumor recurrence after primary resection, survival is 
still typically long, often in excess of a decade. Because 
these tumors are slow growing and relatively refractory 
to chemotherapy, women with metastatic disease are 
often debulked as disease is usually peritoneal based 
(as with epithelial ovarian cancer). Definitive data that 
surgical debulking of metastatic or recurrent disease 
prolongs survival are lacking, but ample data docu-
ment women who have survived years or in some cases 
decades after resection of recurrent disease. In addition, 
large peritoneal-based metastases also have a procliv-
ity for hemorrhage, sometimes with catastrophic com-
plications. Chemotherapy is occasionally effective, and 
women tend to receive regimens designed to treat 
epithelial or germ cell tumors. These tumors often pro-
duce high levels of müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), 
inhibin, and, in the case of Sertoli-Leydig tumors, α feto-
protein (AFP). These proteins are detectable in serum 
and can be used as tumor markers to monitor women 
for recurrent disease as the increase and decrease of 
these proteins in the serum tend to reflect the changing 
bulk of systemic tumor.
Germ cell tumors of the ovary
Germ cell tumors, like their counterparts in the testis, 
are cancers of germ cells. These totipotent cells contain 
the programming for differentiation to essentially all tis-
sue types, and hence the germ cell tumors include a his-
tologic menagerie of bizarre tumors, including benign 
teratomas and a variety of malignant tumors, such as 
immature teratomas, dysgerminomas, yolk sac malig-
nancies, and choriocarcinomas. Benign teratoma (or 
dermoid cyst) is the most common germ cell neoplasm 
of the ovary and often presents in young women. These 
tumors include a complex mixture of differentiated tis-
sue including tissues from all three germ layers. In older 
women these differentiated tumors can develop malig-
nant transformation, most commonly squamous cell 
carcinomas. Malignant germ cell tumors include dys-
germinomas, yolk sac tumors, and immature teratomas, 
 
CHAPTER 14
Gynecologic Malignancies
219
as well as embryonal and choriocarcinomas. There are 
no known genetic abnormalities that unify these tumors. 
A subset of dysgerminomas harbor mutations in c-Kit 
oncogenes [as seen in gastrointestinal stromal tumors 
(GISTs)], whereas a subset of germ cell tumors have 
isochromosome 12 abnormalities as seen in testicular 
malignancies. In addition, a subset of dysgerminomas 
is associated with dysgenetic ovaries. Identification of a 
dysgerminoma arising in genotypic XY gonads is impor-
tant in that it highlights the need to identify and remove 
the contralateral gonad due to risk of gonadoblastoma.
Presentation
Germ cell tumors can present at all ages, but the peak 
age of presentation tends to be in females in their late 
teens or early twenties. Typically these tumors will 
become large ovarian masses that eventually present as 
palpable low abdominal or pelvic masses. Like sex cord 
tumors, torsion or hemorrhage may present urgently 
or emergently as acute abdominal pain. Some of these 
tumors produce elevated levels of human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) that can lead to isosexual preco-
cious puberty when tumors present in younger girls. 
Unlike epithelial ovarian cancer, these tumors have a 
higher proclivity for nodal or hematogenous metastases. 
As with testicular tumors some of these tumors tend to 
produce AFP (yolk sac tumors) or hCG (embryonal and 
choriocarcinomas as well as some dysgerminomas) that 
are reliable tumor markers.
Treatment	
Germ Cell Tumors
Germ cell tumors typically present in women who are 
still of childbearing age, and because bilateral tumors 
are uncommon (except in dysgerminoma, 10–15%), 
the typical treatment is unilateral oophorectomy or 
salpingo-oophorectomy. Because nodal metastases to 
pelvic and para-aortic nodes are common and may 
affect treatment choices, these nodes should be care-
fully inspected and, if enlarged, should be resected if 
possible. Women with malignant germ cell tumors typi-
cally receive bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) 
chemotherapy. In the majority of women, even those 
with advanced-stage disease, cure is expected. Close 
follow-up without adjuvant therapy of women with 
stage I tumors is reasonable if there is high confidence 
that the patient and health care team are committed to 
compulsive and careful follow-up, as chemotherapy at 
the time of tumor recurrence is likely to be curative.
Dysgerminoma is the ovarian counterpart of testicu-
lar seminoma. The 5-year disease-free survival is 100% in 
early-stage patients and 61% in stage III disease. Although 
the tumor is highly radiation sensitive, radiation produces 
infertility in many patients. BEP chemotherapy is as effec-
tive or more so without causing infertility. The use of BEP 
following incomplete resection is associated with 95%, 
2-year disease-free survival. This chemotherapy is now the 
treatment of choice for dysgerminoma.
Fallopian Tube Cancer
Transport of the egg to the uterus occurs via tran-
sit through the fallopian tube, with the distal ends of 
these tubes composed of fimbriae that drape about the 
ovarian surface and capture the egg as it erupts from 
the ovarian cortex. Fallopian tube malignancies typi-
cally have the same histologic pattern as ovarian malig-
nancies, with the most common epithelial malignancy 
being of serous histology. Previous teaching was that 
these malignancies were rare, but more careful histo-
logic examination suggests that many “ovarian malig-
nancies” might actually arise in the distal fimbria of the 
fallopian tube. Data supporting this theory are stron-
gest in the population of women who carry BRCA1 or 
BRCA2 somatic mutations. These women often pres-
ent with adnexal masses, and, like ovarian cancer, these 
tumors spread relatively early throughout the peritoneal 
cavity and respond to platinum and taxane therapy and 
have a natural history that is essentially identical to ovar-
ian cancer (Table 14-1).
Cervical Cancer
Global Considerations
Cervical cancer is the second most common 
and most lethal malignancy in women world-
wide likely due to the widespread infection with 
high-risk strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) and 
limited utilization or access to Pap smear screening in 
many nations throughout the world. Nearly 500,000 
cases of cervical cancer are expected worldwide with 
approximately 240,000 deaths annually. Cancer inci-
dence is particularly high in women residing in Central 
and South America, the Caribbean, and southern and 
eastern Africa. Mortality rate is disproportionately high 
in Africa. In the United States, 12,200 women were 
diagnosed with cervical cancer and 4210 women died. 
Whereas efforts in developed countries have looked at 
high-technology screening techniques for HPV involv-
ing polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and other molecular 
technologies, there is an urgent need for high-throughput 
low-technology strategies to identify and treat women 
bearing high-risk but treatable cervical dysplasia. The 
development of effective vaccines for high-risk HPV 
types makes it imperative to determine economical, 
socially acceptable, and logistically feasible strategies to 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
220
deliver and distribute this vaccine to girls and perhaps 
boys before their engagement in sexual activity.
HPV Infection and Preventive 
Vaccination
HPV is the primary neoplastic-initiating event in the 
vast majority of women with invasive cervical cancer. This 
double-strand DNA virus infects epithelium near the 
transformation zone of the cervix. More than 60 types 
of HPV are known, with approximately 20 types having 
the ability to generate high-grade dysplasia and malig-
nancy. HPV16 and 18 are the types most frequently 
associated with high-grade dysplasia and targeted by 
both FDA-approved vaccines. The large majority of 
sexually active adults are exposed to HPV, and most 
women clear the infection without specific interven-
tion. The 8-kilobase HPV genome encodes seven early 
genes, most notably E6 and E7, which can bind to RB 
and p53, respectively. High-risk types of HPV encode 
E6 and E7 molecules that are particularly effective at 
inhibiting the normal cell cycle checkpoint functions of 
these regulatory proteins, leading to immortalization but 
not full transformation of cervical epithelium. A minor-
ity of woman will fail to clear the infection with subse-
quent HPV integration into the host genome. Over the 
course of as short as months but more typically years, 
some of these women develop high-grade dysplasia. 
The time from dysplasia to carcinoma is likely years to 
more than a decade and almost certainly requires the 
acquisition of other poorly defined genetic mutations 
within the infected and immortalized epithelium.
Risk factors include a high number of sexual part-
ners, age of first intercourse, and history of venereal 
disease. Smoking is a cofactor; heavy smokers have a 
higher risk of dysplasia with HPV infection. HIV infec-
tion, especially when associated with low CD4+ T-cell 
counts, is associated with a higher rate of high-grade 
dysplasia and likely a shorter latency period between 
infection and invasive disease.
Currently approved vaccines include the recombi-
nant proteins to the late proteins, L1 and L2 of HPV-16 
and -18. Vaccination of women before the initiation of 
sexual activity dramatically reduces the rate of HPV-16 
and -18 infection and subsequent dysplasia. There is also 
partial protection against other HPV types, although 
vaccinated women are still at risk for HPV infection 
and still require standard Pap smear screening. Although 
no randomized trial data demonstrate the utility of Pap 
smears, the dramatic drop in cervical cancer incidence 
and death in developed countries employing wide-scale 
screening provides strong evidence for its effectiveness. 
The incorporation of HPV testing by PCR or other 
molecular techniques increases the sensitivity of detect-
ing cervical pathology but at the cost of lower sensitivity 
in that it identifies many women with transient infec-
tions who require no specific medical intervention.
Clinical Presentations
The majority of cervical malignancies are squamous cell 
carcinomas associated with HPV. Adenocarcinomas are 
also HPV related and arise deep in the endocervical 
canal; they are typically not seen by visual inspection 
of the cervix and thus are often missed by Pap smear 
screening. A variety of rarer malignancies including 
atypical epithelial tumors, carcinoids, small cell car-
cinomas, sarcomas, and lymphomas have also been 
reported.
The principal role of Pap smear testing is the detec-
tion of asymptomatic preinvasive cervical dysplasia of 
squamous epithelial lining. Invasive carcinomas often 
have symptoms or signs including postcoital spotting 
or intermenstrual cycle bleeding or menometrorrhagia. 
Foul-smelling or persistent yellow discharge may also 
be seen. Presentations that include pelvic or sacral pain 
suggest lateral extension of the tumor into pelvic nerve 
plexus by either the primary tumor or a pelvic node and 
are signs of advanced-stage disease. Likewise, flank pain 
from hydronephrosis from ureteral compression or deep 
venous thrombosis from iliac vessel compression sug-
gests either extensive nodal disease or direct extension 
of the primary tumor to the pelvic sidewall. The most 
common finding of physical exam is a visible tumor on 
the cervix.
Treatment	
Cervical Cancer
Scans are not part of the formal clinical staging of cer-
vical cancer yet are very useful in planning appropri-
ate therapy. CT can detect hydronephrosis indicative of 
pelvic sidewall disease but is not accurate at evaluating 
other pelvic structures. MRI is more accurate at estimat-
ing uterine extension and paracervical extension of dis-
ease into soft tissues typically bordered by broad and 
cardinal ligaments that support the uterus in the cen-
tral pelvis. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan 
may be the most accurate technique for evaluating the 
pelvis and, more importantly, nodal (pelvic, para-aortic, 
and scalene) sites for disease. This technique seems 
more prognostic (and probably accurate) than CT, 
MRI, or lymphangiogram, especially in the para-aortic 
region.
Stage I cervical tumors are confined to the cervix, 
whereas stage II tumors extend into the upper vagina 
or paracervical soft tissue (Fig. 14-1). Stage III tumors 
extend to the lower vagina or the pelvic sidewalls, 
whereas stage IV tumors invade the bladder or rec-
tum or have spread to distant sites. Very small stage I 
 
CHAPTER 14
Gynecologic Malignancies
221
cervical tumors can be treated with a variety of sur-
gical procedures. In young women desiring to main-
tain fertility, radical trachelectomy removes the cervix 
with subsequent anastomosis of the upper vagina 
to the uterine corpus. Larger cervical tumors con-
fined to the cervix can be treated with either surgical 
resection or radiation therapy in combination with 
cisplatin-based chemotherapy with a high chance of 
cure. Larger tumors that extend down the vagina or 
into the paracervical soft tissues or the pelvic side-
walls are treated with combination chemotherapy 
and radiation therapy. The treatment of recurrent or 
metastatic disease is unsatisfactory due to the rela-
tive resistance of these tumors to chemotherapy and 
currently available biological agents.
Uterine Cancer
Epidemiology
Several different tumor types arise in uterine corpus. 
Most tumors arise in the glandular lining and are endo-
metrial adenocarcinomas. Tumors can also arise in the 
smooth muscle; most are benign (uterine leiomyoma), 
with a small minority of tumors being sarcomas. The 
endometrioid histologic subtype of endometrial can-
cer is the most common gynecologic malignancy in 
the United States. In 2010, it was diagnosed in 43,470 
women, and 7950 women died from the disease. Devel-
opment of these tumors is a multistep process with 
estrogen playing an important early role in driving 
endometrial gland proliferation. Relative overexposure 
to this class of hormones is a risk factor for the subse-
quent development of endometrioid tumors. In contrast 
progestins drive glandular maturation and are protec-
tive. Hence, women with high endogenous or pharma-
cologic exposure to estrogens, especially if unopposed 
by progesterone, are at high risk for endometrial cancer. 
Obese women, women treated with unopposed estro-
gens, or women with estrogen-producing tumors (such 
as granulosa cell tumors of the ovary) are at higher risk 
for endometrial cancer. In addition, treatment with 
tamoxifen, which has antiestrogenic effects in breast 
tissue but estrogenic effects in uterine epithelium, is 
associated with an increased risk of endometrial can-
cer. Secondary events such as the loss of the PTEN or 
Cables tumor suppressor genes likely serve as second-
ary events in carcinogenesis. The molecular events that 
underlie less common endometrial cancers such as clear 
cell and papillary serous tumors of the uterine corpus 
are unknown.
Women with mutation in one of a series of DNA 
mismatch repair genes associated with the Lynch syn-
drome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colon 
cancer (HNPCC) syndrome, are at increased risk for 
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma. These individu-
als have germ-line mutations in MSH2, MLH1, and 
in rare cases PMS1 and PMS2. Individuals who carry 
these mutations typically have a family history of cancer 
and are at markedly increased risk for colon cancer and 
modestly increased risk for ovarian cancer and a variety 
Stage
Staging of cervix cancer
0
I
II
III
IV
Extent of
tumor
Carcinoma
in situ
5-year
survival
100%
Confined
to cervix
85%
Uterine
cavity
Uterine
wall
Fallopian
tube
Internal os
Corpus
Pelvic
side wall
IIB
IIIB
Cervix
IIA
IIIA
External os
Fundus
Vagina
47%
Disease
beyond cervix
but not to pelvic
wall or lower
1/3 of vagina
65%
28%
Disease
to pelvic
wall or
lower 1/3
vagina
35%
21%
Invades bladder,
rectum or
metastasis
7%
4%
Stage at
presentation
Figure 14-1 
Anatomic display of the stages of cervix cancer defined by location, extent of tumor, frequency of presentation, and 
5-year survival.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
222
therapy. Patients with high-grade tumors or tumors 
that are deeply invasive (stage IB, 13%) are at higher 
risk for pelvic recurrence or recurrence at the vagi-
nal cuff, which is typically prevented by vaginal vault 
brachytherapy.
Women with regional metastases or metastatic dis-
ease (3% of patients) with low-grade tumors can be 
treated with progesterone. Poorly differentiated tumors 
are typically resistant to hormonal manipulation and 
thus are treated with chemotherapy. The role of chemo-
therapy in the adjuvant setting is currently under inves-
tigation. Chemotherapy for metastatic disease is deliv-
ered with palliative intent.
Five-year survival is 89% for stage I, 73% for stage II, 
52% for stage III, and 17% for stage IV disease (Table 14-1).
Gestational  
Trophoblastic Tumors
Global Considerations
Gestational trophoblastic diseases represent a 
spectrum of neoplasia from benign hydatidi-
form mole to choriocarcinoma due to persistent 
trophoblastic disease associated most commonly with 
molar pregnancy but occasionally seen after normal ges-
tation. The most common presentations of trophoblas-
tic tumors are partial and complete molar pregnancies. 
These represent approximately 1 in 1500 conceptions 
in developed Western countries. The incidence widely 
varies globally, with areas in Southeast Asia having a 
much higher incidence of molar pregnancy. Regions 
with high molar pregnancy rates are often associated 
with diets low in carotene and animal fats.
Risk Factors
Trophoblastic tumors result from the outgrowth or per-
sistence of placental tissue. They arise most commonly 
in the uterus but can also arise in other sites such as the 
fallopian tubes due to ectopic pregnancy. Risk factors 
include poorly defined dietary and environmental fac-
tors as well as conceptions at the extremes of reproduc-
tive age, with the incidence particularly high in females 
conceiving younger than age 16 or older than age 50. 
In older women, the incidence of molar pregnancy 
might be as high as one in three, likely due to increased 
risk of abnormal fertilization of the aged ova. Most 
trophoblastic neoplasms are associated with complete 
moles, diploid tumors with all genetic material from 
the paternal donor (known as parental disomy). This 
is thought to occur when a single sperm fertilizes an 
enucleate egg that subsequently duplicates the paternal 
of other tumors. Middle-aged women with HNPCC 
carry a 4% annual risk of endometrial cancer and a rela-
tive overall risk of approximately 200-fold as compared 
to age-matched women without HNPCC.
Pathology
Approximately 75–80% of endometrial cancers are ade-
nocarcinomas. Prognosis depends on stage, histologic 
grade, and depth of myometrial invasion. Approximately 
10% of patients have tumors with areas of squamous cell 
differentiation. When the tumor is well differentiated, it 
is called adenoacanthoma; when poorly differentiated,
adenosquamous carcinoma. Less common histologies include 
mucinous carcinoma (5%) and a papillary serous tumor 
(<10%) that behaves like ovarian cancer.
Presentations
The majority of women with tumors of the uterine cor-
pus present with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding due 
to shedding of the malignant endometrial lining. Pre-
menopausal women often will present with atypical 
bleeding between typical menstrual cycles. These signs 
typically bring a woman to the attention of a health care 
professional, and hence the majority of women present 
with early-stage disease in which the tumor is confined 
to the uterine corpus. Diagnosis is typically established 
by endometrial biopsy. Epithelial tumors may spread to 
pelvic or para-aortic lymph nodes. Pulmonary metasta-
ses can appear later in the natural history of this disease 
but are very uncommon at initial presentation. Serous 
tumors tend to have patterns of spread much more rem-
iniscent of ovarian cancer, with many patients present-
ing with omental disease and sometimes ascites. Some 
women presenting with uterine sarcomas will present 
with pelvic pain. Nodal metastases are uncommon with 
sarcomas, which are more likely to present with either 
intraabdominal disease or pulmonary metastases.
Treatment	
Uterine Cancer
Most women with endometrial cancer have disease that 
is localized to the uterus (75% are stage I, Table 14-1), 
and definitive treatment typically involves a hysterec-
tomy with removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes. 
The resection of lymph nodes does not improve out-
come but does provide prognostic information. Node 
involvement defines stage III disease, present in 13% 
of patients. Tumor grade and depth of invasion are the 
two key prognostic variables in early-stage tumors, 
and women with low-grade and/or minimally invasive 
tumors are typically observed after definitive surgical 
 
CHAPTER 14
Gynecologic Malignancies
223
DNA. Trophoblastic proliferation occurs with exuber-
ant villous stroma. If pseudopregnancy extends out past 
the 12th week, fluid progressively accumulates within 
the stroma leading to “hydropic changes.” There is no 
fetal development in complete moles.
Partial moles arise from the fertilization of an egg 
with two sperm, hence two-thirds of genetic material 
is paternal in these triploid tumors. Hydropic changes 
are less dramatic, and fetal development can often occur 
through late first trimester or early second trimester at 
which point spontaneous abortion is common. Labo-
ratory findings will include excessively high hCG and 
high AFP. The risk of persistent gestational trophoblas-
tic disease after partial mole is approximately 5%. Com-
plete and partial moles can be noninvasive or invasive. 
Myometrial invasion occurs in no more than one in six 
complete moles and a lower portion of partial moles.
Presentation of Invasive 
Trophoblastic Disease
The clinical presentation of molar pregnancy is chang-
ing in developed countries due to the early detection of 
pregnancy with home pregnancy kits and the very early 
use of Doppler and ultrasound to evaluate the early fetus 
and uterine cavity for evidence of a viable fetus. Thus, 
in these countries, the majority of women presenting 
with trophoblastic disease have their moles detected early 
and have typical symptoms of early pregnancy including 
nausea, amenorrhea, and breast tenderness. With uter-
ine evacuation of early complete and partial moles, most 
women experience spontaneous remission of their dis-
ease as monitored by serial hCG levels. These women 
require no chemotherapy. Patients with persistent eleva-
tion of hCG or rising hCG postevacuation have persis-
tent or actively growing gestational trophoblastic disease 
and require therapy. Most series suggest that between 15 
and 25% of women will have evidence of persistent ges-
tational trophoblastic disease after molar evacuation.
In women who lack access to prenatal care, pre-
senting symptoms can be life threatening including 
the development of preeclampsia or even eclampsia. 
Hyperthyroidism can also be seen. Evacuation of large 
moles can be associated with life-threatening complications 
including uterine perforation, volume loss, high-output 
cardiac failure, and adult respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS).
For women with evidence of rising hCG or radio-
logic confirmation of metastatic or persistent regional 
disease, prognosis can be estimated through a variety of 
scoring algorithms that identify those women at low, 
intermediate, and high risk for requiring multi-agent 
chemotherapy. In general, women with widely meta-
static nonpulmonary disease, very elevated hCG, and 
prior normal antecedent term pregnancy are considered 
at high risk and typically require multi-agent chemo-
therapy for cure.
Treatment	
Invasive Trophoblastic Disease
The management for a persistent and rising hCG poste-
vacuation of a molar conception is typically chemo-
therapy, although surgery can play an important role 
for disease that is persistently isolated in the uterus 
(especially if childbearing is complete) or to control 
hemorrhage. For women wishing to maintain fertility or 
with metastatic disease, the preferred treatment is che-
motherapy. Chemotherapy is guided by the hCG level, 
which typically drops to undetectable levels with effec-
tive therapy. Single-agent treatment with methotrex-
ate or actinomycin D cures 90% of women with low-risk 
disease. Patients with high-risk disease (high hCG levels, 
presentation 4 or more months after pregnancy, brain 
or liver metastases, failure of methotrexate therapy) are 
typically treated with multi-agent chemotherapy [e.g., 
etoposide, methotrexate, and actinomycin D alternat-
ing with cyclophosphamide and vincristine (EMA-CO)], 
which is typically curative even in those women with 
extensive metastatic disease. Cisplatin, bleomycin, and 
either etoposide or vinblastine are also active combina-
tions. Survival in high-risk disease exceeds 80%. Cured 
women may get pregnant again without evidence of 
increased fetal or maternal complications.
 Kevin T. McVary 
224
 Male sexual dysfunction affects 10–25% of middle-aged 
and elderly men, and female sexual dysfunction occurs 
with a similar frequency. Demographic changes, the 
popularity of newer treatments, and greater awareness 
of sexual dysfunction by patients and society have led 
to increased diagnosis and associated health care expen-
ditures for the management of this common disorder. 
Because many patients are reluctant to initiate discussion 
of their sex lives, physicians should address this topic 
directly to elicit a history of sexual dysfunction. 
 male Sexual DySFunction 
 Physiology of mAlE sExuAl rEsPonsE 
 Normal male sexual function requires (1) an intact 
libido, (2) the ability to achieve and maintain penile 
erection, (3) ejaculation, and (4) detumescence.  Libido
refers to sexual desire and is infl uenced by a variety 
of visual, olfactory, tactile, auditory, imaginative, and 
hormonal stimuli. Sex steroids, particularly testos-
terone, act to increase libido. Libido can be dimin-
ished by hormonal or psychiatric disorders and by 
medications. 
 Penile tumescence leading to erection depends on 
an increased fl ow of blood into the lacunar network 
accompanied by complete relaxation of the arteries and 
corporal smooth muscle. The microarchitecture of the 
corpora is composed of a mass of smooth muscle (tra-
becula) that contains a network of endothelial-lined 
vessels (lacunar spaces). Subsequent compression of the 
trabecular smooth muscle against the fi broelastic tunica 
albuginea causes a passive closure of the emissary veins 
and accumulation of blood in the corpora. In the pres-
ence of a full erection and a competent valve mecha-
nism, the corpora become noncompressible cylinders 
from which blood does not escape. 
 The central nervous system (CNS) exerts an impor-
tant infl uence by either stimulating or antagonizing spinal 
pathways that mediate erectile function and ejaculation. 
The erectile response is mediated by a combination of 
central (psychogenic) innervation and peripheral (refl exo-
genic) innervation. Sensory nerves that originate from 
receptors in the penile skin and glans converge to form 
the dorsal nerve of the penis, which travels to the S2-S4 
dorsal root ganglia via the pudendal nerve. Parasympa-
thetic nerve fi bers to the penis arise from neurons in the 
intermediolateral columns of the S2-S4 sacral spinal seg-
ments. Sympathetic innervation originates from the T 11 
to the L 2 spinal segments and descends through the 
hypogastric plexus. 
 Neural input to smooth-muscle tone is crucial to 
the initiation and maintenance of an erection. There 
is also an intricate interaction between the corporal 
smooth-muscle cell and its overlying endothelial cell 
lining  ( Fig. 15-1 A ) . Nitric oxide, which induces vas-
cular relaxation, promotes erection and is opposed by 
endothelin 1 (ET-1) and Rho kinase, which mediate 
vascular contraction. Nitric oxide is synthesized from L-
arginine by nitric oxide synthase and is released from 
the nonadrenergic, noncholinergic (NANC) autonomic 
nerve supply to act postjunctionally on smooth-muscle 
cells. Nitric oxide increases the production of cyclic 
3′,5′-guanosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP), which 
induces relaxation of smooth muscle ( Fig. 15-1 B ). 
Cyclic GMP is gradually broken down by phosphodi-
esterase type 5 (PDE-5). Inhibitors of PDE-5 such as 
the oral medications sildenafi l, vardenafi l, and tadalafi l 
maintain erections by reducing the breakdown of cyclic 
GMP. However, if nitric oxide is not produced at some 
level, PDE-5 inhibitors are ineffective, as these drugs 
facilitate, but do not initiate, the initial enzyme cascade. 
In addition to nitric oxide, vasoactive prostaglandins 
(PGE 1 , PGF 2 α ) are synthesized within the cavernosal 
 SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION 
 cHaPteR 15 
 
CHAPTER 15
Sexual Dysfunction
225
tissue and increase cyclic AMP levels, also leading to 
relaxation of cavernosal smooth-muscle cells.
Ejaculation is stimulated by the sympathetic nervous 
system; this results in contraction of the epididymis, vas 
deferens, seminal vesicles, and prostate, causing semi-
nal fluid to enter the urethra. Seminal fluid emission is 
followed by rhythmic contractions of the bulbocaver-
nosus and ischiocavernosus muscles, leading to ejacu-
lation. Premature ejaculation usually is related to anxiety 
or a learned behavior and is amenable to behavioral 
therapy or treatment with medications such as selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Retrograde ejacula-
tion results when the internal urethral sphincter does not 








Smooth-muscle cells
Cholinergic
  nerve
A
-Adrenergic
  nerve
Endothelial cells
Gap junctions
NO
NE
Parasympathetic (erection)
Sympathetic (detumescence)
B
-Arginine
 NO 
 cyclic GMP
 5-GMP
 PDE-5

Sildenafil
Vardenafil
Tadalafil
 Erection
  Smooth-
  muscle
  relaxation
 iCa2
NOS
L
Ach
NANC
NO
Endothelin
Rho kinase
close; it may occur in men with diabetes or after surgery 
involving the bladder neck.
Detumescence is mediated by norepinephrine from 
the sympathetic nerves, endothelin from the vascu-
lar surface, and smooth-muscle contraction induced 
by postsynaptic α-adrenergic receptors and activation 
of Rho kinase. These events increase venous outflow 
and restore the flaccid state. Venous leak can cause 
premature detumescence and is caused by insufficient 
relaxation of the corporal smooth muscle rather than a 
specific anatomic defect. Priapism refers to a persistent 
and painful erection and may be associated with sickle 
cell anemia, hypercoagulable states, spinal cord injury, 
or injection of vasodilator agents into the penis.
Erectile Dysfunction
Epidemiology
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is not considered a normal 
part of the aging process. Nonetheless, it is associated 
with certain physiologic and psychological changes 
related to age. In the Massachusetts Male Aging Study 
(MMAS), a community-based survey of men aged 
40–70, 52% of responders reported some degree of ED. 
Complete ED occurred in 10% of respondents, moder-
ate ED in 25%, and minimal ED in 17%. The incidence 
of moderate or severe ED more than doubled between 
the ages of 40 and 70. In the National Health and Social 
Life Survey (NHSLS), which included a sample of men 
and women aged 18–59, 10% of men reported being 
unable to maintain an erection (corresponding to the 
proportion of men in the MMAS reporting severe ED). 
Incidence was highest among men in the age group 
50–59 (21%) and men who were poor (14%), divorced 
(14%), and less educated (13%).
The incidence of ED is also higher among men with 
certain medical disorders, such as diabetes mellitus, obe-
sity, lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), heart disease, hypertension, 
and decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels. 
Cardiovascular disease and ED share etiologies as well 
as pathophysiology (e.g., endothelial dysfunction), and 
the degree of ED appears to correlate with the severity 
of cardiovascular disease. Consequently, ED represents a 
“sentinel symptom” in patients with occult cardiovascular 
and peripheral vascular disease.
Smoking is also a significant risk factor in the devel-
opment of ED. Medications used in treating diabetes or 
cardiovascular disease are additional risk factors (see later 
in the chapter). There is a higher incidence of ED among 
men who have undergone radiation or surgery for pros-
tate cancer and in those with a lower spinal cord injury. 
Psychological causes of ED include depression, anger, 
stress from unemployment, and other stress-related causes.
Figure 15-1 
Pathways that control erection and detumescence. 
A. Erection is mediated by cholinergic parasympathetic path-
ways and nonadrenergic, noncholinergic (NANC) pathways, 
which release nitric oxide (NO). Endothelial cells also release 
NO, which induces vascular smooth-muscle cell relaxation, 
allowing enhanced blood flow and leading to erection. Detu-
mescence is mediated by sympathetic pathways that release 
norepinephrine and stimulate α-adrenergic pathways, lead-
ing to contraction of vascular smooth-muscle cells. Endothe-
lin, released from endothelial cells, also induces contraction. 
Rho kinase activation via endothelin activity (among others) 
also contributes to detumescence by alteration of calcium 
signaling. B. Biochemical pathways of NO synthesis and 
action. Sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil enhance erectile 
function by inhibiting phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5), 
thereby maintaining high levels of cyclic 3′,5′-guanosine mono­
phosphate (cyclic GMP). iCa2+, intracellular calcium; NOS, 
nitric oxide synthase.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
226
Pathophysiology
ED may result from three basic mechanisms: (1) failure 
to initiate (psychogenic, endocrinologic, or neurogenic), 
(2) failure to fill (arteriogenic), and (3) failure to store 
adequate blood volume within the lacunar network 
(venoocclusive dysfunction). These categories are not 
mutually exclusive, and multiple factors contribute to ED 
in many patients. For example, diminished filling pres-
sure can lead secondarily to venous leak. Psychogenic 
factors frequently coexist with other etiologic factors and 
should be considered in all cases. Diabetic, atheroscle-
rotic, and drug-related causes account for >80% of cases 
of ED in older men.
Vasculogenic
The most common organic cause of ED is a disturbance 
of blood flow to and from the penis. Atherosclerotic or 
traumatic arterial disease can decrease flow to the lacunar 
spaces, resulting in decreased rigidity and an increased 
time to full erection. Excessive outflow through the 
veins despite adequate inflow also may contribute to 
ED. Structural alterations to the fibroelastic compo-
nents of the corpora may cause a loss of compliance 
and inability to compress the tunical veins. This condi-
tion may result from aging, increased cross-linking of 
collagen fibers induced by nonenzymatic glycosylation, 
hypoxemia, or altered synthesis of collagen associated 
with hypercholesterolemia.
Neurogenic
Disorders that affect the sacral spinal cord or the auto-
nomic fibers to the penis preclude nervous system relax-
ation of penile smooth muscle, thus leading to ED. 
In patients with spinal cord injury, the degree of ED 
depends on the completeness and level of the lesion. 
Patients with incomplete lesions or injuries to the upper 
part of the spinal cord are more likely to retain erectile 
capabilities than are those with complete lesions or inju-
ries to the lower part. Although 75% of patients with 
spinal cord injuries have some erectile capability, only 
25% have erections sufficient for penetration. Other 
neurologic disorders commonly associated with ED 
include multiple sclerosis and peripheral neuropathy. 
The latter is often due to either diabetes or alcoholism. 
Pelvic surgery may cause ED through disruption of the 
autonomic nerve supply.
Endocrinologic
Androgens increase libido, but their exact role in erec-
tile function is unclear. Individuals with castrate levels 
of testosterone can achieve erections from visual or 
sexual stimuli. Nonetheless, normal levels of testoster-
one appear to be important for erectile function, par-
ticularly in older males. Androgen replacement therapy 
can improve depressed erectile function when it is sec-
ondary to hypogonadism; however, it is not useful for 
ED when endogenous testosterone levels are normal. 
Increased prolactin may decrease libido by suppressing 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), and it also 
leads to decreased testosterone levels. Treatment of 
hyperprolactinemia with dopamine agonists can restore 
libido and testosterone.
Diabetic
ED occurs in 35–75% of men with diabetes mellitus. 
Pathologic mechanisms are related primarily to diabetes-
associated vascular and neurologic complications. Dia-
betic macrovascular complications are related mainly to 
age, whereas microvascular complications correlate with 
the duration of diabetes and the degree of glycemic 
control (Chap. 19). Individuals with diabetes also have 
reduced amounts of nitric oxide synthase in both endo-
thelial and neural tissues.
Psychogenic
Two mechanisms contribute to the inhibition of erec-
tions in psychogenic ED. First, psychogenic stimuli to the 
sacral cord may inhibit reflexogenic responses, thereby 
blocking activation of vasodilator outflow to the penis. 
Second, excess sympathetic stimulation in an anxious 
man may increase penile smooth-muscle tone. The 
most common causes of psychogenic ED are perfor-
mance anxiety, depression, relationship conflict, loss of 
attraction, sexual inhibition, conflicts over sexual prefer-
ence, sexual abuse in childhood, and fear of pregnancy 
or sexually transmitted disease. Almost all patients with 
ED, even when it has a clear-cut organic basis, develop 
a psychogenic component as a reaction to ED.
Medication-related
Medication-induced ED (Table 15-1) is estimated to 
occur in 25% of men seen in general medical outpatient 
clinics. The adverse effects related to drug therapy are 
additive, especially in older men. In addition to the drug 
itself, the disease being treated is likely to contribute to 
sexual dysfunction. Among the antihypertensive agents, 
the thiazide diuretics and beta blockers have been impli-
cated most frequently. Calcium channel blockers and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are cited less 
frequently. These drugs may act directly at the corpo-
ral level (e.g., calcium channel blockers) or indirectly 
by reducing pelvic blood pressure, which is important 
in the development of penile rigidity. α-Adrenergic 
blockers are less likely to cause ED. Estrogens, GnRH 
agonists, H2 antagonists, and spironolactone cause ED 
by suppressing gonadotropin production or by block-
ing androgen action. Antidepressant and antipsychotic 
agents—particularly neuroleptics, tricyclics, and SSRIs—
are associated with erectile, ejaculatory, orgasmic, and 
sexual desire difficulties.
If there is a strong association between the institution 
of a drug and the onset of ED, alternative medications 
should be considered. Otherwise, it is often practical to 
 
CHAPTER 15
Sexual Dysfunction
227
treat the ED without attempting multiple changes in 
medications, as it may be difficult to establish a causal 
role for a drug.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Erectile Dysfunction
A good physician-patient relationship helps unravel the 
possible causes of ED, many of which require discussion 
of personal and sometimes embarrassing topics. For this 
reason, a primary care provider is often ideally suited to 
initiate the evaluation. However, a significant percentage 
of men experience ED and remain undiagnosed unless 
specifically questioned about this issue. By far the most 
common reason for underreporting of ED is patient 
embarrassment. Once the topic is initiated by the physi-
cian, patients are more willing to discuss their potency 
issues. A complete medical and sexual history should be 
taken in an effort to assess whether the cause of ED is 
organic, psychogenic, or multifactorial (Fig. 15-2).
Both the patient and his sexual partner should be 
interviewed regarding sexual history. ED should be dis­
tinguished from other sexual problems, such as pre-
mature ejaculation. Lifestyle factors such as sexual 
orientation, the patient′s distress from ED, performance 
anxiety, and details of sexual techniques should be 
addressed. Standardized questionnaires are available to 
assess ED, including the International Index of Erectile 
Function (IIEF) and the more easily administered Sexual 
Health Inventory for Men (SHIM), a validated abridged 
version of the IIEF.
The initial evaluation of ED begins with a review of 
the patient′s medical, surgical, sexual, and psychosocial 
histories. The history should note whether the patient 
has experienced pelvic trauma, surgery, or radiation. In 
light of the increasing recognition of the relationship 
between lower urinary tract symptoms and ED, it is advis-
able to evaluate for the presence of symptoms of bladder 
outlet obstruction. Questions should focus on the onset 
of symptoms, the presence and duration of partial erec-
tions, and the progression of ED. A history of nocturnal 
or early morning erections is useful for distinguishing 
physiologic ED from psychogenic ED. Nocturnal erec-
tions occur during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and 
require intact neurologic and circulatory systems. Organic 
causes of ED generally are characterized by a gradual and 
persistent change in rigidity or the inability to sustain
Table 15-1
Drugs Associated With Erectile Dysfunction
Classification
Drugs
Diuretics
Thiazides
Spironolactone
Antihypertensives
Calcium channel blockers
Methyldopa
Clonidine
Reserpine
Beta blockers
Guanethidine
Cardiac/antihyper-
lipidemics
Digoxin
Gemfibrozil
Clofibrate
Antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors
Tricyclic antidepressants
Lithium
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranquilizers
Butyrophenones
Phenothiazines
H2 antagonists
Ranitidine
Cimetidine
Hormones
Progesterone
Estrogens
Corticosteroids
GnRH agonists
5α-Reductase inhibitors
Cyproterone acetate
Cytotoxic agents
Cyclophosphamide
Methotrexate
Roferon-A
Anticholinergics
Disopyramide
Anticonvulsants
Recreational
Ethanol
Cocaine
Marijuana
Abbreviation: GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
Patient/partner education
Goal-directed therapy planning
Sex therapy
Special testing
Treatment
  success
Treatment
  success
Oral PDE inhibitors
Vacuum device
Implantation/
  vascular surgery
Intraurethral or injection therapy
Problem resolved
Problem persists
History: Medical, sexual, and psychosocial
Physical examination
Serum: Testosterone and prolactin levels
Lifestyle risk management
Medication review
PATIENT EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT
Figure 15-2 
Algorithm for the evaluation and management of patients 
with ED. PDE, phosphodiesterase.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
228
nocturnal, coital, or self-stimulated erections. The 
patient should be questioned about the presence of 
penile curvature or pain with coitus. It is also important 
to address libido, as decreased sexual drive and ED are 
sometimes the earliest signs of endocrine abnormali-
ties (e.g., increased prolactin, decreased testosterone 
levels). It is useful to ask whether the problem is con-
fined to coitus with one partner or also involves other 
partners; ED not uncommonly arises in association with 
new or extramarital sexual relationships. Situational 
ED, as opposed to consistent ED, suggests psychogenic 
causes. Ejaculation is much less commonly affected than 
erection, but questions should be asked about whether 
ejaculation is normal, premature, delayed, or absent. 
Relevant risk factors should be identified, such as diabe-
tes mellitus, coronary artery disease (CAD), and neuro-
logic disorders. The patient′s surgical history should be 
explored with an emphasis on bowel, bladder, prostate, 
and vascular procedures. A complete drug history is 
also important. Social changes that may precipitate ED 
are also crucial to the evaluation, including health wor-
ries, spousal death, divorce, relationship difficulties, and 
financial concerns.
Because ED commonly involves a host of endothelial 
cell risk factors, men with ED report higher rates of overt 
and silent myocardial infarction. Therefore, ED in an oth-
erwise asymptomatic male warrants consideration of 
other vascular disorders, including CAD.
The physical examination is an essential element in the 
assessment of ED. Signs of hypertension as well as evi-
dence of thyroid, hepatic, hematologic, cardiovascular, or 
renal diseases should be sought. An assessment should 
be made of the endocrine and vascular systems, the exter-
nal genitalia, and the prostate gland. The penis should 
be palpated carefully along the corpora to detect fibrotic 
plaques. Reduced testicular size and loss of secondary 
sexual characteristics are suggestive of hypogonadism. 
Neurologic examination should include assessment of 
anal sphincter tone, investigation of the bulbocavernosus 
reflex, and testing for peripheral neuropathy.
Although hyperprolactinemia is uncommon, a serum 
prolactin level should be measured, as decreased libido 
and/or ED may be the presenting symptoms of a pro-
lactinoma or another mass lesion of the sella (Chap. 2). 
The serum testosterone level should be measured, and if 
it is low, gonadotropins should be measured to determine 
whether hypogonadism is primary (testicular) or second-
ary (hypothalamic-pituitary) in origin (Chap.  8). If not 
performed recently, serum chemistries, complete blood 
count (CBC), and lipid profiles may be of value, as they 
can yield evidence of anemia, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, 
or other systemic diseases associated with ED. Determi-
nation of serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) should 
be conducted according to recommended clinical 
guidelines.
Additional diagnostic testing is rarely necessary in 
the evaluation of ED. However, in selected patients, 
specialized testing may provide insight into pathologic 
mechanisms of ED and aid in the selection of treat-
ment options. Optional specialized testing includes 
(1) studies of nocturnal penile tumescence and rigid-
ity, (2) vascular testing (in-office injection of vasoactive 
substances, penile Doppler ultrasound, penile angiog-
raphy, dynamic infusion cavernosography/cavernosom-
etry), (3) neurologic testing (biothesiometry-graded vibra-
tory perception, somatosensory evoked potentials), 
and (4) psychological diagnostic tests. The information 
potentially gained from these procedures must be bal-
anced against their invasiveness and cost.
Treatment	
Male Sexual Dysfunction
Patient Education  Patient and partner educa-
tion is essential in the treatment of ED. In goal-directed 
therapy, education facilitates understanding of the dis-
ease, the results of the tests, and the selection of treat-
ment. Discussion of treatment options helps clarify how 
treatment is best offered and stratify first- and second-
line therapies. Patients with high-risk lifestyle issues 
such as obesity, smoking, alcohol abuse, and recre-
ational drug use should be counseled on the role those 
factors play in the development of ED.
Therapies currently employed for the treatment of 
ED include oral phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor 
therapy (most commonly used), injection therapies, 
testosterone therapy, penile devices, and psychologi-
cal therapy. In addition, limited data suggest that treat-
ments for underlying risk factors and comorbidities—
for example, weight loss, exercise, stress reduction, and 
smoking cessation—may improve erectile function. 
Decisions regarding therapy should take into account 
the preferences and expectations of patients and their 
partners.
Oral Agents  Sildenafil, tadalafil, and vardenafil 
are the only approved and effective oral agents for the 
treatment of ED. These three medications have mark-
edly improved the management of ED because they are 
effective for the treatment of a broad range of causes, 
including psychogenic, diabetic, vasculogenic, post-
radical prostatectomy (nerve-sparing procedures), and 
spinal cord injury. They belong to a class of medications 
that are selective and potent inhibitors of PDE-5, the 
predominant phosphodiesterase isoform found in the 
penis. They are administered in graduated doses and 
enhance erections after sexual stimulation. The onset of 
action is approximately 60–120 min, depending on the 
medication used and other factors, such as recent food 
intake. Reduced initial doses should be considered for
 
CHAPTER 15
Sexual Dysfunction
229
patients who are elderly, are taking concomitant alpha 
blockers, have renal insufficiency, or are taking medi-
cations that inhibit the CYP3A4 metabolic pathway in 
the liver (e.g., erythromycin, cimetidine, ketoconazole, 
and possibly itraconazole and mibefradil), as they may 
increase the serum concentration of the PDE-5 inhibi-
tors (PDE-5i) or promote hypotension.
Several randomized trials have demonstrated the 
efficacy of this class of medications. There are no com-
pelling data to support the superiority of one PDE-5i 
over another.
Patients may fail to respond to a PDE-5i for several 
reasons (Table 15-2). Some patients may not tolerate 
PDE-5i secondary to adverse events from vasodilation 
in nonpenile tissues expressing PDE-5 or from the inhi-
bition of homologous nonpenile isozymes (i.e., PDE-6 
found in the retina). Abnormal vision attributed to the 
effects of PDE-5i on retinal PDE-6 is of short duration, 
reported only with sildenafil and not thought to be clini-
cally significant. A more serious concern is the possibil-
ity that PDE-5i may cause nonarteritic anterior ischemic 
optic neuropathy; although data to support that asso-
ciation are limited, it is prudent to avoid the use of these 
agents in men with a prior history of nonarteritic ante-
rior ischemic optic neuropathy.
Testosterone supplementation combined with a PDE-5i 
may be beneficial in improving erectile function in hypo-
gonadal men with ED who are unresponsive to PDE-5i 
alone. These drugs do not affect ejaculation, orgasm, or 
sexual drive. Side effects associated with PDE-5i include 
headaches (19%), facial flushing (9%), dyspepsia (6%), 
and nasal congestion (4%). Approximately 7% of men 
using sildenafil may experience transient altered color 
vision (blue halo effect), and 6% of men taking tadala-
fil may experience loin pain. PDE-5i is contraindicated 
in men receiving nitrate therapy for cardiovascular dis-
ease, including agents delivered by the oral, sublin-
gual, transnasal, and topical routes. These agents can 
potentiate its hypotensive effect and may result in pro-
found shock. Likewise, amyl/butyl nitrate “poppers” 
may have a fatal synergistic effect on blood pressure.
PDE-5i also should be avoided in patients with conges-
tive heart failure and cardiomyopathy because of the 
risk of vascular collapse. Because sexual activity leads to 
an increase in physiologic expenditure [5–6 metabolic 
equivalents (METS)], physicians have been advised to 
exercise caution in prescribing any drug for sexual activ-
ity to those with active coronary disease, heart failure, 
borderline hypotension, or hypovolemia and to those 
on complex antihypertensive regimens.
Although the various forms of PDE-5i have a com-
mon mechanism of action, there are a few differences 
among the three agents. Tadalafil is unique in its longer 
half-life. All three drugs are effective for patients with 
ED of all ages, severities, and etiologies. Although there 
are pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic differences 
among these agents, clinically relevant differences are 
not clear.
Androgen Therapy  Testosterone replacement 
is used to treat both primary and secondary causes of 
hypogonadism (Chap. 8). Androgen supplementation 
in the setting of normal testosterone is rarely efficacious 
in the treatment of ED and is discouraged. Methods of 
androgen replacement include transdermal patches 
and gels, parenteral administration of long-acting tes-
tosterone esters (enanthate and cypionate), and oral 
preparations (17 α-alkylated derivatives) (Chap. 8). Oral
androgen preparations have the potential for hepato-
toxicity and should be avoided.
Men who receive testosterone should be reevaluated 
after 1–3 months and at least annually thereafter for tes-
tosterone levels, erectile function, and adverse effects, 
which may include gynecomastia, sleep apnea, devel-
opment or exacerbation of lower urinary tract symp-
toms or benign prostatic hyperplasia, prostate cancer, 
lowering of HDL, erythrocytosis, elevations of liver 
function tests, and reduced fertility. Periodic reevalua-
tion should include measurement of CBC and PSA and 
digital rectal exam. Therapy should be discontinued in 
patients who do not respond within 3 months.
Vacuum Constriction Devices  Vacuum 
constriction devices (VCDs) are a well-established nonin-
vasive therapy. They are a reasonable treatment alterna-
tive for select patients who cannot take sildenafil or do 
not desire other interventions. VCDs draw venous blood 
into the penis and use a constriction ring to restrict 
venous return and maintain tumescence. Adverse events 
with VCD include pain, numbness, bruising, and altered 
ejaculation. Additionally, many patients complain that 
the devices are cumbersome and that the induced erec-
tions have a nonphysiologic appearance and feel.
Intraurethral Alprostadil  If a patient 
fails to respond to oral agents, a reasonable next choice 
is intraurethral or self-injection of vasoactive substances.
Table 15-2
Issues to Consider If Patients Report Failure 
of PDE-5i to Improve Erectile Dysfunction
•  A trial of medication on at least six different days at the 
maximal dose should be made before declaring patient 
nonresponsive to PDE-5i use.
•  Taking medication after a high-fat meal.
•  Failure to include physical and psychic stimulation at the 
time of foreplay to induce endogenous NO.
•  Unrecognized hypogonadism.
Abbreviations: NO, nitric oxide; PDE-5i, phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitor.
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
230
Intraurethral prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil), in the form 
of a semisolid pellet (doses of 125–1000 μg), is delivered 
with an applicator. Approximately 65% of men receiving 
intraurethral alprostadil respond with an erection when 
tested in the office, but only 50% achieve successful 
coitus at home. Intraurethral insertion is associated with 
a markedly reduced incidence of priapism in compari-
son to intracavernosal injection.
Intracavernosal Self-Injection  Injection
of synthetic formulations of alprostadil is effective in 
70–80% of patients with ED, but discontinuation rates 
are high because of the invasive nature of administration. 
Doses range between 1 and 40 μg. Injection therapy is 
contraindicated in men with a history of hypersensitivity 
to the drug and men at risk for priapism (hypercoagu-
lable states, sickle cell disease). Side effects include local 
adverse events, prolonged erections, pain, and fibrosis 
with chronic use. Various combinations of alprostadil, 
phentolamine, and/or papaverine sometimes are used.
Surgery  A less frequently used form of therapy 
for ED involves the surgical implantation of a semirigid 
or inflatable penile prosthesis. The choice of prosthesis is 
dependent on patient preference and should take into 
account body habitus and manual dexterity, which may 
affect the ability of the patient to manipulate the device. 
Because of the permanence of prosthetic devices, 
patients should be advised to first consider less inva-
sive options for treatment. These surgical treatments are 
invasive, are associated with potential complications, 
and generally are reserved for treatment of refractory 
ED. Despite their high cost and invasiveness, penile pros-
theses are associated with high rates of patient and part-
ner satisfaction.
Sex Therapy  A course of sex therapy may be use-
ful for addressing specific interpersonal factors that may 
affect sexual functioning. Sex therapy generally consists 
of in-session discussion and at-home exercises specific 
to the person and the relationship. Psychosexual therapy 
involves techniques such as sensate focus (nongenital 
massage), sensory awareness exercises, correction of 
misconceptions about sexuality, and interpersonal dif-
ficulties therapy (e.g., open communication about sexual 
issues, physical intimacy scheduling, and behavioral inter-
ventions). These approaches may be useful in patients 
who have psychogenic or social components to their 
ED, although data from randomized trials are scanty and 
inconsistent. It is preferable if therapy includes both part-
ners if the patient is involved in an ongoing relationship.
Female Sexual Dysfunction
Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) has traditionally 
included disorders of desire, arousal, pain, and muted 
orgasm. The associated risk factors for FSD are similar 
to those in males: cardiovascular disease, endocrine dis-
orders, hypertension, neurologic disorders, and smoking 
(Table 15-3).
Epidemiology
Epidemiologic data are limited, but the available esti-
mates suggest that as many as 43% of women complain 
of at least one sexual problem. Despite the recent inter-
est in organic causes of FSD, desire and arousal phase 
disorders (including lubrication complaints) remain the 
most common presenting problems when surveyed in a 
community-based population.
Physiology of the Female Sexual 
Response
The female sexual response requires the presence of 
estrogens. A role for androgens is also likely but less well 
established. In the CNS, estrogens and androgens work 
synergistically to enhance sexual arousal and response. 
A number of studies report enhanced libido in women 
during preovulatory phases of the menstrual cycle, sug-
gesting that hormones involved in the ovulatory surge 
(e.g., estrogens) increase desire.
Sexual motivation is heavily influenced by context, 
including the environment and partner factors. Once suf-
ficient sexual desire is reached, sexual arousal is mediated 
by the central and autonomic nervous systems. Cerebral 
sympathetic outflow is thought to increase desire, and 
peripheral parasympathetic activity results in clitoral vaso-
congestion and vaginal secretion (lubrication).
The neurotransmitters for clitoral corporal engorge-
ment are similar to those in the male, with a prominent 
role for neural, smooth-muscle, and endothelial released 
nitric oxide (NO). A fine network of vaginal nerves 
and arterioles promotes a vaginal transudate. The major 
Table 15-3
Risk Factors for Female Sexual Dysfunction
Neurologic disease: stroke, spinal cord injury, parkinsonism
Trauma, genital surgery, radiation
Endocrinopathies: diabetes, hyperprolactinemia
Liver and/or renal failure
Cardiovascular disease
Psychological factors and interpersonal relationship  
disorders: sexual abuse, life stressors
Medications
  Antiandrogens: cimetidine, spironolactone
Antidepressants, alcohol, hypnotics, sedatives
Antiestrogens or GnRH antagonists
Antihistamines, sympathomimetic amines
Antihypertensives: diuretics, calcium channel blockers
Alkylating agents
Anticholinergics
Abbreviation: GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
 
CHAPTER 15
Sexual Dysfunction
231
transmitters of this complex vaginal response are not 
certain, but roles for NO and vasointestinal polypeptide 
(VIP) are suspected. Investigators studying the nor-
mal female sexual response have challenged the long-
held construct of a linear and unmitigated relationship 
between initial desire, arousal, vasocongestion, lubrica-
tion, and eventual orgasm. Caregivers should consider a 
paradigm of a positive emotional and physical outcome 
with one, many, or no orgasmic peak and release.
Although there are anatomic differences as well as 
variation in the density of vascular and neural beds in 
males and females, the primary effectors of sexual response 
are strikingly similar. Intact sensation is important for 
arousal. Thus, reduced levels of sexual functioning are 
more common in women with peripheral neuropa-
thies (e.g., diabetes). Vaginal lubrication is a transudate 
of serum that results from the increased pelvic blood 
flow associated with arousal. Vascular insufficiency from 
a variety of causes may compromise adequate lubrication 
and result in dyspareunia. Cavernosal and arteriole smooth- 
muscle relaxation occurs via increased nitric oxide syn-
thase (NOS) activity and produces engorgement in the 
clitoris and the surrounding vestibule. Orgasm requires 
an intact sympathetic outflow tract; hence, orgasmic dis-
orders are common in female patients with spinal cord 
injuries.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Female Sexual Dysfunction
Many women do not volunteer information about their 
sexual response. Open-ended questions in a supportive 
atmosphere are helpful in initiating a discussion of sex-
ual fitness in women who are reluctant to discuss such 
issues. Once a complaint has been voiced, a comprehen-
sive evaluation should be performed, including a medical 
history, a psychosocial history, a physical examination, 
and limited laboratory testing.
The history should include the usual medical, surgical, 
obstetric, psychological, gynecologic, sexual, and social 
information. Past experiences, intimacy, knowledge, 
and partner availability should also be ascertained. 
Medical disorders that may affect sexual health should 
be delineated. They include diabetes, cardiovascu-
lar disease, gynecologic conditions, obstetric history, 
depression, anxiety disorders, and neurologic disease. 
Medications should be reviewed as they may affect 
arousal, libido, and orgasm. The need for counseling 
and recognizing life stresses should be identified. The physi-
cal examination should assess the genitalia, including 
the clitoris. Pelvic floor examination may identify prolapse 
or other disorders. Laboratory studies are needed, espe-
cially if menopausal status is uncertain. Estradiol, follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH) 
are usually obtained, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
should be considered as it reflects adrenal androgen 
secretion. A CBC, liver function assessment, and lipid 
studies may be useful, if not otherwise obtained. Com-
plicated diagnostic evaluation such as clitoral Doppler 
ultrasonography and biothesiometry require expensive 
equipment and are of uncertain utility. It is important 
for the patient to identify which symptoms are most 
distressing.
The evaluation of FSD previously occurred mainly 
in a psychosocial context. However, inconsistencies 
between diagnostic categories based only on psycho-
social considerations and the emerging recognition of 
organic etiologies have led to a new classification of 
FSD. This diagnostic scheme is based on four compo-
nents that are not mutually exclusive: (1) Hypoactive 
sexual desire—the persistent or recurrent lack of sexual 
thoughts and/or receptivity to sexual activity, which 
causes personal distress. Hypoactive sexual desire may 
result from endocrine failure or may be associated with 
psychological or emotional disorders. (2) Sexual arousal 
disorder—the persistent or recurrent inability to attain 
or maintain sexual excitement, which causes personal 
distress. (3) Orgasmic disorder—the persistent or recur-
rent loss of orgasmic potential after sufficient sexual 
stimulation and arousal, which causes personal distress. 
(4) Sexual pain disorder—persistent or recurrent geni-
tal pain associated with noncoital sexual stimulation, 
which causes personal distress. This newer classifica-
tion emphasizes “personal distress” as a requirement for 
dysfunction and provides clinicians with an organized 
framework for evaluation before or in conjunction with 
more traditional counseling methods.
Treatment	
Female Sexual Dysfunction
General  An open discussion with the patient is 
important as couples may need to be educated about 
normal anatomy and physiologic responses, including 
the role of orgasm, in sexual encounters. Physiologic 
changes associated with aging and/or disease should 
be explained. Couples may need to be reminded that 
clitoral stimulation rather than coital intromission may 
be more beneficial.
Behavioral modification and nonpharmacologic 
therapies should be a first step. Patient and partner 
counseling may improve communication and relation-
ship strains. Lifestyle changes involving known risk fac-
tors can be an important part of the treatment process. 
Emphasis on maximizing physical health and avoiding 
lifestyles (e.g., smoking, alcohol abuse) and medications 
likely to produce FSD is important (Table 15-3). The use 
of topical lubricants may address complaints of dyspa-
reunia and dryness. Contributing medications such as 
antidepressants may need to be altered, including the 
SECTION II
Reproductive Endocrinology
232
use of medications with less impact on sexual function, 
dose reduction, medication switching, or drug holidays.
Hormonal Therapy  In postmenopausal women,
estrogen replacement therapy may be helpful in 
treating vaginal atrophy, decreasing coital pain, and 
improving clitoral sensitivity (Chap. 12). Estrogen 
replacement in the form of local cream is the preferred 
method, as it avoids systemic side effects. Androgen 
levels in women decline substantially before meno-
pause. However, low levels of testosterone or DHEA are 
not effective predictors of a positive therapeutic out-
come with androgen therapy. The widespread use of 
exogenous androgens is not supported by the litera-
ture except in select circumstances (premature ovarian
failure or menopausal states) and in secondary arousal 
disorders.
Oral Agents  The efficacy of PDE-5i in FDS has 
been a marked disappointment in light of the proposed 
role of nitric oxide–dependent physiology in the nor-
mal female sexual response. The use of PDE-5i for FSD 
should be discouraged pending proof that it is effective.
Clitoral Vacuum Device  In patients with 
arousal and orgasmic difficulties, the option of using a 
clitoral vacuum device may be explored. This handheld 
battery-operated device has a small soft plastic cup 
that applies a vacuum over the stimulated clitoris. This 
causes increased cavernosal blood flow, engorgement, 
and vaginal lubrication.
Diabetes Mellitus, 
Obesity, Lipoprotein 
Metabolism
SECTION III
 Jeffrey s. Flier  I   eleftheria Maratos-Flier 
234
 In a world where food supplies are intermittent, the 
ability to store energy in excess of what is required for 
immediate use is essential for survival. Fat cells, resid-
ing within widely distributed adipose tissue depots, are 
adapted to store excess energy effi ciently as triglycer-
ide and, when needed, to release stored energy as free 
fatty acids for use at other sites. This physiologic sys-
tem, orchestrated through endocrine and neural path-
ways, permits humans to survive starvation for as long 
as several months. However, in the presence of nutri-
tional abundance and a sedentary lifestyle, and infl u-
enced importantly by genetic endowment, this system 
increases adipose energy stores and produces adverse 
health consequences. 
 dEfINITION aNd mEaSuREmENT 
Obesity is a state of excess adipose tissue mass. Although 
often viewed as equivalent to increased body weight, 
this need not be the case—lean but very muscular 
individuals may be overweight by numerical standards 
without having increased adiposity. Body weights are 
distributed continuously in populations, so that choice 
of a medically meaningful distinction between lean and 
obese is somewhat arbitrary. Obesity is therefore more 
effectively defi ned by assessing its linkage to morbidity 
or mortality. 
 Although not a direct measure of adiposity, the most 
widely used method to gauge obesity is the  body mass 
index (BMI), which is equal to weight/height 2 (in kg/m 2 ) 
 ( Fig. 16-1 ) . Other approaches to quantifying obesity 
include anthropometry (skinfold thickness), densitom-
etry (underwater weighing), CT or MRI, and electri-
cal impedance. Using data from the Metropolitan Life 
Tables, BMIs for the midpoint of all heights and frames 
among both men and women range from 19 to 26 kg/m 2 ; 
at a similar BMI, women have more body fat than men. 
Based on data of substantial morbidity, a BMI of 30 is 
most commonly used as a threshold for obesity in both 
men and women. Large-scale epidemiologic studies 
suggest that all-cause, metabolic, cancer, and cardiovas-
cular morbidity begin to rise (albeit at a slow rate) when 
BMIs are ≥25, suggesting that the cutoff for obesity 
should be lowered. Most authorities use the term  over-
weight (rather than obese) to describe individuals with 
BMIs between 25 and 30. A BMI between 25 and 30 
should be viewed as medically signifi cant and worthy 
of therapeutic intervention, especially in the presence 
of risk factors that are infl uenced by adiposity such as 
hypertension and glucose intolerance. 
 The distribution of adipose tissue in different anatomic 
depots also has substantial implications for morbidity. 
Specifi cally, intraabdominal and abdominal subcutaneous 
fat have more signifi cance than subcutaneous fat present 
in the buttocks and lower extremities. This distinction 
is most easily made clinically by determining the waist-
to-hip ratio, with a ratio >0.9 in women and >1.0 in 
men being abnormal. Many of the most important com-
plications of obesity such as insulin resistance, diabetes,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hyperandrogenism in
women, are linked more strongly to intraabdominal and/or
upper body fat than to overall adiposity  ( Chap. 18 ) . 
The mechanism underlying this association is unknown 
but may relate to the fact that intraabdominal adipo-
cytes are more lipolytically active than those from other 
depots. Release of free fatty acids into the portal circula-
tion has adverse metabolic actions, especially on the liver. 
Whether adipokines and cytokines secreted by visceral 
adipocytes play an additional role in systemic complica-
tions of obesity is an area of active investigation. 
 PREValENCE 
 Data from the National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Surveys (NHANES) show that the percentage 
of the American adult population with obesity (BMI 
>30) has increased from 14.5% (between 1976 and 
1980) to 33.9% (between 2007 and 2008). As many 
 BIOLOGY OF OBESITY 
 CHAPTER 16 
 
CHAPTER 16
Biology of Obesity
235
as 68% of U.S. adults aged ≥20 years were overweight 
(defined as BMI >25) between the years of 2007 and 
2008. Extreme obesity (BMI ≥40) has also increased and 
affects 5.7% of the population. The increasing preva-
lence of medically significant obesity raises great con-
cern. Obesity is more common among women and in 
the poor, and among blacks and Hispanics; the preva-
lence in children is also rising at a worrisome rate.
Physiologic Regulation of Energy 
Balance
Substantial evidence suggests that body weight is regu-
lated by both endocrine and neural components that 
ultimately influence the effector arms of energy intake 
and expenditure. This complex regulatory system is nec-
essary because even small imbalances between energy 
intake and expenditure will ultimately have large effects 
on body weight. For example, a 0.3% positive imbal-
ance over 30 years would result in a 9-kg (20-lb) weight 
gain. This exquisite regulation of energy balance can-
not be monitored easily by calorie-counting in relation 
to physical activity. Rather, body weight regulation or 
dysregulation depends on a complex interplay of hor-
monal and neural signals. Alterations in stable weight 
by forced overfeeding or food deprivation induce 
physiologic changes that resist these perturbations: with 
weight loss, appetite increases and energy expenditure 
falls; with overfeeding, appetite falls and energy expen-
diture increases. This latter compensatory mechanism 
Weight
kg         lb
Height
cm         in.
Body Mass Index
[kg/m2]
WOMEN
MEN
RELATIVE
RISK
VERY HIGH
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
HIGH
MODERATE
LOW
 VERY LOW
RELATIVE
RISK
VERY HIGH
HIGH
MODERATE
LOW
 VERY LOW
50
125
130
55
135
140
60
65
70
75
80
85
150
145
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
210
150
140
340
130
120
110
100
95
75
80
85
90
65
70
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
320
300
280
260
240
220
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
  95
  90
  85
  80
  75
  70
  65
  60
  55
  50
Figure 16-1
Nomogram for determining body mass index. To use this 
nomogram, place a ruler or other straight edge between the 
body weight (without clothes) in kilograms or pounds located 
on the left-hand line and the height (without shoes) in 
centimeters or inches located on the right-hand line. The 
body mass index is read from the middle of the scale and is 
in metric units. (harrsion  1979, George A. Bray, MD; used 
with permission.)
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
236
frequently fails, however, permitting obesity to develop 
when food is abundant and physical activity is limited. 
A major regulator of these adaptive responses is the 
adipocyte-derived hormone leptin, which acts through 
brain circuits (predominantly in the hypothalamus) to 
influence appetite, energy expenditure, and neuroendo-
crine function (see below).
Appetite is influenced by many factors that are inte-
grated by the brain, most importantly within the hypo-
thalamus (Fig. 16-2). Signals that impinge on the 
hypothalamic center include neural afferents, hormones, 
and metabolites. Vagal inputs are particularly important, 
bringing information from viscera, such as gut disten-
tion. Hormonal signals include leptin, insulin, cortisol, 
and gut peptides. Among the latter is ghrelin, which is 
made in the stomach and stimulates feeding, and pep-
tide YY (PYY) and cholecystokinin, which is made in 
the small intestine and signal to the brain through direct 
action on hypothalamic control centers and/or via the 
vagus nerve. Metabolites, including glucose, can influ-
ence appetite, as seen by the effect of hypoglycemia 
to induce hunger; however, glucose is not normally a 
major regulator of appetite. These diverse hormonal, 
metabolic, and neural signals act by influencing the 
expression and release of various hypothalamic peptides 
[e.g., neuropeptide Y (NPY), Agouti-related peptide 
(AgRP), α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH), 
and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)] that 
are integrated with serotonergic, catecholaminergic, 
endocannabinoid, and opioid signaling pathways (see 
below). Psychological and cultural factors also play a 
role in the final expression of appetite. Apart from rare 
genetic syndromes involving leptin, its receptor, and the 
melanocortin system, specific defects in this complex 
appetite control network that influence common cases 
of obesity are not well defined.
Energy expenditure includes the following components: 
(1) resting or basal metabolic rate; (2) the energy cost 
of metabolizing and storing food; (3) the thermic effect 
of exercise; and (4) adaptive thermogenesis, which var-
ies in response to long-term caloric intake (rising with 
increased intake). Basal metabolic rate accounts for 
∼70% of daily energy expenditure, whereas active physi-
cal activity contributes 5–10%. Thus, a significant com-
ponent of daily energy consumption is fixed.
Genetic models in mice indicate that mutations 
in certain genes (e.g., targeted deletion of the insulin 
receptor in adipose tissue) protect against obesity, appar-
ently by increasing energy expenditure. Adaptive ther-
mogenesis occurs in brown adipose tissue (BAT), which 
plays an important role in energy metabolism in many 
mammals. In contrast to white adipose tissue, which is 
used to store energy in the form of lipids, BAT expends 
stored energy as heat. A mitochondrial uncoupling protein 
(UCP-1) in BAT dissipates the hydrogen ion gradient 
in the oxidative respiration chain and releases energy as 
heat. The metabolic activity of BAT is increased by a 
central action of leptin, acting through the sympathetic 
nervous system that heavily innervates this tissue. In 
rodents, BAT deficiency causes obesity and diabetes; 
stimulation of BAT with a specific adrenergic agonist 
(β3 agonist) protects against diabetes and obesity. BAT 
exists in humans (especially neonates), and although its 
physiologic role is not yet established, identification of 
functional BAT in many adults using PET imaging has 
increased interest in the implications of the tissue for 
pathogenesis and therapy of obesity.
The Adipocyte and Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue is composed of the lipid-storing adi-
pose cell and a stromal/vascular compartment in which 
cells including preadipocytes and macrophages reside. 
Adipose mass increases by enlargement of adipose cells 
through lipid deposition, as well as by an increase in the 
number of adipocytes. Obese adipose tissue is also char-
acterized by increased numbers of infiltrating macro-
phages. The process by which adipose cells are derived 
from a mesenchymal preadipocyte involves an orches-
trated series of differentiation steps mediated by a cas-
cade of specific transcription factors. One of the key 
transcription factors is peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor γ (PPARγ), a nuclear receptor that binds the thi-
azolidinedione class of insulin-sensitizing drugs used in 
the treatment of type 2 diabetes (Chap. 19).
Although the adipocyte has generally been regarded 
as a storage depot for fat, it is also an endocrine cell that 
releases numerous molecules in a regulated fashion 
(Fig. 16-3). These include the energy balance–regulating 
Cultural 
  factors
Increase
Decrease
NPY
MCH
AgRP
Orexin
Endocannabinoid
α-MSH
CART
GLP-1
Serotonin
appetite
Hormones
  Leptin
  Insulin
  Cortisol
Metabolites
  Glucose
  Ketones
Gut peptides
  CCK
  Ghrelin
  PYY
Neural afferents
  (vagal)
Psychological
  factors
Central controllers
of appetite
Figure 16-2
The factors that regulate appetite through effects on 
central neural circuits. Some factors that increase or 
decrease appetite are listed. AgRP, Agouti-related peptide; 
α-MSH, α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone; CART, cocaine- 
and amphetamine-related transcript; CCK, cholecystokinin; 
GLP-1, glucagon-elated peptide-1; MCH, melanin-concentrat-
ing hormone; NPY, neuropeptide Y.
 
CHAPTER 16
Biology of Obesity
237
hormone leptin, cytokines such as tumor necrosis fac-
tor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6, complement factors
such as factor D (also known as adipsin), prothrombotic
agents such as plasminogen activator inhibitor I, and 
a component of the blood pressure–regulating system, angio-
tensinogen. Adiponectin, an abundant adipose-derived 
protein whose levels are reduced in obesity, enhances 
insulin sensitivity and lipid oxidation and it has vascular- 
protective effects, whereas resistin and retinal binding 
protein 4 (RBP4), whose levels are increased in obesity, 
may induce insulin resistance. These factors, and others 
not yet identified, play a role in the physiology of lipid 
homeostasis, insulin sensitivity, blood pressure control, 
coagulation, and vascular health, and are likely to con-
tribute to obesity-related pathologies.
Etiology of Obesity
Although the molecular pathways regulating energy 
balance are beginning to be illuminated, the causes of 
obesity remain elusive. In part, this reflects the fact that 
obesity is a heterogeneous group of disorders. At one 
level, the pathophysiology of obesity seems simple: a 
chronic excess of nutrient intake relative to the level of 
energy expenditure. However, due to the complexity of 
the neuroendocrine and metabolic systems that regulate 
energy intake, storage, and expenditure, it has been dif-
ficult to quantitate all the relevant parameters (e.g., food 
intake and energy expenditure) over time in human 
subjects.
Role of genes versus environment
Obesity is commonly seen in families, and the heritabil-
ity of body weight is similar to that for height. Inheri-
tance is usually not Mendelian, however, and it is dif-
ficult to distinguish the role of genes and environmental 
factors. Adoptees more closely resemble their biologic 
than adoptive parents with respect to obesity, providing 
strong support for genetic influences. Likewise, identical 
twins have very similar BMIs whether reared together 
Cytokines
  TFN-
  IL-6
Substrates
  Free fatty acids
  Glycerol
Enzymes
  Aromatase
  11-HSD-1
Others
  PAI-1
  Angiotensinogen
  RBP4
Complement factors
  Factor D/adipsin
Hormones
  Leptin
  Adiponectin
  Resistin
Adipocyte
Figure 16-3
Factors released by the adipocyte that can affect periph-
eral tissues. PAI, plasminogen activator inhibitor; RBP4, reti-
nal binding protein 4; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
or apart, and their BMIs are much more strongly corre-
lated than those of dizygotic twins. These genetic effects 
appear to relate to both energy intake and expenditure.
Whatever the role of genes, it is clear that the environ-
ment plays a key role in obesity, as evidenced by the fact 
that famine prevents obesity in even the most obesity- 
prone individual. In addition, the recent increase in 
the prevalence of obesity in the United States is far too 
rapid to be due to changes in the gene pool. Undoubt-
edly, genes influence the susceptibility to obesity in 
response to specific diets and availability of nutrition. 
Cultural factors are also important—these relate to both 
availability and composition of the diet and to changes 
in the level of physical activity. In industrial societ-
ies, obesity is more common among poor women, 
whereas in underdeveloped countries, wealthier women 
are more often obese. In children, obesity correlates 
to some degree with time spent watching television. 
Although the role of diet composition in obesity con-
tinues to generate controversy, it appears that high-fat 
diets may promote obesity when combined with diets 
rich in simple, rapidly absorbed carbohydrates.
Additional environmental factors may contribute to 
the increasing obesity prevalence. Both epidemiologic 
correlations and experimental data suggest that sleep 
deprivation leads to increased obesity. Changes in gut 
microbiome with capacity to alter energy balance are 
receiving experimental support from animal studies, and 
a possible role for obesigenic viral infections continues 
to receive sporadic attention.
Specific genetic syndromes
For many years, obesity in rodents has been known to 
be caused by a number of distinct mutations distributed 
through the genome. Most of these single-gene muta-
tions cause both hyperphagia and diminished energy 
expenditure, suggesting a physiologic link between 
these two parameters of energy homeostasis. Identifica-
tion of the ob gene mutation in genetically obese (ob/
ob) mice represented a major breakthrough in the field. 
The ob/ob mouse develops severe obesity, insulin resis-
tance, and hyperphagia, as well as efficient metabolism 
(e.g., it gets fat even when ingesting the same num-
ber of calories as lean litter mates). The product of the 
ob gene is the peptide leptin, a name derived from the 
Greek root leptos, meaning thin. Leptin is secreted by 
adipose cells and acts primarily through the hypothala-
mus. Its level of production provides an index of adipose 
energy stores (Fig. 16-4). High leptin levels decrease 
food intake and increase energy expenditure. Another 
mouse mutant, db/db, which is resistant to leptin, has 
a mutation in the leptin receptor and develops a simi-
lar syndrome. The ob gene is present in humans where 
it is also expressed in fat. Several families with morbid, 
early-onset obesity caused by inactivating mutations in 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
238
Hunger/satiety
Glucose and lipid metabolism
Brain
Hypothalamus
Thermogenesis/autonomic system
Neuroendocrine function
Peripheral targets
Beta cells
Immune cells
Others
Adipocyte
Fed state/obesity
Fasted state
Leptin
Leptin
Blood-brain barrier
Figure 16-4
The physiologic system regulated by leptin. Rising or fall-
ing leptin levels act through the hypothalamus to influence 
appetite, energy expenditure, and neuroendocrine function 
and through peripheral sites to influence systems such as 
the immune system.
Table 16-1
Some Obesity Genes in Humans and Mice
Gene
Gene Product
Mechanism of Obesity
In Human
In Rodent
Lep (ob)
Leptin, a fat-derived hormone
Mutation prevents leptin from delivering 
satiety signal; brain perceives starvation
Yes
Yes
LepR (db)
Leptin receptor
Same as above
Yes
Yes
POMC
Proopiomelanocortin, a precursor of 
several hormones and neuropeptides
Mutation prevents synthesis of  
melanocyte-stimulating hormone 
(MSH), a satiety signal
Yes
Yes
MC4R
Type 4 receptor for MSH
Mutation prevents reception of satiety 
signal from MSH
Yes
Yes
AgRP
Agouti-related peptide, a neuropeptide 
expressed in the hypothalamus
Overexpression inhibits signal through 
MC4R
No
Yes
PC-1
Prohormone convertase 1, a processing 
enzyme
Mutation prevents synthesis of neuro-
peptide, probably MSH
Yes
No
Fat
Carboxypeptidase E, a processing 
enzyme
Same as above
No
Yes
Tub
Tub, a hypothalamic protein of unknown 
function
Hypothalamic dysfunction
No
Yes
TrkB
TrkB, a neurotrophin receptor
Hyperphagia due to uncharacterized 
hypothalamic defect
Yes
Yes
either leptin or the leptin receptor have been described, 
thus demonstrating the biologic relevance of the leptin 
pathway in humans. Obesity in these individuals begins 
shortly after birth, is severe, and is accompanied by 
neuroendocrine abnormalities. The most prominent 
of these is hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, which is 
reversed by leptin replacement in the leptin-deficient 
subset. Central hypothyroidism and growth retarda-
tion are seen in the mouse model, but their occurrence 
in leptin-deficient humans is less clear. To date, there 
is no evidence that mutations in the leptin or leptin 
receptor genes play a prominent role in common forms 
of obesity.
Mutations in several other genes cause severe obe-
sity in humans (Table 16-1); each of these syndromes 
is rare. Mutations in the gene encoding proopiomela-
nocortin (POMC) cause severe obesity through fail-
ure to synthesize α-MSH, a key neuropeptide that 
inhibits appetite in the hypothalamus. The absence of 
POMC also causes secondary adrenal insufficiency due 
to absence of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
as well as pale skin and red hair due to absence of 
α-MSH. Proenzyme convertase 1 (PC-1) mutations 
are thought to cause obesity by preventing synthesis of 
α-MSH from its precursor peptide, POMC. α-MSH 
binds to the type 4 melanocortin receptor (MC4R), a 
key hypothalamic receptor that inhibits eating. Het-
erozygous loss-of-function mutations of this receptor 
account for as much as 5% of severe obesity. These five 
genetic defects define a pathway through which leptin 
(by stimulating POMC and increasing α-MSH) restricts 
food intake and limits weight (Fig. 16-5). The results 
 
CHAPTER 16
Biology of Obesity
239
of genomewide association studies to identify genetic 
loci responsible for obesity in the general population 
have so far been disappointing. More than 10 repli-
cated loci linked to obesity have been identified, but 
together they account for less than 3% of interindivid-
ual variation in BMI. The most replicated of these is a 
gene named FTO, which is of unknown function, but 
like many of the other recently described candidates, is 
expressed in the brain. Since the heritability of obesity is 
estimated to be 40–70%, it is likely that many more loci 
remain to be identified.
In addition to these human obesity genes, stud-
ies in rodents reveal several other molecular candidates 
for hypothalamic mediators of human obesity or lean-
ness. The tub gene encodes a hypothalamic peptide of 
unknown function; mutation of this gene causes late-
onset obesity. The fat gene encodes carboxypeptidase E, 
a peptide-processing enzyme; mutation of this gene is 
thought to cause obesity by disrupting production of one 
or more neuropeptides. AgRP is coexpressed with NPY 
in arcuate nucleus neurons. AgRP antagonizes α-MSH 
action at MC4 receptors, and its overexpression induces 
obesity. In contrast, a mouse deficient in the peptide 
MCH, whose administration causes feeding, is lean.
A number of complex human syndromes with defined 
inheritance are associated with obesity (Table 16-2). 
Although specific genes have limited definition at present, 
their identification will likely enhance our understand-
ing of more common forms of human obesity. In the 
Prader-Willi syndrome, a multigenic neurodevelopmental 
disorder, obesity coexists with short stature, mental retarda-
tion, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypotonia, small 
hands and feet, fish-shaped mouth, and hyperphagia. 
Most patients have a deletion in the 15q11-13 chromo-
somal region, and reduced expression of the signaling 
protein necdin may be an important cause of defec-
tive hypothalamic neural development in this disorder. 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heteroge-
neous disorder characterized by obesity, mental retar-
dation, retinitis pigmentosa, diabetes, renal and cardiac 
malformations, polydactyly, and hypogonadotropic hypo­
gonadism. At least 12 genetic loci have been identified, 
and most of the encoded proteins form two multipro-
tein complexes that are involved in ciliary function 
and microtubule-based intracellular transport. Recent 
evidence suggests that mutations might disrupt leptin 
receptor trafficking in key hypothalamic neurons, caus-
ing leptin resistance.
Other specific syndromes associated with 
obesity
Cushing’s syndrome
Although obese patients commonly have central obesity, 
hypertension, and glucose intolerance, they lack other 
specific stigmata of Cushing’s syndrome (Chap.  5). 
Nonetheless, a potential diagnosis of Cushing’s syn-
drome is often entertained. Cortisol production and 
urinary metabolites (17OH steroids) may be increased 
in simple obesity. Unlike in Cushing’s syndrome, how-
ever, cortisol levels in blood and urine in the basal state 
and in response to corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) or ACTH are normal; the overnight 1-mg 
dexamethasone suppression test is normal in 90%, with 
the remainder being normal on a standard 2-day low-
dose dexamethasone suppression test. Obesity may be 
associated with excessive local reactivation of cortisol in 
fat by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1, an enzyme 
that converts inactive cortisone to cortisol.
Hypothyroidism
The possibility of hypothyroidism should be considered, 
but it is an uncommon cause of obesity; hypothyroid-
ism is easily ruled out by measuring thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH). Much of the weight gain that occurs 
in hypothyroidism is due to myxedema (Chap. 4).
Insulinoma
Patients with insulinoma often gain weight as a result of 
overeating to avoid hypoglycemic symptoms (Chap. 20). 
The increased substrate plus high insulin levels promote 
energy storage in fat. This can be marked in some indi-
viduals but is modest in most.
Craniopharyngioma and other disorders 
involving the hypothalamus
Whether through tumors, trauma, or inflammation, 
hypothalamic dysfunction of systems controlling sati-
ety, hunger, and energy expenditure can cause vary-
ing degrees of obesity (Chap. 2). It is uncommon to 
PC-1 processing enzyme
Leptin
AgRP
Leptin
receptor
signal
Known
mutations in
man
Proopio-
melanocortin
(POMC)
expression
-MSH
Melanocortin 4
receptor
signal
Decreased
appetite
Figure 16-5
A central pathway through which leptin acts to regulate 
appetite and body weight. Leptin signals through proo-
piomelanocortin (POMC) neurons in the hypothalamus to 
induce increased production of α-melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone (α-MSH), requiring the processing enzyme PC-1 
(proenzyme convertase 1). α-MSH acts as an agonist on 
melanocortin-4 receptors to inhibit appetite, and the neuro-
peptide AgRp (Agouti-related peptide) acts as an antagonist 
of this receptor. Mutations that cause obesity in humans are 
indicated by the solid green arrows.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
240
identify a discrete anatomic basis for these disorders. Sub-
tle hypothalamic dysfunction is probably a more common 
cause of obesity than can be documented using currently 
available imaging techniques. Growth hormone (GH), 
which exerts lipolytic activity, is diminished in obesity 
and is increased with weight loss. Despite low GH lev-
els, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I (somatomedin) 
production is normal, suggesting that GH suppression is 
a compensatory response to increased nutritional supply.
Pathogenesis of common obesity
Obesity can result from increased energy intake, 
decreased energy expenditure, or a combination of the 
two. Thus, identifying the etiology of obesity should 
involve measurements of both parameters. However, it 
is difficult to perform direct and accurate measurements 
of energy intake in free-living individuals, and the 
obese, in particular, often underreport intake. Measure-
ments of chronic energy expenditure are possible using 
doubly labeled water or metabolic chamber/rooms. In 
subjects at stable weight and body composition, energy 
intake equals expenditure. Consequently, these tech-
niques allow assessment of energy intake in free-living 
individuals. The level of energy expenditure differs in 
established obesity, during periods of weight gain or loss, 
and in the pre- or postobese state. Studies that fail to 
take note of this phenomenon are not easily interpreted.
There is continued interest in the concept of a body 
weight “set point.” This idea is supported by physio-
logic mechanisms centered around a sensing system in 
adipose tissue that reflects fat stores and a receptor, or 
“adipostat,” that is in the hypothalamic centers. When 
fat stores are depleted, the adipostat signal is low, and 
Table 16-2
A Comparison of Syndromes of Obesity—Hypogonadism and Mental Retardation
Syndrome
Feature
Prader-Willi
Laurence-Moon-Biedl
Ahlstrom’s
Cohen’s
Carpenter’s
Inheritance
Sporadic; two-
thirds have defect
Autosomal  
recessive
Autosomal  
recessive
Probably autosomal  
recessive
Autosomal 
recessive
Stature
Short
Normal;  
infrequently short
Normal; infre-
quently short
Short or tall
Normal
Obesity
Generalized
Moderate to 
severe
Onset 1–3 years
Generalized
Early onset, 1–2 years
Truncal
Early onset,  
2–5 years
Truncal
Mid-childhood, age 5
Truncal,  
gluteal
Craniofacies
Narrow bifrontal 
diameter
Almond-shaped 
eyes
Strabismus
V-shaped mouth
High-arched palate
Not distinctive
Not distinctive
High nasal bridge
Arched palate
Open mouth
Short philtrum
Acrocephaly
Flat nasal 
bridge
High-arched 
palate
Limbs
Small hands and 
feet
Polydactyly
No abnormalities
Hypotonia
Narrow hands and feet
Polydactyly
Syndactyly
Genu valgum
Hypotonia
Reproductive 
status
1° Hypogonadism
1° Hypogonadism
Hypogonadism 
in males but 
not in females
Normal gonadal 
function or  
hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism
2° Hypogo-
nadism
Other  
features
Enamel hypoplasia
Hyperphagia
Temper tantrums
Nasal speech
Dysplastic ears
Delayed puberty
Mental  
retardation
Mild to moderate
Normal  
intelligence
Mild
Slight
 
CHAPTER 16
Biology of Obesity
241
the hypothalamus responds by stimulating hunger and 
decreasing energy expenditure to conserve energy. 
Conversely, when fat stores are abundant, the signal is 
increased, and the hypothalamus responds by decreasing 
hunger and increasing energy expenditure. The recent 
discovery of the ob gene, and its product leptin, and the 
db gene, whose product is the leptin receptor, provides 
important elements of a molecular basis for this physio-
logic concept (see section “Specific Genetic Syndromes”).
What is the status of food intake in obesity? 
(Do the obese eat more than the lean?)
This question has stimulated much debate, due in part 
to the methodologic difficulties inherent in determin-
ing food intake. Many obese individuals believe that 
they eat small quantities of food, and this claim has 
often been supported by the results of food intake ques-
tionnaires. However, it is now established that average 
energy expenditure increases as individuals get more 
obese, due primarily to the fact that metabolically active 
lean tissue mass increases with obesity. Given the laws 
of thermodynamics, the obese person must therefore 
eat more than the average lean person to maintain their 
increased weight. It may be the case, however, that a 
subset of individuals who are predisposed to obesity 
have the capacity to become obese initially without an 
absolute increase in caloric consumption.
What is the state of energy expenditure in 
obesity?
The average total daily energy expenditure is higher 
in obese than lean individuals when measured at stable 
weight. However, energy expenditure falls as weight 
is lost, due in part to loss of lean body mass and to 
decreased sympathetic nerve activity. When reduced 
to near-normal weight and maintained there for awhile, 
(some) obese individuals have lower energy expenditure 
than (some) lean individuals. There is also a tendency 
for those who will develop obesity as infants or chil-
dren to have lower resting energy expenditure rates than 
those who remain lean.
The physiologic basis for variable rates of energy ex-
penditure (at a given body weight and level of energy 
intake) is essentially unknown. A mutation in the 
human β3-adrenergic receptor may be associated with 
increased risk of obesity and/or insulin resistance in cer-
tain (but not all) populations.
One recently described component of thermogenesis, 
called nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), has been 
linked to obesity. It is the thermogenesis that accom-
panies physical activities other than volitional exercise 
such as the activities of daily living, fidgeting, spontane-
ous muscle contraction, and maintaining posture. NEAT 
accounts for about two-thirds of the increased daily 
energy expenditure induced by overfeeding. The wide 
variation in fat storage seen in overfed individuals is pre-
dicted by the degree to which NEAT is induced. The 
molecular basis for NEAT and its regulation is unknown.
Leptin in typical obesity
The vast majority of obese persons have increased 
leptin levels but do not have mutations of either leptin 
or its receptor. They appear, therefore, to have a form 
of functional “leptin resistance.” Data suggesting that 
some individuals produce less leptin per unit fat mass 
than others or have a form of relative leptin deficiency 
that predisposes to obesity are at present contradictory 
and unsettled. The mechanism for leptin resistance, and 
whether it can be overcome by raising leptin levels or 
combining leptin with other treatments in a subset of 
obese individuals, is not yet established. Some data sug-
gest that leptin may not effectively cross the blood-brain 
barrier as levels rise. It is also apparent from animal stud-
ies that leptin signaling inhibitors, such as SOCS3 and 
PTP1b, are involved in the leptin-resistant state.
Pathologic Consequences of 
Obesity
(See also Chap. 17) Obesity has major adverse effects on 
health. Obesity is associated with an increase in mor-
tality, with a 50–100% increased risk of death from all 
causes compared to normal-weight individuals, mostly 
due to cardiovascular causes. Obesity and overweight 
together are the second leading cause of preventable 
death in the United States, accounting for 300,000 
deaths per year. Mortality rates rise as obesity increases, 
particularly when obesity is associated with increased 
intraabdominal fat (see section “Definition and Mea-
surement”). Life expectancy of a moderately obese indi-
vidual could be shortened by 2–5 years, and a 20- to 
30-year-old male with a BMI >45 may lose 13 years of 
life. It is also apparent that the degree to which obesity 
affects particular organ systems is influenced by suscepti-
bility genes that vary in the population.
Insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus
Hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance are perva-
sive features of obesity, increasing with weight gain 
and diminishing with weight loss (Chap. 18). Insulin 
resistance is more strongly linked to intraabdominal fat 
than to fat in other depots. Molecular links between 
obesity and insulin resistance in fat, muscle, and 
liver have been sought for many years. Major factors 
include (1) insulin itself, by inducing receptor down-
regulation; (2) free fatty acids that are increased and 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
242
capable of impairing insulin action; (3) intracellular lipid 
accumulation; and (4) several circulating peptides pro-
duced by adipocytes, including the cytokines TNF-α 
and IL-6, RBP4, and the “adipokines” adiponectin and 
resistin that have altered expression in obese adipocytes 
and can modify insulin action. Additional mechanisms 
are obesity-linked inflammation, including infiltration 
of macrophages into tissues including fat, and induction 
of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response that can 
bring about resistance to insulin action in cells. Despite 
the prevalence of insulin resistance, most obese indi-
viduals do not develop diabetes, suggesting that diabetes 
requires an interaction between obesity-induced insu-
lin resistance and other factors such as impaired insu-
lin secretion (Chap. 19). Obesity, however, is a major 
risk factor for diabetes, and as many as 80% of patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus are obese. Weight loss and 
exercise, even of modest degree, increase insulin sensi-
tivity and often improve glucose control in diabetes.
Reproductive disorders
Disorders that affect the reproductive axis are associated 
with obesity in both men and women. Male hypogo-
nadism is associated with increased adipose tissue, often 
distributed in a pattern more typical of females. In men 
whose weight is >160% ideal body weight (IBW), 
plasma testosterone and sex hormone–binding globulin 
(SHBG) are often reduced, and estrogen levels (derived 
from conversion of adrenal androgens in adipose tissue) 
are increased (Chap. 8). Gynecomastia may be seen. 
However, masculinization, libido, potency, and sper-
matogenesis are preserved in most of these individuals. 
Free testosterone may be decreased in morbidly obese 
men whose weight is >200% IBW.
Obesity has long been associated with menstrual 
abnormalities in women, particularly in women with 
upper body obesity (Chap. 10). Common findings are 
increased androgen production, decreased SHBG, and 
increased peripheral conversion of androgen to estro-
gen. Most obese women with oligomenorrhea have 
the polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), with its asso-
ciated anovulation and ovarian hyperandrogenism; 
40% of women with PCOS are obese. Most nonobese 
women with PCOS are also insulin resistant, suggesting 
that insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, or the com-
bination of the two are causative or contribute to the 
ovarian pathophysiology in PCOS in both obese and 
lean individuals. In obese women with PCOS, weight 
loss or treatment with insulin-sensitizing drugs often 
restores normal menses. The increased conversion of 
androstenedione to estrogen, which occurs to a greater 
degree in women with lower body obesity, may con-
tribute to the increased incidence of uterine cancer in 
postmenopausal women with obesity.
Cardiovascular disease
The Framingham Study revealed that obesity was an 
independent risk factor for the 26-year incidence of 
cardiovascular disease in men and women [including 
coronary disease, stroke, and congestive heart failure 
(CHF)]. The waist-to-hip ratio may be the best predic-
tor of these risks. When the additional effects of hyper-
tension and glucose intolerance associated with obesity 
are included, the adverse impact of obesity is even more 
evident. The effect of obesity on cardiovascular mortal-
ity in women may be seen at BMIs as low as 25. Obe-
sity, especially abdominal obesity, is associated with an 
atherogenic lipid profile; with increased low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol, very low density lipoprotein, 
and triglyceride; and with decreased high density lipo-
protein cholesterol and decreased levels of the vascular 
protective adipokine adiponectin (Chap. 21). Obe-
sity is also associated with hypertension. Measurement 
of blood pressure in the obese requires use of a larger 
cuff size to avoid artifactual increases. Obesity-induced 
hypertension is associated with increased peripheral 
resistance and cardiac output, increased sympathetic 
nervous system tone, increased salt sensitivity, and 
insulin-mediated salt retention; it is often responsive to 
modest weight loss.
Pulmonary disease
Obesity may be associated with a number of pulmo-
nary abnormalities. These include reduced chest wall 
compliance, increased work of breathing, increased 
minute ventilation due to increased metabolic rate, and 
decreased functional residual capacity and expiratory 
reserve volume. Severe obesity may be associated with 
obstructive sleep apnea and the “obesity hypoventilation 
syndrome” with attenuated hypoxic and hypercapnic 
ventilatory responses. Sleep apnea can be obstructive 
(most common), central, or mixed and is associated 
with hypertension. Weight loss (10–20 kg) can bring 
substantial improvement, as can major weight loss fol-
lowing gastric bypass or restrictive surgery. Continu-
ous positive airway pressure has been used with some 
success.
Hepatobiliary disease
Obesity is frequently associated with the common dis-
order nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). This 
hepatic fatty infiltration of NAFLD can progress in a 
subset to inflammatory nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH) and more rarely to cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Steatosis has been noted to improve follow-
ing weight loss, secondary to diet or bariatric surgery. 
The mechanism for the association remains unclear. 
Obesity is associated with enhanced biliary secretion of 
 
CHAPTER 16
Biology of Obesity
243
cholesterol, supersaturation of bile, and a higher inci-
dence of gallstones, particularly cholesterol gallstones. 
A person 50% above IBW has about a sixfold increased 
incidence of symptomatic gallstones. Paradoxically, fast-
ing increases supersaturation of bile by decreasing the 
phospholipid component. Fasting-induced cholecystitis 
is a complication of extreme diets.
Cancer
Obesity in males is associated with higher mortality 
from cancer, including cancer of the esophagus, colon, 
rectum, pancreas, liver, and prostate; obesity in females 
is associated with higher mortality from cancer of the 
gallbladder, bile ducts, breasts, endometrium, cervix, 
and ovaries. Some of the latter may be due to increased 
rates of conversion of androstenedione to estrone in 
adipose tissue of obese individuals. Other possible 
mechanistic links are other hormones whose levels are 
linked to nutritional state, including insulin, leptin, 
adiponectin, and IGF-1. It has been estimated that obe-
sity accounts for 14% of cancer deaths in men and 20% 
in women in the United States.
Bone, joint, and cutaneous disease
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of osteo-
arthritis, no doubt partly due to the trauma of added 
weight bearing, but potentially linked as well to acti-
vation of inflammatory pathways that could promote 
synovial pathology. The prevalence of gout may also 
be increased. Among the skin problems associated with 
obesity is acanthosis nigricans, manifested by darken-
ing and thickening of the skinfolds on the neck, elbows, 
and dorsal interphalangeal spaces. Acanthosis reflects the 
severity of underlying insulin resistance and diminishes 
with weight loss. Friability of skin may be increased, 
especially in skinfolds, enhancing the risk of fungal and 
yeast infections. Finally, venous stasis is increased in the 
obese.
 Robert F. Kushner 
244
 Over 66% of U.S. adults are categorized as overweight 
or obese, and the prevalence of obesity is increasing 
rapidly in most of the industrialized world. Children 
and adolescents also are becoming more obese, indi-
cating that the current trends will accelerate over time. 
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of multiple 
health problems, including hypertension, Type 2 diabetes, 
dyslipidemia, degenerative joint disease, and some malig-
nancies. Thus, it is important for physicians to identify, 
evaluate, and treat patients for obesity and associated 
comorbid conditions. 
 eValuaTIon 
 Physicians should screen all adult patients for obesity 
and offer intensive counseling and behavioral interven-
tions to promote sustained weight loss. The fi ve main 
steps in the evaluation of obesity, as described below, 
are (1) focused obesity-related history, (2) physical 
examination to determine the degree and type of obesity, 
(3) comorbid conditions, (4) fi tness level, and (5) the 
patient’s readiness to adopt lifestyle changes. 
 The obesity-focused history 
 Information from the history should address the follow-
ing six questions: 
•  What factors contribute to the patient’s obesity? 
•  How is the obesity affecting the patient’s health? 
•  What is the patient’s level of risk from obesity? 
•  What are the patient’s goals and expectations? 
•  Is the patient motivated to begin a weight manage-
ment program? 
•  What kind of help does the patient need? 
 Although the vast majority of cases of obesity can 
be attributed to behavioral features that affect diet and 
physical activity patterns, the history may suggest sec-
ondary causes that merit further evaluation. Disorders to 
consider include polycystic ovarian syndrome, hypothy-
roidism, Cushing’s syndrome, and hypothalamic disease. 
Drug-induced weight gain also should be considered. 
Common causes include medications for diabetes (insu-
lin, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones); steroid hormones; 
psychotropic agents; mood stabilizers (lithium); antide-
pressants (tricyclics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, par-
oxetine, mirtazapine); and antiepileptic drugs (valproate, 
gabapentin, carbamazepine). Other medications, such as 
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs and calcium chan-
nel blockers, may cause peripheral edema but do not 
increase body fat. 
 The patient’s current diet and physical activity pat-
terns may reveal factors that contribute to the develop-
ment of obesity in addition to identifying behaviors to 
target for treatment. This type of historic information is 
best obtained by using a questionnaire in combination 
with an interview. 
 BMI and waist circumference 
 Three key anthropometric measurements are important 
to evaluate the degree of obesity: weight, height, and 
waist circumference. The body mass index (BMI), calcu-
lated as weight (kg)/height (m) 2 , or weight (lbs)/height 
(inches) 2 × 703, is used to classify weight status and risk 
of disease  ( Tables 17-1 and  17-2 ) . BMI is used since it 
provides an estimate of body fat and is related to risk of 
disease. Lower BMI thresholds for overweight and obe-
sity have been proposed for the Asia-Pacifi c region since 
this population appears to be at risk for glucose and lipid 
abnormalities at lower body weights. 
 Excess abdominal fat, assessed by measurement of 
waist circumference or waist-to-hip ratio, is indepen-
dently associated with higher risk for diabetes mellitus 
 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 
 CHAPTER 17 
 
CHAPTER 17
Evaluation and Management of Obesity
245
Table 17-1
Body Mass Index (BMI) Table
BMI
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
Height, 
inches
Body Weight, pounds
58
91
96
100
105
110
115
119
124
129
134
138
143
148
153
158
162
167
59
94
99
104
109
114
119
124
128
133
138
143
148
153
158
163
168
173
60
97
102
107
112
118
123
128
133
138
143
148
153
158
163
168
174
179
61
100
106
111
116
122
127
132
137
143
148
153
158
164
169
174
180
185
62
104
109
115
120
126
131
136
142
147
153
158
164
169
175
180
186
191
63
107
113
118
124
130
135
141
146
152
158
163
169
175
180
186
191
197
64
110
116
122
128
134
140
145
151
157
163
169
174
180
186
192
197
204
65
114
120
126
132
138
144
150
156
162
168
174
180
186
192
198
204
210
66
118
124
130
136
142
148
155
161
167
173
179
186
192
198
204
210
216
67
121
127
134
140
146
153
159
166
172
178
185
191
198
204
211
217
223
68
125
131
138
144
151
158
164
171
177
184
190
197
203
210
216
223
230
69
128
135
142
149
155
162
169
176
182
189
196
203
209
216
223
230
236
70
132
139
146
153
160
167
174
181
188
195
202
209
216
222
229
236
243
71
136
143
150
157
165
172
179
186
193
200
208
215
222
229
236
243
250
72
140
147
154
162
169
177
184
191
199
206
213
221
228
235
242
250
258
73
144
151
159
166
174
182
189
197
204
212
219
227
235
242
250
257
265
74
148
155
163
171
179
186
194
202
210
218
225
233
241
249
256
264
272
75
152
160
168
176
184
192
200
208
216
224
232
240
248
256
264
272
279
76
156
164
172
180
189
197
205
213
221
230
238
246
254
263
271
279
287
BMI 36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
58
172
177
181
186
191
196
201
205
210
215
220
224
229
234
239
244
248
253
258
59
178
183
188
193
198
203
208
212
217
222
227
232
237
242
247
252
257
262
267
60
184
189
194
199
204
209
215
220
225
230
235
240
245
250
255
261
266
271
276
61
190
195
201
206
211
217
222
227
232
238
243
248
254
259
264
269
275
280
285
62
196
202
207
213
218
224
229
235
240
246
251
256
262
267
273
278
284
289
295
63
203
208
214
220
225
231
237
242
248
254
259
265
270
278
282
287
293
299
304
64
209
215
221
227
232
238
244
250
256
262
267
273
279
285
291
296
302
308
314
65
216
222
228
234
240
246
252
258
264
270
276
282
288
294
300
306
312
318
324
66
223
229
235
241
247
253
260
266
272
278
284
291
297
303
309
315
322
328
334
67
230
236
242
249
255
261
268
274
280
287
293
299
306
312
319
325
331
338
344
68
236
243
249
256
262
269
276
282
289
295
302
308
315
322
328
335
341
348
354
69
243
250
257
263
270
277
284
291
297
304
311
318
324
331
338
345
351
358
365
70
250
257
264
271
278
285
292
299
306
313
320
327
334
341
348
355
362
369
376
71
257
265
272
279
286
293
301
308
315
322
329
338
343
351
358
365
372
379
386
72
265
272
279
287
294
302
309
316
324
331
338
346
353
361
368
375
383
390
397
73
272
280
288
295
302
310
318
325
333
340
348
355
363
371
378
386
393
401
408
74
280
287
295
303
311
319
326
334
342
350
358
365
373
381
389
396
404
412
420
75
287
295
303
311
319
327
335
343
351
359
367
375
383
391
399
407
415
423
431
76
295
304
312
320
328
336
344
353
361
369
377
385
394
402
410
418
426
435
443
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
246
Table 17-2
Classification of Weight Status and Risk of 
Disease
BMI (kg/m2)
Obesity 
Class
Risk of 
Disease
Underweight
<18.5
Healthy 
weight
18.5–24.9
Overweight
25.0–29.9
Increased
Obesity
30.0–34.9
I
High
Obesity
35.0–39.9
II
Very high
Extreme  
obesity
≥40
III
Extremely 
high
Source: Adapted from National Institutes of Health, National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute: Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, Eval-
uation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 1998.
and cardiovascular disease. Measurement of the waist 
circumference is a surrogate for visceral adipose tissue 
and should be performed in the horizontal plane above 
the iliac crest (Table 17-3).
Physical fitness
Several prospective studies have demonstrated that 
physical fitness, reported by questionnaire or measured 
by a maximal treadmill exercise test, is an important 
predictor of all-cause mortality rate independent of BMI 
and body composition. These observations highlight the 
importance of taking an exercise history during exami-
nation as well as emphasizing physical activity as a treat-
ment approach.
Obesity-associated comorbid conditions
The evaluation of comorbid conditions should be based 
on presentation of symptoms, risk factors, and index of 
suspicion. All patients should have a fasting lipid panel 
[total, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and triglyceride levels] 
and fasting blood glucose along with blood pressure 
determination. Symptoms and diseases that are directly 
or indirectly related to obesity are listed in Table 17-4. 
Although individuals vary, the number and severity of 
organ-specific comorbid conditions usually rise with 
Table 17-3 
Ethnic-Specific Values for Waist 
Circumference
Ethnic Group
Waist Circumference
Europeans
  Men
>94 cm (37 in)
  Women
>80 cm (31.5 in)
South Asians and Chinese
  Men
>90 cm (35 in)
  Women
>80 cm (31.5 in)
Japanese
  Men
>85 cm (33.5 in)
  Women
>90 cm (35 in)
Ethnic South and Central 
Americans
Use south Asian recom-
mendations until more 
specific data are available.
Sub-Saharan Africans
Use European data until 
more specific data are 
available.
Eastern Mediterranean  
and Middle East (Arab) 
populations
Use European data until 
more specific data are 
available.
Source: From KGMM Alberti et al. for the IDF Epidemiology Task 
Force Consensus Group: Lancet 366:1059, 2005.
Table 17-4
Obesity-Related Organ Systems Review
Cardiovascular
  Hypertension
  Congestive heart failure
  Cor pulmonale
  Varicose veins
  Pulmonary embolism
  Coronary artery disease
Endocrine
Metabolic syndrome
Type 2 diabetes
Dyslipidemia
Polycystic ovarian  
syndrome
Musculoskeletal
Hyperuricemia and gout
Immobility
Osteoarthritis (knees and 
hips)
Low back pain
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Psychological
Depression/low  
self-esteem
Body image disturbance 
Social stigmatization
Integument
Striae distensae
Stasis pigmentation of 
legs
Lymphedema
Cellulitis
Intertrigo, carbuncles
Acanthosis nigricans
Acrochordon (skin tags)
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Respiratory
Dyspnea
Obstructive sleep apnea
Hypoventilation syndrome
Pickwickian syndrome
Asthma
Gastrointestinal
Gastroesophageal reflux 
disease
Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease
Cholelithiasis
Hernias
Colon cancer
Genitourinary
Urinary stress  
incontinence
Obesity-related  
glomerulopathy
Hypogonadism (male)
Breast and uterine cancer
Pregnancy complications
Neurologic
Stroke
Idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension
Meralgia paresthetica
Dementia
 
CHAPTER 17
Evaluation and Management of Obesity
247
increasing levels of obesity. Patients at very high abso-
lute risk include those with the following: established 
coronary heart disease; presence of other atherosclerotic 
diseases, such as peripheral arterial disease, abdominal 
aortic aneurysm, and symptomatic carotid artery disease; 
Type 2 diabetes; and sleep apnea.
Assessing the patient’s readiness to change
An attempt to initiate lifestyle changes when the patient 
is not ready usually leads to frustration and may hamper 
future weight-loss efforts. Assessment includes patient 
motivation and support, stressful life events, psychiatric 
status, time availability and constraints, and appropriate-
ness of goals and expectations. Readiness can be viewed 
as the balance of two opposing forces: (1) motivation, 
or the patient’s desire to change, and (2) resistance, or 
the patient’s resistance to change.
A helpful method to begin a readiness assessment 
is to “anchor” the patient’s interest and confidence to 
change on a numerical scale. With this technique, the 
patient is asked to rate his or her level of interest and 
confidence on a scale from 0 to 10, with 0 being not so 
important (or confident) and 10 being very important 
(or confident) to lose weight at this time. This exercise 
helps establish readiness to change and also serves as a 
basis for further dialogue.
Treatment	
Obesity
The Goal of Therapy  The primary goal of 
treatment is to improve obesity-related comorbid con-
ditions and reduce the risk of developing future comor-
bidities. Information obtained from the history, physical 
examination, and diagnostic tests is used to determine 
risk and develop a treatment plan (Fig. 17-1). The deci-
sion of how aggressively to treat the patient and which 
modalities to use is determined by the patient’s risk sta-
tus, expectations, and available resources. Therapy for 
obesity always begins with lifestyle management and 
may include pharmacotherapy or surgery, depending on 
BMI risk category (Table 17-5). Setting an initial weight-
loss goal of 10% over 6 months is a realistic target.
Lifestyle Management  Obesity care involves 
attention to three essential elements of lifestyle: dietary 
habits, physical activity, and behavior modification. 
Because obesity is fundamentally a disease of energy 
imbalance, all patients must learn how and when 
energy is consumed (diet), how and when energy is 
expended (physical activity), and how to incorporate 
this information into their daily lives (behavior therapy). 
Lifestyle management has been shown to result in a 
modest (typically 3–5 kg) weight loss compared with no 
treatment or usual care.
Diet Therapy  The primary focus of diet therapy is 
to reduce overall calorie consumption. The National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) guidelines rec-
ommend initiating treatment with a calorie deficit of 
500–1000 kcal/d compared with the patient’s habitual 
diet. This reduction is consistent with a goal of los-
ing approximately 1–2 lb per week. This calorie deficit 
can be accomplished by suggesting substitutions 
or alternatives to the diet. Examples include choosing 
smaller portion sizes, eating more fruits and vegetables, 
consuming more whole-grain cereals, selecting leaner 
cuts of meat and skimmed dairy products, reducing 
fried foods and other added fats and oils, and drink-
ing water instead of caloric beverages. It is important 
that the dietary counseling remain patient centered 
and that the goals be practical, realistic, and achievable.
The macronutrient composition of the diet will vary 
with the patient’s preference and medical condition. The 
2005 U.S. Department of Agriculture Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans, which focus on health promotion and 
risk reduction, can be applied to treatment of over-
weight or obese patients. The recommendations include 
maintaining a diet rich in whole grains, fruits, vegeta-
bles, and dietary fiber; consuming two servings (8 oz) 
of fish high in omega 3 fatty acids per week; decreas-
ing sodium to <2300 mg/d; consuming 3 cups of milk 
(or equivalent low-fat or fat-free dairy products) per day; 
limiting cholesterol to <300 mg/d; and keeping total fat 
between 20 and 35% of daily calories and saturated fats 
to <10% of daily calories. Application of these guide-
lines to specific calorie goals can be found on the web-
site www.mypyramid.gov. The revised Dietary Reference 
Intakes for Macronutrients released by the Institute of 
Medicine recommends 45–65% of calories from carbo-
hydrates, 20–35% from fat, and 10–35% from protein. 
The guidelines also recommend daily fiber intake of 38 
g (men) and 25 g (women) for persons over 50 years of 
age and 30 g (men) and 21 g (women) for those under 
age 50.
Since portion control is one of the most difficult 
strategies for patients to manage, the use of pre-
prepared products such as meal replacements is a sim-
ple and convenient suggestion. Examples include fro-
zen entrees, canned beverages, and bars. Use of meal 
replacements in the diet has been shown to result in 
a 7–8% weight loss.
An ongoing area of investigation is the use of low-
carbohydrate, high-protein diets for weight loss. These 
diets are based on the concept that carbohydrates 
are the primary cause of obesity and lead to insulin 
resistance. Most low-carbohydrate diets (e.g., South 
Beach, Zone, and Sugar Busters!) recommend a carbo-
hydrate level of approximately 40–46% of energy. The 
Atkins diet contains 5–15% carbohydrate, depending
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
248
Table 17-5
 A Guide to Selecting Treatment
BMI Category
Treatment
25–26.9
27–29.9
30–35
35–39.9
ê40
Diet, exercise, behavior therapy
With comorbidities
With comorbidities
+
+
+
Pharmacotherapy
With comorbidities
+
+
+
Surgery
With comorbidities
+
Source: From National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, North American Association for the Study of Obesity (2000).
Patient encounter
Hx of ≥25 BMI?
BMI
measured in
past 2 years?
• Measure weight,
   height and waist
   circumference
• Calculate BMI
BMI ≥25 OR
waist circumference
>88 cm (F)
>102 cm (M)
Hx BMI ≥25?
Brief reinforcement/
educate on weight
management
Advise to maintain
weight, address 
other risk factors
Assess risk
factors
BMI ≥30 OR
{[BMI 26 to 29.9
OR waist circumference >88
cm (F) >102 cm (M)]
AND ≥2 risk factors}
Does
patient want to
lose weight?
Progress being 
made/goal 
achieved?
Maintenance counseling:
• Dietary therapy
• Behavior therapy
• Physical therapy
Assess reasons
for failure to lose 
weight  
Examination
Treatment
Periodic weight check
1
2
3
4
No
Yes
5
6
Yes
7
Yes
Yes
No
8
9
12
11
10
No
Yes
13
15
14
No
Yes
16
No
No
ALGORITHM FOR TREATMENT OF OBESITY
Clinician and patient devise goals 
and treatment strategy for weight loss 
and risk factor control
Figure 17-1  
Treatment algorithm. This algorithm applies only to the 
assessment for overweight and obesity and subsequent 
decisions on that assessment. It does not reflect any initial 
overall assessment for other conditions that the physician 
may wish to perform. BMI, body mass index; Ht, height; Hx, 
history; Wt, weight. (From National, Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute: Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation, 
and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: The evi-
dence report. Washington, DC, US Department of Health and 
Human Services, 1998.)
 
CHAPTER 17
Evaluation and Management of Obesity
249
on the phase of the diet. Low-carbohydrate, high-pro-
tein diets appear to be more effective in lowering BMI; 
improving coronary heart disease risk factors, including 
an increase in HDL cholesterol and a decrease in triglyc-
eride levels; and controlling satiety in the short term 
compared with low-fat diets. However, after 12 months, 
there is no significant difference among diets. Multiple 
studies have shown that sustained adherence to the 
diet rather than diet type is likely to be the best predic-
tor of weight-loss outcome.
Another dietary approach to consider is the concept 
of energy density, which refers to the number of calories 
(energy) a food contains per unit of weight. People tend 
to ingest a constant volume of food regardless of caloric 
or macronutrient content. Adding water or fiber to a 
food decreases its energy density by increasing weight 
without affecting caloric content. Examples of foods with 
low-energy density include soups, fruits, vegetables, oat-
meal, and lean meats. Dry foods and high-fat foods such 
as pretzels, cheese, egg yolks, potato chips, and red meat 
have a high-energy density. Diets containing low-energy 
dense foods have been shown to control hunger and 
result in decreased caloric intake and weight loss.
Occasionally, very low calorie diets (VLCDs) are pre-
scribed as a form of aggressive dietary therapy. The 
primary purpose of a VLCD is to promote a rapid and 
significant (13–23 kg) short-term weight loss over a 
3- to 6-month period. These propriety formulas typi-
cally supply ≤800 kcal, 50–80 g protein, and 100% of 
the recommended daily intake for vitamins and miner-
als. According to a review by the National Task Force on 
the Prevention and Treatment of Obesity, indications 
for initiating a VLCD include well-motivated individuals 
who are moderately to severely obese (BMI >30), have 
failed at more conservative approaches to weight loss, 
and have a medical condition that would be immedi-
ately improved with rapid weight loss. These conditions 
include poorly controlled Type 2 diabetes, hypertri-
glyceridemia, obstructive sleep apnea, and symptom-
atic peripheral edema. The risk for gallstone formation 
increases exponentially at rates of weight loss >1.5 kg/
week (3.3 lb/week). Prophylaxis against gallstone forma-
tion with ursodeoxycholic acid, 600 mg/d, is effective in 
reducing this risk. Because of the need for close meta-
bolic monitoring, these diets usually are prescribed by 
physicians specializing in obesity care.
Physical Activity Therapy  Although exercise 
alone is only moderately effective for weight loss, the 
combination of dietary modification and exercise is the 
most effective behavioral approach for the treatment 
of obesity. The most important role of exercise appears 
to be in the maintenance of the weight loss. The 2008 
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans recom-
mends that adults should engage in 150 min a week of 
moderate-intensity or 75 minutes a week of vigorous-
intensity aerobic physical activity performed in epi-
sodes of at least 10 min, preferably spread throughout 
the week. The guidelines can be found at www.health.
gov/paguidelines. Focusing on simple ways to add 
physical activity into the normal daily routine through 
leisure activities, travel, and domestic work should be 
suggested. Examples include walking, using the stairs, 
doing home and yard work, and engaging in sport 
activities. Asking the patient to wear a pedometer to 
monitor total accumulation of steps as part of the activi-
ties of daily living is a useful strategy. Step counts are 
highly correlated with activity level. Studies have dem-
onstrated that lifestyle activities are as effective as struc-
tured exercise programs for improving cardiorespiratory 
fitness and weight loss. A high amount of physical activ-
ity (more than 300 min of moderate-intensity activity a 
week) is often needed to lose weight and sustain weight 
loss. These exercise recommendations are daunting to 
most patients and need to be implemented gradually. 
Consultation with an exercise physiologist or personal 
trainer may be helpful.
Behavioral Therapy  Cognitive behavioral ther-
apy is used to help change and reinforce new dietary 
and physical activity behaviors. Strategies include self-
monitoring techniques (e.g., journaling, weighing, and 
measuring food and activity); stress management; 
stimulus control (e.g., using smaller plates, not eating 
in front of the television or in the car); social support; 
problem solving; and cognitive restructuring to help 
patients develop more positive and realistic thoughts 
about themselves. When recommending any behav-
ioral lifestyle change, have the patient identify what, 
when, where, and how the behavioral change will be 
performed. The patient should keep a record of the 
anticipated behavioral change so that progress can be 
reviewed at the next office visit. Because these tech-
niques are time-consuming to implement, they are 
often provided by ancillary office staff such as a nurse 
clinician or registered dietitian.
Pharmacotherapy  Adjuvant pharmacologic 
treatments should be considered for patients with a BMI 
>30 kg/m2 or a BMI >27 kg/m2 for those who also have 
concomitant obesity-related diseases and for whom 
dietary and physical activity therapy has not been suc-
cessful. When an antiobesity medication is prescribed, 
patients should be actively engaged in a lifestyle pro-
gram that provides the strategies and skills needed to 
use the drug effectively since this support increases 
total weight loss.
There are several potential targets of pharmaco-
logic therapy for obesity. The most thoroughly explored 
treatment is suppression of appetite via centrally active
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
250
medications that alter monoamine neurotransmitters. A 
second strategy is to reduce the absorption of selective 
macronutrients from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, such 
as fat.
Centrally Acting Anorexiant Medications 
Appetite-suppressing drugs, or anorexiants, affect 
satiety (the absence of hunger after eating) and 
hunger (a biologic sensation that initiates eating). By 
increasing satiety and decreasing hunger, these agents 
help patients reduce caloric intake without a sense of 
deprivation. The target site for the actions of anorexi-
ants is the ventromedial and lateral hypothalamic 
regions in the central nervous system (Chap. 16). Their 
biologic effect on appetite regulation is produced by 
augmenting the neurotransmission of three mono-
amines: norepinephrine; serotonin [5-hydroxytrypta-
mine (5-HT)]; and, to a lesser degree, dopamine. The 
classic sympathomimetic adrenergic agents (benzphet-
amine, phendimetrazine, diethylpropion, mazindol, 
and phentermine) function by stimulating norepineph-
rine release or by blocking its reuptake. In contrast, 
sibutramine (Meridia) functions as a serotonin and nor-
epinephrine reuptake inhibitor. Unlike other previously 
used anorexiants, sibutramine is not pharmacologically 
related to amphetamine and has no addictive potential.
Sibutramine was the only available anorexiant 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for long-term use until it was voluntarily with-
drawn from the U.S. market by the manufacturer in 
October 2010, due to an increased risk of nonfatal myo-
cardial infarction and nonfatal stroke among individuals 
with preexisting cardiovascular disease.
Peripherally Acting Medications  Orlistat 
(Xenical) is a synthetic hydrogenated derivative of a 
naturally occurring lipase inhibitor, lipostatin, produced 
by the mold Streptomyces toxytricini. Orlistat is a potent, 
slowly reversible inhibitor of pancreatic, gastric, and 
carboxylester lipases and phospholipase A2, which are 
required for the hydrolysis of dietary fat into fatty acids 
and monoacylglycerols. The drug acts in the lumen of 
the stomach and small intestine by forming a covalent 
bond with the active site of these lipases. Taken at a 
therapeutic dose of 120 mg tid, orlistat blocks the diges-
tion and absorption of about 30% of dietary fat. After 
discontinuation of the drug, fecal fat usually returns to 
normal concentrations within 48–72 h.
Multiple randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
studies have shown that after 1 year, orlistat produces 
a weight loss of about 9–10%, compared with a 4–6% 
weight loss in the placebo-treated groups. Because orli-
stat is minimally (<1%) absorbed from the GI tract, it has 
no systemic side effects. Tolerability to the drug is related 
to the malabsorption of dietary fat and subsequent
passage of fat in the feces. GI tract adverse effects are 
reported in at least 10% of orlistat-treated patients. 
These effects include flatus with discharge, fecal urgency, 
fatty/oily stool, and increased defecation. These side 
effects generally are experienced early, diminish as 
patients control their dietary fat intake, and infrequently 
cause patients to withdraw from clinical trials. Psyllium 
mucilloid is helpful in controlling the orlistat-induced GI 
side effects when taken concomitantly with the medica-
tion. Serum concentrations of the fat-soluble vitamins 
D and E and β-carotene may be reduced, and vitamin 
supplements are recommended to prevent potential 
deficiencies. Orlistat was approved for over-the-counter 
use in 2007.
The Endocannabinoid System  Cannabinoid 
receptors and their endogenous ligands have been 
implicated in a variety of physiologic functions, includ-
ing feeding, modulation of pain, emotional behavior, 
and peripheral lipid metabolism. Cannabis and its main 
ingredient, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is an exog-
enous cannabinoid compound. Two endocannabinoids 
have been identified: anandamide and 2-arachidonyl 
glyceride. Two cannabinoid receptors have been iden-
tified: CB1 (abundant in the brain) and CB2 (present in 
immune cells). The brain endocannabinoid system is 
thought to control food intake by reinforcing motiva-
tion to find and consume foods with high incentive 
value and to regulate actions of other mediators of 
appetite. The first selective cannabinoid CB1 recep-
tor antagonist, rimonabant, was discovered in 1994. 
The medication antagonizes the orexigenic effect of 
THC and suppresses appetite. Several large prospec-
tive, randomized controlled trials have demonstrated 
the effectiveness of rimonabant as a weight-loss agent 
with concomitant improvements in waist circumfer-
ence and cardiovascular risk factors. However, increased 
risk of neurologic and psychiatric side effects—sei-
zures, depression, anxiety, insomnia, aggressiveness, 
and suicidal thoughts among patients randomized to 
rimonabant—resulted in a ruling against approval of 
the drug by the FDA in June 2007. Although the drug 
was available in 56 countries around the world in 2008, 
approval was officially withdrawn by the European 
Medicines Agency (EMEA) in January 2009, stating that 
the benefits of rimonabant no longer outweighed its 
risks. Development of CB1 antagonists that do not enter 
the brain and selectively target the peripheral endocan-
nabinoid system is needed.
Antiobesity Drugs in Development  An emerg-
ing theme in pharmacotherapy for obesity is to target 
several points in the regulatory pathways that control 
body weight. Several combination drug therapies have 
completed phase III trials and have been submitted to 
 
CHAPTER 17
Evaluation and Management of Obesity
251
the FDA for approval. Bupropion and naltrexone (Con-
trave), a dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake inhibi-
tor and an opioid receptor antagonist, respectively, are 
combined to dampen the motivation/reinforcement 
that food brings (dopamine effect) and the pleasure/
palatability of eating (opioid effect). Another formula-
tion of bupropion with zonisamide (Empatic) combines 
bupropion with an anticonvulsant that has serotoner-
gic and dopaminergic activity. Lastly, a formulation of 
phentermine and topiramate (Qnexa) combines a cat-
echolamine releaser and an anticonvulsant, respectively, 
that have independently been shown to result in weight 
loss. The mechanism responsible for topiramate’s weight 
loss is uncertain but is thought to be mediated through 
its modulation of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) recep-
tors, inhibition of carbonic anhydrase, and antagonism 
of glutamate to reduce food intake. In October 2010, 
the FDA rejected Qnexa’s initial application as a new 
drug, citing clinical concerns regarding the potential 
teratogenic risks of topiramate in women of childbear-
ing age. An additional investigational drug, lorcaserin, a 
5-HT2C receptor agonist, has completed phase III trials 
as a single agent. The FDA rejected Lorcaserin’s initial 
application as a new drug, citing clinical concerns that 
the weight loss efficacy in overweight and obese indi-
viduals without Type 2 diabetes is marginal, and non-
clinical concerns related to mammary adenocarcinomas 
in female rats.
Surgery  Bariatric surgery can be considered for 
patients with severe obesity (BMI ≥40 kg/m2) or those 
with moderate obesity (BMI ≥35 kg/m2) associated with 
a serious medical condition. Surgical weight loss func-
tions by reducing caloric intake and, depending on the 
procedure, macronutrient absorption.
Weight-loss surgeries fall into one of two categories: 
restrictive and restrictive-malabsorptive (Fig. 17-2). 
Restrictive surgeries limit the amount of food the stom-
ach can hold and slow the rate of gastric emptying. The 
vertical banded gastroplasty (VBG) is the prototype of 
this category but is currently performed on a very lim-
ited basis due to lack of effectiveness in long-term trials. 
Laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric banding (LASGB) 
has replaced the VBG as the most commonly performed 
restrictive operation. The first banding device, the 
LAP-BAND, was approved for use in the United States 
in 2001, and the second, the REALIZE band, in 2007. In 
contrast to previous devices, the diameters of these 
bands are adjustable by way of their connection to a 
reservoir that is implanted under the skin. Injection or 
removal of saline into the reservoir tightens or loosens 
the band’s internal diameter, thus changing the size of 
the gastric opening.
The three restrictive-malabsorptive bypass procedures 
combine the elements of gastric restriction and selective
x
x
y
y
z
z
100 cm
150 cm
A
B
C
D
Figure 17-2  
Bariatric surgical procedures. Examples of operative 
interventions used for surgical manipulation of the gastroin-
testinal tract. A. Laparoscopic gastric band (LAGB). B. The 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. C. Biliopancreatic diversion with 
duodenal switch. D. Biliopancreatic diversion. (From ML 
Kendrick, GF Dakin: Mayo Clin Proc 815:518, 2006; with 
permission.)
malabsorption. These procedures include Roux-en-Y gas-
tric bypass (RYGB), biliopancreatic diversion (BPD), and 
biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch (BPDDS) 
(Fig. 17-2). RYGB is the most commonly performed and 
accepted bypass procedure. It may be performed with 
an open incision or laparoscopically.
Although no recent randomized controlled trials com-
pare weight loss after surgical and nonsurgical interven-
tions, data from meta-analyses and large databases,  
primarily obtained from observational studies, suggest 
that bariatric surgery is the most effective weight-loss 
therapy for those with clinically severe obesity. These pro-
cedures generally produce a 30–35% average total body 
weight loss that is maintained in nearly 60% of patients 
at 5 years. In general, mean weight loss is greater after 
the combined restrictive-malabsorptive procedures 
than after the restrictive procedures. An abundance of
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
252
data supports the positive impact of bariatric surgery 
on obesity-related morbid conditions, including dia-
betes mellitus, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, 
dyslipidemia, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The 
rapid improvement seen in diabetes after restrictive-
malabsorptive procedures is thought to be due to 
surgery-specific, weight-independent effects on glu-
cose homeostasis brought about by alteration of gut 
hormones.
Surgical mortality rate from bariatric surgery is gen-
erally <1% but varies with the procedure, patient’s age 
and comorbid conditions, and experience of the surgical 
team. The most common surgical complications include 
stomal stenosis or marginal ulcers (occurring in 5–15% 
of patients) that present as prolonged nausea and 
vomiting after eating or inability to advance the diet to 
solid foods. These complications typically are treated 
by endoscopic balloon dilatation and acid suppres-
sion therapy, respectively. For patients who undergo 
LASGB, there are no intestinal absorptive abnormalities 
other than mechanical reduction in gastric size and out-
flow. Therefore, selective deficiencies occur uncommonly 
unless eating habits become unbalanced. In contrast, the 
restrictive-malabsorptive procedures increase risk for micro-
nutrient deficiencies of vitamin B12, iron, folate, calcium, 
and vitamin D. Patients with restrictive-malabsorptive 
procedures require lifelong supplementation with these 
micronutrients.
 Robert H. Eckel 
253
 The metabolic syndrome (syndrome X, insulin resis-
tance syndrome) consists of a constellation of metabolic 
abnormalities that confer increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) and diabetes mellitus (DM). The crite-
ria for the metabolic syndrome have evolved since the 
original defi nition by the World Health Organization in 
1998, refl ecting growing clinical evidence and analysis 
by a variety of consensus conferences and professional 
organizations. The major features of the metabolic syn-
drome include central obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, 
low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, hyper-
glycemia, and hypertension  ( Table 18-1 ) . 
 EPiDEMiology 
 The prevalence of metabolic syndrome varies 
around the world, in part refl ecting the age and 
ethnicity of the populations studied and the diag-
nostic criteria applied. In general, the prevalence of meta-
bolic syndrome increases with age. The highest recorded
prevalence worldwide is in Native Americans, with nearly 
60% of women aged 45–49 and 45% of men aged 45–49 
meeting National Cholesterol Education Program and 
Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP:ATPIII) criteria. In the 
United States, metabolic syndrome is less common in 
 THE METABOLIC SYNDROME 
 CHAPTER 18 
TABLe 18-1 
 NcEP:atPiii 2001 aND iDF cRitERia FoR tHE MEtaBolic syNDRoME 
NcEP:atPiii 2001
iDF cRitERia FoR cENtRal aDiPosity a  
 three or more of the following: 
Central obesity: Waist circumference 
>102 cm (M), >88 cm (F)
Hypertriglyceridemia: Triglycerides 
≥150 mg/dL or specifi c medication
Low HDL cholesterol: <40 mg/dL and 
<50 mg/dL, respectively, or specifi c 
medication
Hypertension: Blood pressure ≥130 mm 
systolic or ≥85 mm diastolic or specifi c 
medication
Fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL 
or specifi c medication or previously 
diagnosed Type 2 diabetes
Waist circumference 
MEN
WoMEN
EtHNicity
≥94 cm
≥80 cm
Europid, Sub-Saharan African, Eastern and Middle 
Eastern
≥90 cm
≥80 cm
South Asian, Chinese, and ethnic South and Central 
American
≥85 cm
≥90 cm
Japanese
two or more of the following: 
Fasting triglycerides >150 mg/dL or specifi c medication 
HDL cholesterol <40 mg/dL and <50 mg/dL for men and women, respectively, 
or specifi c medication 
Blood pressure >130 mm systolic or >85 mm diastolic or previous diagnosis or 
specifi c medication
Fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL or previously diagnosed Type 2 diabetes
 a  In this analysis, the following thresholds for waist circumference were used: white men, ≥94 cm; African-American men, ≥94 cm; Mexican-
American men, ≥90 cm; white women, ≥80 cm; African-American women, ≥80 cm; Mexican-American women, ≥80 cm. For participants whose 
designation was “other race—including multiracial,” thresholds that were once based on Europid cut points (≥94 cm for men and ≥80 cm for 
women) and once based on South Asian cut points (≥90 cm for men and ≥80 cm for women) were used. For participants who were considered 
“other Hispanic,” the IDF thresholds for ethnic South and Central Americans were used.
 Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDF, International Diabetes Foundation; NCEP:ATPIII, National Cholesterol Education Program, 
Adult Treatment Panel III.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
254
African-American men and more common in Mexican-
American women. Based on data from the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
1999–2000, the age-adjusted prevalence of the meta-
bolic syndrome in U.S. adults who did not have dia-
betes is 28% for men and 30% for women. In France, 
a cohort 30 to 60 years old has shown a <10% preva-
lence for each sex, although 17.5% are affected in the 
age range 60–64. Greater industrialization worldwide is 
associated with rising rates of obesity, which is antici-
pated to increase prevalence of the metabolic syndrome 
dramatically, especially as the population ages. More-
over, the rising prevalence and severity of obesity in 
children is initiating features of the metabolic syndrome 
in a younger population.
The frequency distribution of the five components of 
the syndrome for the U.S. population (NHANES III) is 
summarized in Fig. 18-1. Increases in waist circumfer-
ence predominate in women, whereas fasting triglycerides 
>150 mg/dL and hypertension are more likely in men.
Risk Factors
Overweight/obesity
Although the first description of the metabolic syndrome 
occurred in the early twentieth century, the worldwide 
overweight/obesity epidemic has been the driving force 
for more recent recognition of the syndrome. Cen-
tral adiposity is a key feature of the syndrome, reflect-
ing the fact that the syndrome’s prevalence is driven by 
the strong relationship between waist circumference and 
increasing adiposity. However, despite the importance 
of obesity, patients who are normal weight may also be 
insulin resistant and have the syndrome.
Men
Women
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Waist circ
TG150
HDL chol
BP
Glucose
Population prevalence (%)
Figure 18-1
Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome components, from 
NHANES III. BP, blood pressure; HDL, high-density lipopro-
tein; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey; TG, triglyceride. The prevalence of elevated glucose 
includes individuals with known diabetes mellitus. (Created 
from data in ES Ford et al: Diabetes Care 27:2444, 2004.)
Sedentary lifestyle
Physical inactivity is a predictor of CVD events and 
related mortality rate. Many components of the metabolic 
syndrome are associated with a sedentary lifestyle, includ-
ing increased adipose tissue (predominantly central), 
reduced HDL cholesterol, and a trend toward increased 
triglycerides, high blood pressure, and increased glucose 
in the genetically susceptible. Compared with individu-
als who watched television or videos or used the com-
puter <1 h daily, those who carried out those behaviors 
for >4 h daily had a twofold increased risk of the meta-
bolic syndrome.
Aging
The metabolic syndrome affects 44% of the U.S. pop-
ulation older than age 50. A greater percentage of 
women over age 50 have the syndrome than men. The 
age dependency of the syndrome’s prevalence is seen in 
most populations around the world.
Diabetes mellitus
DM is included in both the NCEP and International 
Diabetes Foundation (IDF) definitions of the metabolic 
syndrome. It is estimated that the great majority (∼75%) 
of patients with Type 2 diabetes or impaired glucose 
tolerance (IGT) have the metabolic syndrome. The 
presence of the metabolic syndrome in these popula-
tions relates to a higher prevalence of CVD compared 
with patients with Type 2 diabetes or IGT without the 
syndrome.
Coronary heart disease
The approximate prevalence of the metabolic syndrome 
in patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) is 50%, 
with a prevalence of 37% in patients with premature 
coronary artery disease (≤ age 45), particularly in women. 
With appropriate cardiac rehabilitation and changes in 
lifestyle (e.g., nutrition, physical activity, weight reduc-
tion, and, in some cases, pharmacologic agents), the prev-
alence of the syndrome can be reduced.
Lipodystrophy
Lipodystrophic disorders in general are associated with 
the metabolic syndrome. Both genetic (e.g., Berardinelli- 
Seip congenital lipodystrophy, Dunnigan familial partial 
lipodystrophy) and acquired (e.g., HIV-related lipodys-
trophy in patients treated with highly active antiretro-
viral therapy) forms of lipodystrophy may give rise to 
severe insulin resistance and many of the components of 
the metabolic syndrome.
 
CHAPTER 18
The Metabolic Syndrome
255
SNS
IL-6
Insulin
Insulin
FFA
Hypertension
TG
VLDL
FFA
Fibrinogen
PAI-1
Prothrombotic
state
Adiponectin
Glycogen
Triglyceride
(intramuscular droplet)
FFA
Glucose
TNF-α
IL-6
Small dense LDL
HDL cholesterol
−
−
−
−
−
−
C-III
B-100 and
C-II
CRP
CO2
Figure 18-2
Pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome. Free fatty 
acids (FFAs) are released in abundance from an expanded 
adipose tissue mass. In the liver, FFAs result in an increased 
production of glucose and triglycerides and secretion of very 
low density lipoproteins (VLDLs). Associated lipid/lipoprotein 
abnormalities include reductions in high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol and an increased density of low-density 
lipoproteins (LDLs). FFAs also reduce insulin sensitivity in 
muscle by inhibiting insulin-mediated glucose uptake. Asso-
ciated defects include a reduction in glucose partitioning to 
glycogen and increased lipid accumulation in triglyceride (TG). 
Increases in circulating glucose, and to some extent FFA, 
increase pancreatic insulin secretion, resulting in hyperin-
sulinemia. Hyperinsulinemia may result in enhanced sodium 
reabsorption and increased sympathetic nervous system 
(SNS) activity and contribute to the hypertension, as might 
increased levels of circulating FFAs. The proinflammatory 
state is superimposed and contributory to the insulin resis-
tance produced by excessive FFAs. The enhanced secretion 
of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) pro-
duced by adipocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages 
results in more insulin resistance and lipolysis of adipose 
tissue triglyceride stores to circulating FFAs. IL-6 and other 
cytokines also enhance hepatic glucose production, VLDL 
production by the liver, and insulin resistance in muscle. 
Cytokines and FFAs also increase the hepatic production of 
fibrinogen and adipocyte production of plasminogen acti-
vator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), resulting in a prothrombotic state. 
Higher levels of circulating cytokines also stimulate the 
hepatic production of C-reactive protein (CRP). Reduced 
production of the anti-inflammatory and insulin-sensitizing 
cytokine adiponectin is also associated with the metabolic 
syndrome. (Reprinted from RH Eckel et al: Lancet 365:1415, 
2005, with permission from Elsevier.)
Etiology
Insulin resistance
The most accepted and unifying hypothesis to describe 
the pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome is 
insulin resistance, which is caused by an incompletely 
understood defect in insulin action (Chap. 19). The 
onset of insulin resistance is heralded by postprandial 
hyperinsulinemia, followed by fasting hyperinsulinemia 
and, ultimately, hyperglycemia.
An early major contributor to the development of 
insulin resistance is an overabundance of circulating 
fatty acids (Fig. 18-2). Plasma albumin-bound free fatty 
acids (FFAs) are derived predominantly from adipose 
tissue triglyceride stores released by lipolytic enzymes 
lipase. Fatty acids are also derived from the lipolysis of 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in tissues by lipoprotein 
lipase (LPL). Insulin mediates both antilipolysis and the 
stimulation of LPL in adipose tissue. Of note, the inhi-
bition of lipolysis in adipose tissue is the most sensitive 
pathway of insulin action. Thus, when insulin resistance 
develops, increased lipolysis produces more fatty acids, 
which further decrease the antilipolytic effect of insu-
lin. Excessive fatty acids enhance substrate availability 
and create insulin resistance by modifying downstream 
signaling. Fatty acids impair insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake and accumulate as triglycerides in both skeletal 
and cardiac muscle, whereas increased glucose produc-
tion and triglyceride accumulation are seen in liver.
The oxidative stress hypothesis provides a unifying 
theory for aging and the predisposition to the meta-­
bolic syndrome. In studies carried out in insulin-resistant 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
256
subjects with obesity or Type 2 diabetes, the offspring 
of patients with Type 2 diabetes, and the elderly, a 
defect has been identified in mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation, leading to the accumulation of triglyc-
erides and related lipid molecules in muscle. The accu-
mulation of lipids in muscle is associated with insulin 
resistance.
Increased waist circumference
Waist circumference is an important component of 
the most recent and frequently applied diagnostic cri-
teria for the metabolic syndrome. However, measur-
ing waist circumference does not reliably distinguish 
increases in subcutaneous adipose tissue vs. visceral fat; 
this distinction requires CT or MRI. With increases in 
visceral adipose tissue, adipose tissue–derived FFAs are 
directed to the liver. In contrast, increases in abdomi-
nal subcutaneous fat release lipolysis products into the 
systemic circulation and avoid more direct effects on 
hepatic metabolism. Relative increases in visceral versus 
subcutaneous adipose tissue with increasing waist cir-
cumference in Asians and Asian Indians may explain the 
greater prevalence of the syndrome in those populations 
compared with African-American men in whom subcu-
taneous fat predominates. It is also possible that visceral 
fat is a marker for, but not the source of, excess post-
prandial FFAs in obesity.
Dyslipidemia
(See also Chap. 21) In general, FFA flux to the liver is 
associated with increased production of apoB-containing, 
triglyceride-rich very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs). 
The effect of insulin on this process is complex, but 
hypertriglyceridemia is an excellent marker of the insulin-
resistant condition.
The other major lipoprotein disturbance in the meta-
bolic syndrome is a reduction in HDL cholesterol. This 
reduction is a consequence of changes in HDL compo-
sition and metabolism. In the presence of hypertriglyc-
eridemia, a decrease in the cholesterol content of HDL 
is a consequence of reduced cholesteryl ester content 
of the lipoprotein core in combination with cholesteryl 
ester transfer protein–mediated alterations in triglycer-
ide, making the particle small and dense. This change in 
lipoprotein composition also results in increased clear-
ance of HDL from the circulation. The relationships of 
these changes in HDL to insulin resistance are probably 
indirect, occurring in concert with the changes in 
triglyceride-rich lipoprotein metabolism.
In addition to HDL, low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) 
are modified in composition. With fasting serum triglyc-
erides >2.0 mM (∼180 mg/dL), there is almost always a 
predominance of small dense LDLs. Small dense LDLs 
are thought to be more atherogenic. They may be toxic 
to the endothelium, and they are able to transit through 
the endothelial basement membrane and adhere to gly-
cosaminoglycans. They also have increased susceptibil-
ity to oxidation and are selectively bound to scavenger 
receptors on monocyte-derived macrophages. Subjects 
with increased small dense LDL particles and hypertri-
glyceridemia also have increased cholesterol content of 
both VLDL1 and VLDL2 subfractions. This relatively 
cholesterol-rich VLDL particle may contribute to the 
atherogenic risk in patients with metabolic syndrome.
Glucose intolerance
(See also Chap. 19) The defects in insulin action 
lead to impaired suppression of glucose production by 
the liver and kidney and reduced glucose uptake and 
metabolism in insulin-sensitive tissues, i.e., muscle and 
adipose tissue. The relationship between impaired fast-
ing glucose (IFG) or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) 
and insulin resistance is well supported by human, 
nonhuman primate, and rodent studies. To compen-
sate for defects in insulin action, insulin secretion and/
or clearance must be modified to sustain euglycemia. 
Ultimately, this compensatory mechanism fails, usually 
because of defects in insulin secretion, resulting in prog-
ress from IFG and/or IGT to DM.
Hypertension
The relationship between insulin resistance and hyper-
tension is well established. Paradoxically, under nor-
mal physiologic conditions, insulin is a vasodilator with 
secondary effects on sodium reabsorption in the kid-
ney. However, in the setting of insulin resistance, the 
vasodilatory effect of insulin is lost but the renal effect 
on sodium reabsorption is preserved. Sodium reabsorp-
tion is increased in whites with the metabolic syndrome 
but not in Africans or Asians. Insulin also increases the 
activity of the sympathetic nervous system, an effect 
that also may be preserved in the setting of the insulin 
resistance. Finally, insulin resistance is characterized by 
pathway-specific impairment in phosphatidylinositol-
3-kinase signaling. In the endothelium, this may cause 
an imbalance between the production of nitric oxide 
and the secretion of endothelin 1, leading to decreased 
blood flow. Although these mechanisms are provoca-
tive, when insulin action is assessed by levels of fast-
ing insulin or by the Homeostasis Model Assessment 
(HOMA), insulin resistance contributes only modestly 
to the increased prevalence of hypertension in the met-
abolic syndrome.
Proinflammatory cytokines
The increases in proinflammatory cytokines, including 
interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-18, resistin, tumor necrosis 
 
CHAPTER 18
The Metabolic Syndrome
257
factor (TNF) α, and C-reactive protein (CRP), reflect 
overproduction by the expanded adipose tissue mass 
(Fig. 18-2). Adipose tissue–derived macrophages may be 
the primary source of proinflammatory cytokines locally 
and in the systemic circulation. It remains unclear, how-
ever, how much of the insulin resistance is caused by the 
paracrine vs. endocrine effects of these cytokines.
Adiponectin
Adiponectin is an anti-inflammatory cytokine produced 
exclusively by adipocytes. Adiponectin enhances insulin 
sensitivity and inhibits many steps in the inflammatory 
process. In the liver, adiponectin inhibits the expression 
of gluconeogenic enzymes and the rate of glucose pro-
duction. In muscle, adiponectin increases glucose trans-
port and enhances fatty acid oxidation, partially due to 
activation of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) kinase. 
Adiponectin is reduced in the metabolic syndrome. The 
relative contribution of adiponectin deficiency ver-
sus overabundance of the proinflammatory cytokines is 
unclear.
Clinical features
Symptoms and signs
The metabolic syndrome is typically not associated with 
symptoms. On physical examination, waist circumfer-
ence may be expanded and blood pressure elevated. 
The presence of one or either of these signs should alert 
the clinician to search for other biochemical abnor-
malities that may be associated with the metabolic 
syndrome. Less frequently, lipoatrophy or acanthosis 
nigricans is found on examination. Because these physi-
cal findings typically are associated with severe insulin 
resistance, other components of the metabolic syndrome 
should be expected.
Associated diseases
Cardiovascular disease
The relative risk for new-onset CVD in patients with 
the metabolic syndrome, in the absence of diabetes, 
averages between 1.5-fold and threefold. However, in 
an 8-year follow-up of middle-aged men and women in 
the Framingham Offspring Study (FOS), the population- 
attributable risk for patients with the metabolic syn-
drome to develop CVD was 34% in men and only 16% 
in women. In the same study, both the metabolic syn-
drome and diabetes predicted ischemic stroke, with 
greater risk for patients with the metabolic syndrome 
than for those with diabetes alone (19% vs. 7%), par-
ticularly in women (27% vs. 5%). Patients with meta-
bolic syndrome are also at increased risk for peripheral 
vascular disease.
Type 2 diabetes
Overall, the risk for Type 2 diabetes in patients with the 
metabolic syndrome is increased three- to fivefold. In 
the FOS’s 8-year follow-up of middle-aged men and 
women, the population-attributable risk for developing 
Type 2 diabetes was 62% in men and 47% in women.
Other associated conditions
In addition to the features specifically associated with 
metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance is accompanied 
by other metabolic alterations. Those alterations include 
increases in apoB and apoC-III, uric acid, prothrombotic 
factors (fibrinogen, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1), 
serum viscosity, asymmetric dimethylarginine, homo-
cysteine, white blood cell count, proinflammatory 
cytokines, CRP, microalbuminuria, nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) and/or nonalcoholic steatohep-
atitis (NASH), polycystic ovarian disease (PCOS), and 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Fatty liver is relatively common. However, in NASH, 
both triglyceride accumulation and inflammation coex-
ist. NASH is now present in 2–3% of the population 
in the United States and other Western countries. As 
the prevalence of overweight/obesity and the meta-
bolic syndrome increases, NASH may become one of 
the more common causes of end-stage liver disease and 
hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hyperuricemia
Hyperuricemia reflects defects in insulin action on the 
renal tubular reabsorption of uric acid, whereas the 
increase in asymmetric dimethylarginine, an endoge-
nous inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase, relates to endo-
thelial dysfunction. Microalbuminuria also may be 
caused by altered endothelial pathophysiology in the 
insulin-resistant state.
Polycystic ovary syndrome
(See also Chap. 10) PCOS is highly associated with the 
metabolic syndrome, with a prevalence between 40 and 
50%. Women with PCOS are 2–4 times more likely to 
have the metabolic syndrome than are women without 
PCOS.
Obstructive sleep apnea
OSA is commonly associated with obesity, hypertension, 
increased circulating cytokines, IGT, and insulin resis-
tance. With these associations, it is not surprising that 
the metabolic syndrome is frequently present. More-
over, when biomarkers of insulin resistance are com-
pared between patients with OSA and weight-matched 
controls, insulin resistance is more severe in patients 
with OSA. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
treatment in OSA patients improves insulin sensitivity.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
258
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of the metabolic syndrome relies on sat-
isfying the criteria listed in Table 18-1 by using tools 
at the bedside and in the laboratory. The medical his-
tory should include evaluation of symptoms for OSA in 
all patients and PCOS in premenopausal women. Fam-
ily history will help determine risk for CVD and DM. 
Blood pressure and waist circumference measurements 
provide information necessary for the diagnosis.
Laboratory tests
Fasting lipids and glucose are needed to determine if 
the metabolic syndrome is present. The measurement of 
additional biomarkers associated with insulin resistance 
can be individualized. Such tests might include apoB, 
high-sensitivity CRP, fibrinogen, uric acid, urinary 
microalbumin, and liver function tests. A sleep study 
should be performed if symptoms of OSA are present. 
If PCOS is suspected on the basis of clinical features 
and anovulation, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and 
follicle-stimulating hormone should be measured.
Treatment	
The Metabolic Syndrome
Lifestyle  (See also Chap. 17) Obesity is the driv-
ing force behind the metabolic syndrome. Thus, weight 
reduction is the primary approach to the disorder. With 
weight reduction, the improvement in insulin sensitiv-
ity is often accompanied by favorable modifications in 
many components of the metabolic syndrome. In gen-
eral, recommendations for weight loss include a combi-
nation of caloric restriction, increased physical activity, 
and behavior modification. For weight reduction, caloric 
restriction is the most important component, whereas 
increases in physical activity are important for mainte-
nance of weight loss. Some, but not all, evidence sug-
gests that the addition of exercise to caloric restriction 
may promote relatively greater weight loss from the 
visceral depot. The tendency for weight regain after suc-
cessful weight reduction underscores the need for long-
lasting behavioral changes.
Diet  Before prescribing a weight-loss diet, it is impor-
tant to emphasize that it takes a long time for a patient 
to achieve an expanded fat mass; thus, the correction 
need not occur quickly. On the basis of ∼3500 kcal = 1 lb 
of fat, ∼500 kcal restriction daily equates to weight reduc-
tion of 1 lb per week. Diets restricted in carbohydrate 
typically provide a rapid initial weight loss. However, 
after 1 year, the amount of weight reduction is usually 
unchanged. Thus, adherence to the diet is more impor-
tant than which diet is chosen. Moreover, there is con-
cern about diets enriched in saturated fat, particularly
for patients at risk for CVD. Therefore, a high-quality 
diet—i.e., enriched in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, 
lean poultry, and fish—should be encouraged to pro-
vide the maximum overall health benefit.
Physical Activity  Before a physical activity recom-
mendation is provided to patients with the metabolic 
syndrome, it is important to ensure that the increased 
activity does not incur risk. Some high-risk patients 
should undergo formal cardiovascular evaluation before 
initiating an exercise program. For an inactive partici-
pant, gradual increases in physical activity should be 
encouraged to enhance adherence and avoid injury. 
Although increases in physical activity can lead to mod-
est weight reduction, 60–90 min of daily activity is 
required to achieve this goal. Even if an overweight or 
obese adult is unable to achieve this level of activity, he 
or she will still derive a significant health benefit from 
at least 30 min of moderate-intensity daily activity. 
The caloric value of 30 min of a variety of activities can 
be found at http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.
jhtml?identifier=3040364. Of note, a variety of routine 
activities, such as gardening, walking, and houseclean-
ing, require moderate caloric expenditure. Thus, physi-
cal activity need not be defined solely in terms of 
formal exercise such as jogging, swimming, or tennis.
Obesity  (See also Chap. 17) In some patients with 
the metabolic syndrome, treatment options need to 
extend beyond lifestyle intervention. Weight-loss drugs 
come in two major classes: appetite suppressants and 
absorption inhibitors. Appetite suppressants approved 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration include phen-
termine (for short-term use only, 3 months) and sibutra-
mine. Orlistat inhibits fat absorption by ∼30% and is 
moderately effective compared to placebo (∼5% weight 
loss). Orlistat has been shown to reduce the incidence 
of Type 2 diabetes, an effect that was especially evident 
in patients with baseline IGT.
Bariatric surgery is an option for patients with the 
metabolic syndrome who have a body mass index 
(BMI) >40 kg/m2 or >35 kg/m2 with comorbidities. 
Gastric bypass results in a dramatic weight reduction 
and improvement in the features of metabolic syn-
drome. A survival benefit has also been realized.
LDL Cholesterol  (See also Chap. 21) The 
rationale for the NCEP:ATPIII panel to develop crite-
ria for the metabolic syndrome was to go beyond LDL 
cholesterol in identifying and reducing risk for CVD. The 
working assumption by the panel was that LDL choles-
terol goals had already been achieved, and increasing 
evidence supports a linear reduction in CVD events with 
progressive lowering of LDL cholesterol. For patients 
with the metabolic syndrome and diabetes, LDL cho-
lesterol should be reduced to <100 mg/dL and perhaps
 
CHAPTER 18
The Metabolic Syndrome
259
further in patients with a history of CVD events. For 
patients with the metabolic syndrome without diabe-
tes, the Framingham risk score may predict a 10-year 
CVD risk that exceeds 20%. In these subjects, LDL cho-
lesterol should also be reduced to <100 mg/dL. With a 
10-year risk of <20%, however, the targeted LDL choles-
terol goal is <130 mg/dL.
Diets restricted in saturated fats (<7% of calories), 
trans-fats (as few as possible), and cholesterol (<200 mg 
daily) should be applied aggressively. If LDL choles-
terol remains above goal, pharmacologic intervention 
is needed. Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors), 
which produce a 20–60% lowering of LDL cholesterol, 
are generally the first choice for medication interven-
tion. Of note, for each doubling of the statin dose, there 
is only ∼6% additional lowering of LDL cholesterol. Side 
effects are rare and include an increase in hepatic trans-
aminases and/or myopathy. The cholesterol absorption 
inhibitor ezetimibe is well tolerated and should be the 
second choice. Ezetimibe typically reduces LDL choles-
terol by 15–20%. The bile acid sequestrants cholestyr-
amine and colestipol are more effective than ezetimibe 
but must be used with caution in patients with the met-
abolic syndrome because they can increase triglycerides. 
In general, bile sequestrants should not be adminis-
tered when fasting triglycerides are >200 mg/dL. Side 
effects include gastrointestinal symptoms (palatability, 
bloating, belching, constipation, anal irritation). Nicotinic 
acid has modest LDL cholesterol–lowering capabilities 
(<20%). Fibrates are best employed to lower LDL cho-
lesterol when both LDL cholesterol and triglycerides are 
elevated. Fenofibrate may be more effective than gemfi-
brozil in this group.
Triglycerides  The NCEP:ATPIII has focused on 
non-HDL cholesterol rather than triglycerides. However, 
a fasting triglyceride value of <150 mg/dL is recom-
mended. In general, the response of fasting triglycerides 
relates to the amount of weight reduction achieved. 
A weight reduction of >10% is necessary to lower fast-
ing triglycerides.
A fibrate (gemfibrozil or fenofibrate) is the drug 
of choice to lower fasting triglycerides and typically 
achieve a 35–50% reduction. Concomitant administra-
tion with drugs metabolized by the 3A4 cytochrome 
P450 system (including some statins) greatly increases 
the risk of myopathy. In these cases, fenofibrate may be 
preferable to gemfibrozil. In the Veterans Affairs HDL 
Intervention Trial (VA-HIT), gemfibrozil was adminis-
tered to men with known CHD and levels of HDL choles-
terol <40 mg/dL. A coronary disease event and mortality 
rate benefit was experienced predominantly in men 
with hyperinsulinemia and/or diabetes, many of whom 
retrospectively were identified as having the metabolic 
syndrome. Of note, the amount of triglyceride lowering
in the VA-HIT did not predict benefit. Although levels of 
LDL cholesterol did not change, a decrease in LDL par-
ticle number correlated with benefit. Although several 
additional clinical trials have been performed, they have 
not shown clear evidence that fibrates reduce CVD risk 
as a consequence of triglyceride lowering.
Other drugs that lower triglycerides include statins, 
nicotinic acid, and high doses of omega-3 fatty acids. 
In choosing a statin for this purpose, the dose must be 
high for the “less potent” statins (lovastatin, pravastatin, 
fluvastatin) or intermediate for the “more potent” statins 
(simvastatin, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin). The effect of 
nicotinic acid on fasting triglycerides is dose related and 
less than that of fibrates (∼20–40%). In patients with the 
metabolic syndrome and diabetes, nicotinic acid may 
increase fasting glucose. Omega-3 fatty acid prepara-
tions that include high doses of docosahexaenoic acid 
and eicosapentaenoic acid (∼3.0–4.5 g daily) lower fast-
ing triglycerides by ∼40%. No interactions with fibrates 
or statins occur, and the main side effect is eructation 
with a fishy taste. This can be partially blocked by inges-
tion of the nutraceutical after freezing. Clinical trials 
of nicotinic acid or high-dose omega-3 fatty acids in 
patients with the metabolic syndrome have not been 
reported.
HDL Cholesterol  Beyond weight reduction, 
there are very few lipid-modifying compounds that 
increase HDL cholesterol. Statins, fibrates, and bile acid 
sequestrants have modest effects (5–10%), and there is 
no effect on HDL cholesterol with ezetimibe or omega-3 
fatty acids. Nicotinic acid is the only currently available 
drug with predictable HDL cholesterol-raising proper-
ties. The response is dose related and can increase HDL 
cholesterol ∼30% above baseline. There is limited evi-
dence at present that raising HDL has a benefit on CVD 
events independent of lowering LDL cholesterol, partic-
ularly in patients with the metabolic syndrome.
Blood Pressure  The direct relationship between 
blood pressure and all-cause mortality rate has been 
well established, including patients with hyperten-
sion (>140/90) versus prehypertension (>120/80 but 
<140/90) versus individuals with normal blood pres-
sure (<120/80). In patients with the metabolic syn-
drome without diabetes, the best choice for the first 
antihypertensive should usually be an angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II 
receptor blocker, as these two classes of drugs appear to 
reduce the incidence of new-onset Type 2 diabetes. In 
all patients with hypertension, a sodium-restricted diet 
enriched in fruits and vegetables and low-fat dairy prod-
ucts should be advocated. Home monitoring of blood 
pressure may assist in maintaining good blood pressure 
control.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
260
Impaired 
Fasting 
Glucose  (See also 
Chap. 19.) In patients with the metabolic syndrome 
and Type 2 diabetes, aggressive glycemic control may 
favorably modify fasting triglycerides and/or HDL 
cholesterol. In patients with IFG without a diagno-
sis of diabetes, a lifestyle intervention that includes 
weight reduction, dietary fat restriction, and increased 
physical activity has been shown to reduce the inci-
dence of Type 2 diabetes. Metformin has also been 
shown to reduce the incidence of diabetes, although 
the effect was less than that seen with lifestyle 
intervention.
Insulin Resistance  (See also Chap. 19) Sev-
eral drug classes [biguanides, thiazolidinediones (TZDs)] 
increase insulin sensitivity. Because insulin resistance is the 
primary pathophysiologic mechanism for the metabolic 
syndrome, representative drugs in these classes reduce 
its prevalence. Both metformin and TZDs enhance insulin 
action in the liver and suppress endogenous glucose pro-
duction. TZDs, but not metformin, also improve insulin-
mediated glucose uptake in muscle and adipose tissue. 
Benefits of both drugs have also been seen in patients 
with NAFLD and PCOS, and the drugs have been shown to 
reduce markers of inflammation and small, dense LDL.
 Alvin C. Powers 
261
 Diabetes mellitus (DM) refers to a group of common 
metabolic disorders that share the phenotype of hyper-
glycemia. Several distinct types of DM are caused by 
a complex interaction of genetics and environmental 
factors. Depending on the etiology of the DM, factors 
contributing to hyperglycemia include reduced insulin 
secretion, decreased glucose utilization, and increased 
glucose production. The metabolic dysregulation asso-
ciated with DM causes secondary pathophysiologic 
changes in multiple organ systems that impose a tre-
mendous burden on the individual with diabetes and on 
the health care system. In the United States, DM is the 
leading cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD), non-
traumatic lower extremity amputations, and adult blind-
ness. It also predisposes to cardiovascular diseases. With 
an increasing incidence worldwide, DM will be a lead-
ing cause of morbidity and mortality for the foreseeable 
future. 
 classification 
 DM is classifi ed on the basis of the pathogenic process 
that leads to hyperglycemia, as opposed to earlier crite-
ria such as age of onset or type of therapy  ( Fig. 19-1 ) . 
The two broad categories of DM are designated type 1
and type 2  ( Table 19-1 ) . Both types of diabetes are 
preceded by a phase of abnormal glucose homeosta-
sis as the pathogenic processes progress. Type 1 DM is 
the result of complete or near-total insulin defi ciency. 
Type 2 DM is a heterogeneous group of disorders 
characterized by variable degrees of insulin resistance, 
impaired insulin secretion, and increased glucose pro-
duction. Distinct genetic and metabolic defects in insu-
lin action and/or secretion give rise to the common 
phenotype of hyperglycemia in type 2 DM and have 
important potential therapeutic implications now that 
 DIABETES MELLITUS 
 chaptEr 19 
Type of
Diabetes
Normal
glucose
tolerance
<5.6 mmol/L
(100 mg/dL)
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
(100–125 mg/dL)
≥7.0 mmol/L
(126 mg/dL)
<7.8 mmol/L
(140 mg/dL)
<5.6%
5.7–6.4%
≥6.5%
7.8–11.0 mmol/L
(140–199 mg/dL)
≥11.1 mmol/L
(200 mg/dL)
Type 1
Type 2
Other
  specific types
Gestational
  Diabetes
Time (years)
FPG
2-h PG
A1C
Impaired fasting
glucose or
impaired glucose
tolerance
Not
insulin
requiring
Insulin
required
for
control
Insulin
required
for
survival
Hyperglycemia
Diabetes Mellitus
Pre-diabetesa
 Figure 19-1 
spectrum of glucose homeostasis and diabetes mellitus 
(DM). The spectrum from normal glucose tolerance to diabe-
tes in type 1 DM, type 2 DM, other specifi c types of diabetes, 
and gestational DM is shown from left to right. In most types of 
DM, the individual traverses from normal glucose tolerance to 
impaired glucose tolerance to overt diabetes (these should be 
viewed not as abrupt categories but as a spectrum). Arrows indi-
cate that changes in glucose tolerance may be bidirectional in 
some types of diabetes. For example, individuals with type 2 DM
may return to the impaired glucose tolerance category with 
weight loss; in gestational DM, diabetes may revert to impaired 
glucose tolerance or even normal glucose tolerance after 
delivery. The fasting plasma glucose (FPG), the 2-h plasma 
glucose (PG) after a glucose challenge, and the A1C for the dif-
ferent categories of glucose tolerance are shown at the lower 
part of the fi gure. These values do not apply to the diagnosis of 
gestational DM. The World Health Organization uses an FPG of 
110–125 mg/dL for the prediabetes category. Some types of DM 
may or may not require insulin for survival.  a  Some use the term 
“increased risk for diabetes” (ADA) or “intermediate hypergly-
cemia” (WHO) rather than “prediabetes.”  (Adapted from the 
American Diabetes Association: Diabetes Care 30:S4, 2007.) 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
262
pharmacologic agents are available to target specific 
metabolic derangements. Type 2 DM is preceded by 
a period of abnormal glucose homeostasis classified as 
impaired fasting glucose (IFG) or impaired glucose tol-
erance (IGT).
Two features of the current classification of DM diverge 
from previous classifications. First, the terms insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) are obsolete. Since many indi-
viduals with type 2 DM eventually require insulin treat-
ment for control of glycemia, the use of the term 
NIDDM generated considerable confusion. A second 
difference is that age is not a criterion in the classification 
system. Although type 1 DM most commonly develops 
before the age of 30, an autoimmune beta cell destruc-
tive process can develop at any age. It is estimated that 
between 5 and 10% of individuals who develop DM 
after age 30 years have type 1 DM. Although type 2 
DM more typically develops with increasing age, it is 
now being diagnosed more frequently in children and 
young adults, particularly in obese adolescents.
Other Types of DM
Other etiologies for DM include specific genetic defects 
in insulin secretion or action, metabolic abnormalities 
that impair insulin secretion, mitochondrial abnormali-
ties, and a host of conditions that impair glucose tol-
erance (Table 19-1). Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY) is a subtype of DM characterized by autosomal 
dominant inheritance, early onset of hyperglycemia 
(usually <25 years), and impairment in insulin secretion 
(discussed below). Mutations in the insulin receptor 
cause a group of rare disorders characterized by severe 
insulin resistance.
DM can result from pancreatic exocrine disease 
when the majority of pancreatic islets are destroyed. 
Cystic fibrosis–related DM is an important consideration 
in this patient population. Hormones that antagonize 
insulin action can also lead to DM. Thus, DM is often 
a feature of endocrinopathies such as acromegaly and 
Cushing’s disease. Viral infections have been implicated 
in pancreatic islet destruction but are an extremely rare 
cause of DM. A form of acute onset of type 1 diabetes, 
termed fulminant diabetes, has been noted in Japan and 
may be related to viral infection of islets.
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)
Glucose intolerance developing during pregnancy is clas-
sified as gestational diabetes. Insulin resistance is related 
to the metabolic changes of late pregnancy, and the 
increased insulin requirements may lead to IGT or diabetes. 
GDM occurs in ∼7% (range 2–10%) of pregnancies in 
the United States; most women revert to normal glucose 
tolerance postpartum but have a substantial risk (35–60%) 
of developing DM in the next 10–20 years. The Inter-
national Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Group now rec-
ommends that diabetes diagnosed at the initial prenatal 
visit should be classified as “overt” diabetes rather than 
gestational diabetes.
Table 19-1
Etiologic Classification of Diabetes 
Mellitus
	 I.	 Type 1 diabetes (beta cell destruction, usually leading 
to absolute insulin deficiency)
	 	 A.	 Immune mediated
	 	 B.	 Idiopathic
	II.	 Type 2 diabetes (may range from predominantly insulin 
resistance with relative insulin deficiency to a predomi-
nantly insulin secretory defect with insulin resistance)
	III.	 Other specific types of diabetes
	 	 A.	 Genetic defects of beta cell function characterized 
by mutations in
	 	 	
1.	Hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor (HNF) 4α 
(MODY 1)
	 	 	
2.	Glucokinase (MODY 2)
	 	 	
3.	HNF-1α (MODY 3)
	 	 	
4.	Insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1; MODY 4)
	 	 	
5.	HNF-1β (MODY 5)
	 	 	
6.	NeuroD1 (MODY 6)
	 	 	
7.	Mitochondrial DNA
	 	 	
8.	Subunits of ATP-sensitive potassium channel
	 	 	
9.	Proinsulin or insulin
	 	 B.	 Genetic defects in insulin action
	 	 	
1.	Type A insulin resistance
	 	 	
2.	Leprechaunism
	 	 	
3.	Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome
	 	 	
4.	Lipodystrophy syndromes
	 	 C.	 Diseases of the exocrine pancreas—pancreatitis, 
pancreatectomy, neoplasia, cystic fibrosis,  
hemochromatosis, fibrocalculous pancreatopathy, 
mutations in carboxyl ester lipase
	 	 D.	 Endocrinopathies—acromegaly, Cushing’s  
syndrome, glucagonoma, pheochromocytoma, 
hyperthyroidism, somatostatinoma, aldosteronoma
	 	 E.	 Drug or chemical induced—glucocorticoids, vacor 
(a rodenticide), pentamidine, nicotinic acid, diazox-
ide, β-adrenergic agonists, thiazides, hydantoins, 
asparaginase, α-interferon, protease inhibitors, 
antipsychotics (atypicals and others), epinephrine
	 	 F.	 Infections—congenital rubella, cytomegalovirus, 
coxsackievirus
	 	 G.	Uncommon forms of immune-mediated  
diabetes—“stiff-person” syndrome, anti-insulin 
receptor antibodies
	 	 H.	 Other genetic syndromes sometimes associated 
with diabetes—Wolfram’s syndrome, Down’s  
syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome, Turner’s  
syndrome, Friedreich’s ataxia, Huntington’s chorea, 
Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome, myotonic  
dystrophy, porphyria, Prader-Willi syndrome
IV.	 Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
Abbreviation: MODY, maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
Source: Adapted from American Diabetes Association: Diabetes 
Care 34:S11, 2011.
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
263
Epidemiology
The worldwide prevalence of DM has risen dra-
matically over the past two decades, from an esti-
mated 30 million cases in 1985 to 285 million in 
2010. Based on current trends, the International Diabetes 
Federation projects that 438 million individuals will have 
diabetes by the year 2030 (Fig. 19-2). Although the 
prevalence of both type 1 and type 2 DM is increasing 
worldwide, the prevalence of type 2 DM is rising much 
more rapidly, presumably because of increasing obe-
sity, reduced activity levels as countries become more 
industrialized, and the aging of the population. In 2010, 
the prevalence of diabetes ranged from 11.6 to 30.9% in 
the 10 countries with the highest prevalence (Naurua, 
United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Mauritius, Bahrain, 
Reunion, Kuwait, Oman, Tonga, Malaysia—in descend-
ing prevalence; Fig. 19-2). In the most recent estimate for 
the United States (2010), the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention (CDC) estimated that 25.8 million 
persons, or 8.3% of the population, had diabetes (∼27% 
of the individuals with diabetes were undiagnosed). 
Approximately 1.6 million individuals (>20 years) were 
newly diagnosed with diabetes in 2010. DM increases 
with age. In 2010, the prevalence of DM in the United 
States was estimated to be 0.2% in individuals aged 
<20 years and 11.3% in individuals aged >20 years. In indi-
viduals aged >65 years, the prevalence of DM was 26.9%. 
The prevalence is similar in men and women through-
out most age ranges (11.8 and 10.8%, respectively, 
in individuals aged >20 years). Worldwide estimates 
project that in 2030 the greatest number of individuals 
with diabetes will be aged 45–64 years.
There is considerable geographic variation in the inci-
dence of both type 1 and type 2 DM. Scandinavia has 
North America and Caribbean
2010: 37 million
2030: 53 million
South and Central America
2010: 18 million
2030: 30 million
South and Central America
2010: 18 million
2030: 30 million
Europe
2010: 55 million
2030: 66 million
Europe
2010: 55 million
2030: 66 million
Middle East and North Africa
2010: 27 million
2030: 52 million
Middle East and North Africa
2010: 27 million
2030: 52 million
Africa
2010: 12 million
2030: 24 million
Africa
2010: 12 million
2030: 24 million
South-East Asia
2010: 59 million
2030: 101 million
South-East Asia
2010: 59 million
2030: 101 million
Western Pacific
2010: 77 million
2030: 113 million
Western Pacific
2010: 77 million
2030: 113 million
<4%
4–5%
5–7%
7–9%
9–12%
>12%
Figure 19-2
Worldwide prevalence of diabetes mellitus. Comparative 
prevalence (%) of estimates of diabetes (20–79 years), 2010. 
(Used with permission from IDF Diabetes Atlas, the Interna-
tional Diabetes Federation, 2009.)
the highest incidence of type 1 DM (e.g., in Finland, 
the incidence is 57.4/100,000 per year). The Pacific 
Rim has a much lower rate of type 1 DM (in Japan 
and China, the incidence is 0.6–2.4/100,000 per year); 
Northern Europe and the United States have an inter-
mediate rate (8–20/100,000 per year). Much of the 
increased risk of type 1 DM is believed to reflect the fre- 
quency of high-risk human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
alleles among ethnic groups in different geographic loca-
tions. The prevalence of type 2 DM and its harbinger, 
IGT, is highest in certain Pacific islands and the Middle 
East and intermediate in countries such as India and the 
United States. This variability is likely due to genetic, 
behavioral, and environmental factors. DM prevalence 
also varies among different ethnic populations within a 
given country. For example, the CDC estimated that 
the age-adjusted prevalence of DM in the United States 
(age >20 years; 2007–2009) was 7.1% in non-Hispanic 
whites, 7.5% in Asian Americans, 11.8% in Hispanics, and 
12.6% in non-Hispanic blacks. Comparable statistics for 
individuals belonging to American Indian, Alaska Native, 
or Pacific Islander ethnic groups are not available, but 
the prevalence likely exceeds the rate in non-Hispanic 
whites. The onset of type 2 DM occurs, on average, at 
an earlier age in ethnic groups other than non-Hispanic 
whites. In Asia, the prevalence of diabetes is increasing 
rapidly and the diabetes phenotype appears to be differ-
ent from that in the United States and Europe—onset at 
a lower body mass index (BMI) and younger age, greater 
visceral adiposity, and reduced insulin secretory capacity.
Diabetes is a major cause of mortality, but several 
studies indicate that diabetes is likely underreported as a 
cause of death. In the United States, diabetes was listed 
as the seventh leading cause of death in 2007; a recent 
estimate suggested that diabetes was the fifth leading 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
264
Table 19-2
Criteria for the Diagnosis of Diabetes 
Mellitus
•  Symptoms of diabetes plus random blood glucose  
concentration ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)a or
•  Fasting plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)b or
•  A1C >6.5%c or
•  Two-hour plasma glucose ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) 
during an oral glucose tolerance testd
aRandom is defined as without regard to time since the last meal.
bFasting is defined as no caloric intake for at least 8 h.
cThe test should be performed in a laboratory certified according to 
A1C standards of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial.
dThe test should be performed using a glucose load containing the 
equivalent of 75 g anhydrous glucose dissolved in water, not recom-
mended for routine clinical use.
Note: In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia and acute meta-
bolic decompensation, these criteria should be confirmed by repeat 
testing on a different day.
Source: American Diabetes Association: Diabetes Care 34:S11, 2011.
15
A
FPG
2-h PG
A1C
10
5
0
FPG (mg/dL)
2-h PG (mg/dL)
HbA1c (%)
70
89
93
97
100
105
109
116
136
226
38
94
106
116
126
138
156
185
244
364
3.4
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.3
5.5
5.7
6.0
6.7
9.5
Retinopathy (%)
Figure 19-3
Relationship of diabetes-specific complications and glu-
cose tolerance. This figure shows the incidence of reti-
nopathy in Pima Indians as a function of the fasting plasma 
glucose (FPG), the 2-h plasma glucose after a 75-g oral 
glucose challenge (2-h PG), or the A1C. Note that the inci-
dence of retinopathy greatly increases at a fasting plasma 
glucose >116 mg/dL, or a 2-h plasma glucose of 185 mg/dL, 
or an A1C >6.5%. (Blood glucose values are shown in mg/dL; 
to convert to mmol/L, divide value by 18.) (harrsion  2002,
American Diabetes Association. From Diabetes Care 25[Suppl 1]: 
S5–S20, 2002.)
cause of death worldwide and was responsible for 
almost 4 million deaths in 2010 (6.8% of deaths were 
attributed to diabetes worldwide).
Diagnosis
Glucose tolerance is classified into three broad catego-
ries: normal glucose homeostasis, diabetes mellitus, and 
impaired glucose homeostasis. Glucose tolerance can 
be assessed using the fasting plasma glucose (FPG), the 
response to oral glucose challenge, or the hemoglobin 
A1C (A1C). An FPG <5.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL), a 
plasma glucose <140 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) following 
an oral glucose challenge, and an A1C <5.6% are con-
sidered to define normal glucose tolerance. The Inter-
national Expert Committee, with members appointed 
by the American Diabetes Association, the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes, and the Interna-
tional Diabetes Federation, has issued diagnostic criteria 
for DM (Table 19-2) based on the following premises: 
(1) the FPG, the response to an oral glucose challenge 
(OGTT—oral glucose tolerance test), and A1C differ 
among individuals, and (2) DM is defined as the level of 
glycemia at which diabetes-specific complications occur 
rather than on deviations from a population-based mean. 
For example, the prevalence of retinopathy in Native 
Americans (Pima Indian population) begins to increase 
at an FPG >6.4 mmol/L (116 mg/dL) (Fig. 19-3).
An FPG ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL), a glucose 
>11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) 2 h after an oral glucose 
challenge, or an A1C ≥6.5% warrant the diagnosis of 
DM (Table 19-2). A random plasma glucose concentra-
tion ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) accompanied by classic 
symptoms of DM (polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss) also 
is sufficient for the diagnosis of DM (Table 19-2).
Abnormal glucose homeostasis (Fig. 19-1) is defined 
as (1) FPG = 5.6–6.9 mmol/L (100–125 mg/dL), which 
is defined as IFG [note that the World Health Organiza-
tion uses an FPG of 6.1–6.9 mmol/L (110–125 mg/dL)]; 
(2) plasma glucose levels between 7.8 and 11 mmol/L 
(140 and 199 mg/dL) following an oral glucose chal-
lenge, which is termed impaired glucose tolerance 
(IGT); or (3) A1C of 5.7–6.4%. An A1C of 5.7–6.4%, 
IFG, and IGT do not identify the same individuals, but 
individuals in all three groups are at greater risk of pro-
gressing to type 2 diabetes and have an increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Some use the term “prediabetes,” 
“increased risk of diabetes” (ADA), or “intermediate 
hyperglycemia” (WHO) for this category. The current 
criteria for the diagnosis of DM emphasize that the A1C 
or the FPG as the most reliable and convenient tests for 
identifying DM in asymptomatic individuals. Oral glu-
cose tolerance testing, although still a valid means for 
diagnosing DM, is not often used in routine clinical care.
The diagnosis of DM has profound implications 
for an individual from both a medical and a financial 
standpoint. Thus, abnormalities on screening tests for 
diabetes should be repeated before making a definitive 
diagnosis of DM, unless acute metabolic derangements 
or a markedly elevated plasma glucose are present 
(Table 19-2). These criteria also allow for the diagnosis 
of DM to be withdrawn in situations when the glucose 
intolerance reverts to normal.
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
265
Screening
Widespread use of the FPG or the A1C as a screening 
test for type 2 DM is recommended because (1) a large 
number of individuals who meet the current criteria for 
DM are asymptomatic and unaware that they have the 
disorder, (2) epidemiologic studies suggest that type 2 DM 
may be present for up to a decade before diagnosis, 
(3) some individuals with type 2 DM have one or more 
diabetes-specific complications at the time of their diag-
nosis, and (4) treatment of type 2 DM may favorably 
alter the natural history of DM. The ADA recommends 
screening all individuals >45 years every 3 years and 
screening individuals at an earlier age if they are over-
weight (BMI >25 kg/m2) and have one additional risk 
factor for diabetes (Table 19-3). In contrast to type 2 
DM, a long asymptomatic period of hyperglycemia is rare 
prior to the diagnosis of type 1 DM. A number of immu-
nologic markers for type 1 DM are becoming available 
(discussed below), but their routine use is discouraged 
pending the identification of clinically beneficial inter-
ventions for individuals at high risk for developing type 
1 DM.
Insulin Biosynthesis, Secretion, 
and Action
Biosynthesis
Insulin is produced in the beta cells of the pancre-
atic islets. It is initially synthesized as a single-chain 
86-amino-acid precursor polypeptide, preproinsulin. 
Sub­sequent proteolytic processing removes the amino-
terminal signal peptide, giving rise to proinsulin. Proin-
sulin is structurally related to insulin-like growth factors I 
and II, which bind weakly to the insulin receptor. 
Cleavage of an internal 31-residue fragment from proin-
sulin generates the C peptide and the A (21 amino acids) 
and B (30 amino acids) chains of insulin, which are con-
nected by disulfide bonds. The mature insulin molecule 
and C peptide are stored together and co-secreted from 
secretory granules in the beta cells. Because C peptide 
is cleared more slowly than insulin, it is a useful marker 
of insulin secretion and allows discrimination of endog-
enous and exogenous sources of insulin in the evalua-
tion of hypoglycemia (Chaps. 20 and 22). Pancreatic 
beta cells co-secrete islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) 
or amylin, a 37-amino-acid peptide, along with insulin. 
The role of IAPP in normal physiology is incompletely 
defined, but it is the major component of the amyloid 
fibrils found in the islets of patients with type 2 diabetes, 
and an analogue is sometimes used in treating type 1 and 
type 2 DM. Human insulin is produced by recombinant 
DNA technology; structural alterations at one or more 
amino acid residues modify its physical and pharmaco-
logic characteristics (see later in the chapter).
Secretion
Glucose is the key regulator of insulin secretion by the 
pancreatic beta cell, although amino acids, ketones, vari-
ous nutrients, gastrointestinal peptides, and neurotrans-
mitters also influence insulin secretion. Glucose levels 
>3.9 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) stimulate insulin synthesis, 
primarily by enhancing protein translation and process-
ing. Glucose stimulation of insulin secretion begins 
with its transport into the beta cell by a facilitative glu-
cose transporter (Fig. 19-4). Glucose phosphorylation 
by glucokinase is the rate-limiting step that controls 
glucose-regulated insulin secretion. Further metabolism 
of glucose-6-phosphate via glycolysis generates ATP, 
which inhibits the activity of an ATP-sensitive K+ chan-
nel. This channel consists of two separate proteins: one 
is the binding site for certain oral hypoglycemics (e.g., 
sulfonyl ureas, meglitinides); the other is an inwardly 
rectifying K+ channel protein (Kir6.2). Inhibition of this 
K+ channel induces beta cell membrane depolarization,
which opens voltage-dependent calcium channels (leading 
to an influx of calcium), and stimulates insulin secretion. 
Insulin secretory profiles reveal a pulsatile pattern of hor-
mone release, with small secretory bursts occurring about 
every 10 min, superimposed upon greater amplitude oscil-
lations of about 80–150 min. Incretins are released from 
neuroendocrine cells of the gastrointestinal tract follow-
ing food ingestion and amplify glucose-stimulated insulin 
secretion and suppress glucagon secretion. Glucagon- 
like peptide 1 (GLP-1), the most potent incretin, is released 
from L cells in the small intestine and stimulates insulin 
secretion only when the blood glucose is above the fast-
ing level. Incretin analogues are used to enhance endog-
enous insulin secretion (see later in the chapter).
Table 19-3
Risk Factors for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Family history of diabetes (i.e., parent or sibling with type 2 
diabetes)
Obesity (BMI ≥25 kg/m2)
Physical inactivity
Race/ethnicity (e.g., African American, Latino, Native 
American, Asian American, Pacific Islander)
Previously identified with IFG, IGT, or an A1C of 5.7–6.4%
History of GDM or delivery of baby >4 kg (9 lb)
Hypertension (blood pressure ≥140/90 mmHg)
HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (0.90 mmol/L) and/or a 
triglyceride level >250 mg/dL (2.82 mmol/L)
Polycystic ovary syndrome or acanthosis nigricans
History of cardiovascular disease
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; GDM, gestational diabetes 
mellitus; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IFG, impaired fasting glu-
cose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance.
Source: Adapted from American Diabetes Association: Diabetes 
Care 34:S11, 2011.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
266
CAP
Insulin
Insulin receptor
Plasma membrane
GLUT4
GLUT4
Translocation
Glucose
P
P
P
P
Cell growth
Protein
synthesis
Glycogen
synthesis
Glucose
transport
Shc
IRS proteins
p110
p85
Glucose-6-
phosphate
Metabolism/
storage
Glucose
PI-3-kinase
Hexokinase II
Cbl
Figure 19-5
Insulin signal transduction pathway in skeletal muscle. The 
insulin receptor has intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity and inter-
acts with insulin receptor substrates (IRS and Shc) proteins. 
A number of “docking” proteins bind to these cellular pro-
teins and initiate the metabolic actions of insulin [GrB-2, SOS, 
SHP-2, p110, and phosphatidylinositol-3′-kinase (PI-3-kinase)]. 
Insulin increases glucose transport through PI-3-kinase and 
the Cbl pathway, which promotes the translocation of intra-
cellular vesicles containing GLUT4 glucose transporter to the 
plasma membrane.
Action
Once insulin is secreted into the portal venous system, 
∼50% is removed and degraded by the liver. Unex-
tracted insulin enters the systemic circulation where it 
binds to receptors in target sites. Insulin binding to its 
receptor stimulates intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, 
leading to receptor autophosphorylation and the recruit-
ment of intracellular signaling molecules, such as insu-
lin receptor substrates (IRS) (Fig. 19-5). IRS and other 
adaptor proteins initiate a complex cascade of phosphor-
ylation and dephosphorylation reactions, resulting in the 
widespread metabolic and mitogenic effects of insulin. 
As an example, activation of the phosphatidylinositol-
3′-kinase (PI-3-kinase) pathway stimulates translocation 
of a facilitative glucose transporter (e.g., GLUT4) to the 
cell surface, an event that is crucial for glucose uptake 
by skeletal muscle and fat. Activation of other insulin 
receptor signaling pathways induces glycogen synthesis, 
protein synthesis, lipogenesis, and regulation of various 
genes in insulin-responsive cells.
Glucose homeostasis reflects a balance between hepatic 
glucose production and peripheral glucose uptake and 
utilization. Insulin is the most important regulator of this 
metabolic equilibrium, but neural input, metabolic signals, 
and other hormones (e.g., glucagon) result in integrated 
control of glucose supply and utilization (Chap. 20; 
see Fig. 20-1). In the fasting state, low insulin levels 
increase glucose production by promoting hepatic gluco-
neogenesis and glycogenolysis and reduce glucose uptake 
+
+
ATP/ADP
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose-6-phosphate
Glucokinase
Pyruvate
Mitochondria
K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
ATP-sensitive
K+ channel
GLUT
Voltage-dependent
Ca2+ channel
Incretins
cAMP
Nucleus
Secretory
granules
Insulin
C peptide
IAPP
Depolarization
Islet
transcription
factors
SUR
Incretin
receptors
Figure 19-4
Mechanisms of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and 
abnormalities in diabetes. Glucose and other nutrients reg-
ulate insulin secretion by the pancreatic beta cell. Glucose 
is transported by a glucose transporter (GLUT1 in humans, 
GLUT2 in rodents); subsequent glucose metabolism by the 
beta cell alters ion channel activity, leading to insulin secre-
tion. The SUR receptor is the binding site for some drugs 
that act as insulin secretagogues. Mutations in the events or 
proteins underlined are a cause of maturity-onset diabetes of 
the young (MODY) or other forms of diabetes. ADP, adenos-
ine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; cAMP, cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate; IAPP, islet amyloid polypeptide 
or amylin; SUR, sulfonylurea receptor.
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
267
in insulin-sensitive tissues (skeletal muscle and fat), thereby 
promoting mobilization of stored precursors such as 
amino acids and free fatty acids (lipolysis). Glucagon, 
secreted by pancreatic alpha cells when blood glucose or 
insulin levels are low, stimulates glycogenolysis and glu-
coneogenesis by the liver and renal medulla. Postprandi-
ally, the glucose load elicits a rise in insulin and fall in 
glucagon, leading to a reversal of these processes. Insulin, 
an anabolic hormone, promotes the storage of carbohy-
drate and fat and protein synthesis. The major portion 
of postprandial glucose is utilized by skeletal muscle, an 
effect of insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. Other tissues, 
most notably the brain, utilize glucose in an insulin-
independent fashion.
Pathogenesis
Type 1 DM
Type 1 DM is the result of interactions of genetic, envi-
ronmental, and immunologic factors that ultimately lead 
to the destruction of the pancreatic beta cells and insulin 
deficiency. Type 1 DM results from autoimmune beta 
cell destruction, and most, but not all, individuals have 
evidence of islet-directed autoimmunity. Some indi-
viduals who have the clinical phenotype of type 1 DM 
lack immunologic markers indicative of an autoimmune 
process involving the beta cells and the genetic mark-
ers of type 1 diabetes. These individuals are thought to 
develop insulin deficiency by unknown, nonimmune 
mechanisms and are ketosis prone; many are African 
American or Asian in heritage. The temporal develop-
ment of type 1 DM is shown schematically as a func-
tion of beta cell mass in Fig. 19-6. Individuals with a 
genetic susceptibility have normal beta cell mass at birth 
but begin to lose beta cells secondary to autoimmune 
destruction that occurs over months to years. This auto-
immune process is thought to be triggered by an infec-
tious or environmental stimulus and to be sustained by 
a beta cell–specific molecule. In the majority, immu-
nologic markers appear after the triggering event but 
before diabetes becomes clinically overt. Beta cell mass 
then begins to decrease, and insulin secretion progres-
sively declines, although normal glucose tolerance is 
maintained. The rate of decline in beta cell mass varies 
widely among individuals, with some patients progress-
ing rapidly to clinical diabetes and others evolving more 
slowly. Features of diabetes do not become evident until 
a majority of beta cells are destroyed (70–80%). At this 
point, residual functional beta cells exist but are insuf-
ficient in number to maintain glucose tolerance. The 
events that trigger the transition from glucose intoler-
ance to frank diabetes are often associated with increased 
insulin requirements, as might occur during infections 
Immunologic
trigger
Genetic
predisposition
0
(Birth)
Time (years)
Beta cell mass (% of max)
100
50
0
Immunologic abnormalities
Progressive impairment
of insulin release
Overt diabetes
No diabetes
Diabetes
Figure 19-6
Temporal model for development of type 1 diabetes. 
Individuals with a genetic predisposition are exposed to an 
immunologic trigger that initiates an autoimmune process, 
resulting in a gradual decline in beta cell mass. The down-
ward slope of the beta cell mass varies among individuals 
and may not be continuous. This progressive impairment in 
insulin release results in diabetes when ∼80% of the beta cell 
mass is destroyed. A “honeymoon” phase may be seen in 
the first 1 or 2 years after the onset of diabetes and is asso-
ciated with reduced insulin requirements. (Adapted from 
Medical Management of Type 1 Diabetes, 3rd ed, JS Skyler 
[ed]. American Diabetes Association, Alexandria, VA, 1998.)
or puberty. After the initial clinical presentation of type 1 
DM, a “honeymoon” phase may ensue during which 
time glycemic control is achieved with modest doses of 
insulin or, rarely, insulin is not needed. However, this 
fleeting phase of endogenous insulin production from 
residual beta cells disappears as the autoimmune pro-
cess destroys remaining beta cells, and the individual 
becomes insulin deficient. Some individuals with long-
standing type 1 diabetes produce a small amount of 
insulin (as reflected by C-peptide production), and some 
individuals have insulin-positive cells in the pancreas at 
autopsy.
Genetic Considerations
Susceptibility to type 1 DM involves multiple 
genes. The concordance of type 1 DM in identical 
twins ranges between 40 and 60%, indicating that 
additional modifying factors are likely involved in deter-
mining whether diabetes develops. The major suscepti-
bility gene for type 1 DM is located in the HLA region 
on chromosome 6. Polymorphisms in the HLA com-
plex account for 40–50% of the genetic risk of develop-
ing type 1 DM. This region contains genes that encode 
the class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
268
molecules, which present antigen to helper T cells and 
thus are involved in initiating the immune response. 
The ability of class II MHC molecules to present anti-
gen is dependent on the amino acid composition of 
their antigen-binding sites. Amino acid substitutions 
may influence the specificity of the immune response 
by altering the binding affinity of different antigens for 
class II molecules.
Most individuals with type 1 DM have the HLA 
DR3 and/or DR4 haplotype. Refinements in geno-
typing of HLA loci have shown that the haplotypes 
DQA1*0301, DQB1*0302, and DQB1*0201 are most 
strongly associated with type 1 DM. These haplotypes 
are present in 40% of children with type 1 DM as com-
pared to 2% of the normal U.S. population. However, 
most individuals with predisposing haplotypes do not 
develop diabetes.
In addition to MHC class II associations, genome 
association studies have identified at least 20 different 
genetic loci that contribute susceptibility to type 1 DM 
(polymorphisms in the promoter region of the insulin gene, 
the CTLA-4 gene, interleukin-2 receptor, CTLA4, and 
PTPN22, etc.). Genes that confer protection against the 
development of the disease also exist. The haplotype 
DQA1*0102, DQB1*0602 is extremely rare in individ-
uals with type 1 DM (<1%) and appears to provide pro-
tection from type 1 DM.
Although the risk of developing type 1 DM is 
increased tenfold in relatives of individuals with the dis-
ease, the risk is relatively low: 3–4% if the parent has 
type 1 diabetes and 5–15% in a sibling (depending on 
which HLA haplotypes are shared). Hence, most indi-
viduals with type 1 DM do not have a first-degree rela-
tive with this disorder.
Pathophysiology
Although other islet cell types alpha cells (glucagon 
producing), delta cells (somatostatin producing), or 
PP cells (pancreatic polypeptide producing) are func-
tionally and embryologically similar to beta cells and 
express most of the same proteins as beta cells, they are 
spared from the autoimmune destruction. Pathologically, 
the pancreatic islets are infiltrated with lymphocytes 
(a process termed insulitis). After all beta cells are destroyed, 
the inflammatory process abates, the islets become atro-
phic, and most immunologic markers disappear. Stud-
ies of the autoimmune process in humans and in animal 
models of type 1 DM (NOD mouse and BB rat) have 
identified the following abnormalities in the humoral 
and cellular arms of the immune system: (1) islet cell 
autoantibodies; (2) activated lymphocytes in the islets, 
peripancreatic lymph nodes, and systemic circulation; 
(3) T lymphocytes that proliferate when stimulated 
with islet proteins; and (4) release of cytokines within 
the insulitis. Beta cells seem to be particularly susceptible 
to the toxic effect of some cytokines [tumor necrosis 
factor α (TNF-α), interferon γ, and interleukin 1 (IL-1)].
The precise mechanisms of beta cell death are not 
known but may involve formation of nitric oxide 
metabolites, apoptosis, and direct CD8+ T-cell cytotox-
icity. The islet destruction is mediated by T lympho-
cytes rather than islet autoantibodies, as these antibod-
ies do not generally react with the cell surface of islet 
cells and are not capable of transferring DM to animals. 
Suppression of the autoimmune process at the time of 
diagnosis of diabetes slows the decline in beta cell destruc-
tion, but the safety of such interventions is unknown.
Pancreatic islet molecules targeted by the autoimmune 
process include insulin, glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD, the biosynthetic enzyme for the neurotransmit-
ter GABA), ICA-512/IA-2 (homology with tyrosine 
phosphatases), and a beta cell–specific zinc transporter 
(ZnT-8). Most of the autoantigens are not beta cell 
specific, which raises the question of how the beta 
cells are selectively destroyed. Current theories favor 
initiation of an autoimmune process directed at one 
beta cell molecule, which then spreads to other islet 
molecules as the immune process destroys beta cells 
and creates a series of secondary autoantigens. The 
beta cells of individuals who develop type 1 DM do 
not differ from beta cells of normal individuals, since 
islets transplanted from a genetically identical twin are 
destroyed by a recurrence of the autoimmune process 
of type 1 DM.
Immunologic markers
Islet cell autoantibodies (ICAs) are a composite of sev-
eral different antibodies directed at pancreatic islet mol-
ecules such as GAD, insulin, IA-2/ICA-512, and ZnT-8, 
and serve as a marker of the autoimmune process of 
type 1 DM. Assays for autoantibodies to GAD-65 are 
commercially available. Testing for ICAs can be useful 
in classifying the type of DM as type 1 and in identi-
fying nondiabetic individuals at risk for developing 
type 1 DM. ICAs are present in the majority of indi-
viduals (>85%) diagnosed with new-onset type 1 DM, 
in a significant minority of individuals with newly diag-
nosed type 2 DM (5–10%), and occasionally in indi-
viduals with GDM (<5%). ICAs are present in 3–4% 
of first-degree relatives of individuals with type 1 DM. 
In combination with impaired insulin secretion after IV 
glucose tolerance testing, they predict a >50% risk of 
developing type 1 DM within 5 years. At present, the 
measurement of ICAs in nondiabetic individuals is a 
research tool because no treatments have been approved 
to prevent the occurrence or progression to type 1 DM. 
Clinical trials are testing interventions to slow the auto-
immune beta cell destruction.
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
269
Environmental factors
Numerous environmental events have been proposed to 
trigger the autoimmune process in genetically suscepti-
ble individuals; however, none have been conclusively 
linked to diabetes. Identification of an environmental 
trigger has been difficult because the event may pre-
cede the onset of DM by several years (Fig. 19-6). Puta-
tive environmental triggers include viruses (coxsackie, 
rubella, enteroviruses most prominently), bovine milk 
proteins, and nitrosourea compounds.
Prevention of type 1 DM
A number of interventions have successfully delayed or 
prevented diabetes in animal models. Some interven-
tions have targeted the immune system directly (immu-
nosuppression, selective T-cell subset deletion, induc-
tion of immunologic tolerance to islet proteins), whereas 
others have prevented islet cell death by blocking 
cytotoxic cytokines or increasing islet resistance to the 
destructive process. Though results in animal models are 
promising, these interventions have not been success-
ful in preventing type 1 DM in humans. The Diabetes 
Prevention Trial–type 1 concluded that administering 
insulin (IV or PO) to individuals at high risk for devel-
oping type 1 DM did not prevent type 1 DM.
In patients with new-onset type 1 diabetes, treatment 
with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies, a GAD vaccine, 
and anti-B lymphocyte monoclonal antibody have been 
shown to slow the decline in C-peptide levels. This is 
an area of active clinical investigation.
Type 2 DM
Insulin resistance and abnormal insulin secretion are 
central to the development of type 2 DM. Although 
the primary defect, is controversial, most studies sup-
port the view that insulin resistance precedes an insulin 
secretory defect, but that diabetes develops only when 
insulin secretion becomes inadequate. Type 2 DM likely 
encompasses a range of disorders with common pheno-
type of hyperglycemia. Most of our current understanding 
(and the discussion that follows) of the pathophysiology 
and genetics is based on studies of individuals of European 
descent. It is becoming increasingly apparent that DM in 
other ethnic groups (Asian, African, and Latin American) 
has a different but yet undefined pathophysiology. In 
these groups, DM that is ketosis prone (often obese) or 
ketosis resistant (often lean) is commonly seen.
Genetic Considerations
Type 2 DM has a strong genetic component. The 
concordance of type 2 DM in identical twins is 
between 70 and 90%. Individuals with a parent 
with type 2 DM have an increased risk of diabetes; if 
both parents have type 2 DM, the risk approaches 40%. 
Insulin resistance, as demonstrated by reduced glucose 
utilization in skeletal muscle, is present in many nondia-
betic, first-degree relatives of individuals with type 2 DM. 
The disease is polygenic and multifactorial, since in 
addition to genetic susceptibility, environmental factors 
(such as obesity, nutrition, and physical activity) modulate 
the phenotype. The genes that predispose to type 2 DM 
are incompletely identified, but recent genome-wide 
association studies have identified a large number of 
genes that convey a relatively small risk for type 2 DM 
(>20 genes, each with a relative risk of 1.06–1.5). Most 
prominent is a variant of the transcription factor 7–like 
2 gene that has been associated with type 2 diabetes in 
several populations and with impaired glucose tolerance 
in one population at high risk for diabetes. Genetic 
polymorphisms associated with type 2 diabetes have 
also been found in the genes encoding the peroxisome 
proliferators–activated receptor-γ, inward rectifying potas-
sium channel, zinc transporter, IRS, and calpain 10. 
The mechanisms by which these genetic loci increase 
the susceptibility to type 2 diabetes are not clear, but 
most are predicted to alter islet function or develop-
ment, or insulin secretion. While the genetic suscep-
tibility to type 2 diabetes is under active investigation 
(estimation that <10% of genetic risk is determined by 
loci identified thus far), it is currently not possible to 
use a combination of known genetic loci to predict 
type 2 diabetes.
Pathophysiology
Type 2 DM is characterized by impaired insulin secretion, 
insulin resistance, excessive hepatic glucose production, and 
abnormal fat metabolism. Obesity, particularly visceral 
or central (as evidenced by the hip-waist ratio), is very 
common in type 2 DM (80% or more are obese). In the 
early stages of the disorder, glucose tolerance remains 
near normal, despite insulin resistance, because the pan-
creatic beta cells compensate by increasing insulin out-
put (Fig. 19-7). As insulin resistance and compensatory 
hyper­insulinemia progress, the pancreatic islets in certain 
individuals are unable to sustain the hyperinsulinemic 
state. IGT, characterized by elevations in postprandial 
glucose, then develops. A further decline in insulin secre-
tion and an increase in hepatic glucose production lead 
to overt diabetes with fasting hyperglycemia. Ultimately, 
beta cell failure ensues.
Metabolic abnormalities
Abnormal muscle and fat metabolism
Insulin resistance, the decreased ability of insulin to act 
effectively on target tissues (especially muscle, liver, and fat), 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
270
is a prominent feature of type 2 DM and results from a 
combination of genetic susceptibility and obesity. Insu-
lin resistance is relative, however, since supranormal 
levels of circulating insulin will normalize the plasma 
glucose. Insulin dose-response curves exhibit a right-
ward shift, indicating reduced sensitivity, and a reduced 
maximal response, indicating an overall decrease in max-
imum glucose utilization (30–60% lower than in normal 
individuals). Insulin resistance impairs glucose utilization 
by insulin-sensitive tissues and increases hepatic glucose 
output; both effects contribute to the hyperglycemia. 
Increased hepatic glucose output predominantly accounts 
for increased FPG levels, whereas decreased peripheral 
glucose usage results in postprandial hyperglycemia. In 
skeletal muscle, there is a greater impairment in nonoxida-
tive glucose usage (glycogen formation) than in oxidative 
glucose metabolism through glycolysis. Glucose metab-
olism in insulin-independent tissues is not altered in 
type 2 DM.
The precise molecular mechanism leading to insulin 
resistance in type 2 DM has not been elucidated. Insulin 
receptor levels and tyrosine kinase activity in skeletal mus-
cle are reduced, but these alterations are most likely sec-
ondary to hyperinsulinemia and are not a primary defect. 
Therefore, “postreceptor” defects in insulin-regulated 
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation appear to play the 
predominant role in insulin resistance (Fig.  19-5). For 
example, a PI-3-kinase signaling defect might reduce 
translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane. Other 
abnormalities include the accumulation of lipid within 
skeletal myocytes, which may impair mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation and reduce insulin-stimulated 
mitochondrial ATP production. Impaired fatty acid 
oxidation and lipid accumulation within skeletal myo-
cytes also may generate reactive oxygen species such as 
lipid peroxides. Of note, not all insulin signal transduc-
tion pathways are resistant to the effects of insulin (e.g., 
those controlling cell growth and differentiation using 
the mitogenic-activated protein kinase pathway). Con-
sequently, hyperinsulinemia may increase the insulin 
action through these pathways, potentially accelerating 
diabetes-related conditions such as atherosclerosis.
The obesity accompanying type 2 DM, particularly 
in a central or visceral location, is thought to be part 
of the pathogenic process. The increased adipocyte mass 
leads to increased levels of circulating free fatty acids 
and other fat cell products (Chap. 16). For example, 
adipocytes secrete a number of biologic products (non-
esterified free fatty acids, retinol-binding protein 4, 
leptin, TNF-α, resistin, and adiponectin). In addition 
to regulating body weight, appetite, and energy expen-
diture, adipokines also modulate insulin sensitivity. The 
increased production of free fatty acids and some adipo-
kines may cause insulin resistance in skeletal muscle and 
liver. For example, free fatty acids impair glucose utili-
zation in skeletal muscle, promote glucose production 
by the liver, and impair beta cell function. In contrast, 
the production by adipocytes of adiponectin, an insulin-
sensitizing peptide, is reduced in obesity, and this may 
contribute to hepatic insulin resistance. Adipocyte prod-
ucts and adipokines also produce an inflammatory state 
and may explain why markers of inflammation such as IL-6 
and C-reactive protein are often elevated in type 2 DM. 
In addition, inflammatory cells have been found infil-
trating adipose tissue. Inhibition of inflammatory signaling 
pathways such as the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) pathway 
appears to reduce insulin resistance and improve hyper-
glycemia in animal models.
Impaired insulin secretion
Insulin secretion and sensitivity are interrelated (Fig. 19-7).
In type 2 DM, insulin secretion initially increases in 
response to insulin resistance to maintain normal glucose 
tolerance. Initially, the insulin secretory defect is mild 
and selectively involves glucose-stimulated insulin secre-
tion. The response to other nonglucose secretagogues, 
such as arginine, is preserved. Abnormalities in proinsu-
lin processing is reflected by increased secretion of proin-
sulin in type 2 diabetes. Eventually, the insulin secretory 
defect progresses to a state of inadequate insulin secretion.
The reason(s) for the decline in insulin secretory 
capacity in type 2 DM is unclear. The assumption is 
that a second genetic defect—superimposed upon insu-
lin resistance—leads to beta cell failure. Beta cell mass 
is decreased by approximately 50% in individuals with 
long-standing type 2 diabetes. Islet amyloid polypeptide 
Insulin sensitivity
M value (µmol/min per kg)
Insulin secretion
(pmol per min)
1000
500
0
0
50
100
B
C
D
A
IGT
NGT
Type 2 DM
Figure 19-7
Metabolic changes during the development of type 2 dia-
betes mellitus (DM). Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity 
are related, and as an individual becomes more insulin resis-
tant (by moving from point A to point B), insulin secretion 
increases. A failure to compensate by increasing the insulin 
secretion results initially in impaired glucose tolerance (IGT; 
point C) and ultimately in type 2 DM (point D). (Adapted from 
SE Kahn: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:4047, 2001; RN Bergman, 
M Ader: Trends Endocrinol Metab 11:351, 2000.)
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
271
or amylin is co-secreted by the beta cell and forms the 
amyloid fibrillar deposit found in the islets of individu-
als with long-standing type 2 DM. Whether such islet 
amyloid deposits are a primary or secondary event is 
not known. The metabolic environment of diabetes 
may also negatively impact islet function. For exam-
ple, chronic hyperglycemia paradoxically impairs islet 
function (“glucose toxicity”) and leads to a worsening 
of hyperglycemia. Improvement in glycemic control is 
often associated with improved islet function. In addi-
tion, elevation of free fatty acid levels (“lipotoxicity”) 
and dietary fat may also worsen islet function.
Increased hepatic glucose and lipid production
In type 2 DM, insulin resistance in the liver reflects the 
failure of hyperinsulinemia to suppress gluconeogenesis, 
which results in fasting hyperglycemia and decreased 
glycogen storage by the liver in the postprandial state. 
Increased hepatic glucose production occurs early in the 
course of diabetes, though likely after the onset of insu-
lin secretory abnormalities and insulin resistance in skel-
etal muscle. As a result of insulin resistance in adipose 
tissue, lipolysis and free fatty acid flux from adipocytes 
are increased, leading to increased lipid [very low density 
lipoprotein (VLDL) and triglyceride] synthesis in hepato-
cytes. This lipid storage or steatosis in the liver may lead 
to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and abnormal liver 
function tests. This is also responsible for the dyslipid-
emia found in type 2 DM [elevated triglycerides, reduced 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and increased small, 
dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles].
Insulin resistance syndromes
The insulin resistance condition comprises a spectrum of 
disorders, with hyperglycemia representing one of the 
most readily diagnosed features. The metabolic syndrome, 
the insulin resistance syndrome, and syndrome X are terms 
used to describe a constellation of metabolic derange-
ments that includes insulin resistance, hypertension, dys-
lipidemia (decreased HDL and elevated triglycerides), 
central or visceral obesity, type 2 diabetes or IGT/IFG, 
and accelerated cardiovascular disease. This syndrome is 
discussed in Chap. 18.
A number of relatively rare forms of severe insulin resis-
tance include features of type 2 DM or IGT (Table 19-1). 
Mutations in the insulin receptor that interfere with 
binding or signal transduction are a rare cause of insu-
lin resistance. Acanthosis nigricans and signs of hyper-
androgenism (hirsutism, acne, and oligomenorrhea in 
women) are also common physical features. Two distinct 
syndromes of severe insulin resistance have been described 
in adults: (1) type A, which affects young women and is 
characterized by severe hyperinsulinemia, obesity, and 
features of hyperandrogenism; and (2) type B, which 
affects middle-aged women and is characterized by severe 
hyperinsulinemia, features of hyperandrogenism, and 
autoimmune disorders. Individuals with the type A insu-
lin resistance syndrome have an undefined defect in the 
insulin-signaling pathway; individuals with the type B 
insulin resistance syndrome have autoantibodies directed 
at the insulin receptor. These receptor autoantibodies 
may block insulin binding or may stimulate the insulin 
receptor, leading to intermittent hypoglycemia.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common dis-
order that affects premenopausal women and is charac-
terized by chronic anovulation and hyperandrogenism 
(Chap. 10). Insulin resistance is seen in a significant sub-
set of women with PCOS, and the disorder substantially 
increases the risk for type 2 DM, independent of the 
effects of obesity.
Prevention
Type 2 DM is preceded by a period of IGT or IFG, and 
a number of lifestyle modifications and pharmacologic 
agents prevent or delay the onset of DM. The Diabetes 
Prevention Program (DPP) demonstrated that inten-
sive changes in lifestyle (diet and exercise for 30 min/d 
five times/week) in individuals with IGT prevented or 
delayed the development of type 2 DM by 58% com-
pared to placebo. This effect was seen in individu-
als regardless of age, sex, or ethnic group. In the same 
study, metformin prevented or delayed diabetes by 31% 
compared to placebo. The lifestyle intervention group 
lost 5–7% of their body weight during the 3 years of 
the study. Studies in Finnish and Chinese populations 
noted similar efficacy of diet and exercise in preventing 
or delaying type 2 DM; α-glucosidase inhibitors, met-
formin, thiazolidinediones, and orlistat prevent or delay 
type 2 DM but are not approved for this purpose. Indi-
viduals with a strong family history of type 2 DM and 
individuals with IFG or IGT should be strongly encour-
aged to maintain a normal BMI and engage in regular 
physical activity. Pharmacologic therapy for individu-
als with prediabetes is currently controversial because 
its cost-effectiveness and safety profile are not known. 
The ADA has suggested that metformin be considered 
in individuals with both IFG and IGT who are at very 
high risk for progression to diabetes (age <60 years, BMI 
≥35 kg/m2, family history of diabetes in first-degree rela-
tive, elevated triglycerides, reduced HDL, hypertension, 
or A1C >6.0%). Individuals with IFG, IGT, or an A1C 
of 5.7–6.4% should be monitored annually to determine 
if diagnostic criteria for diabetes are present.
Genetically Defined, Monogenic 
Forms of Diabetes Mellitus
Several monogenic forms of DM have been identified. 
Six different variants of MODY, caused by mutations 
in genes encoding islet-enriched transcription factors or 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
272
Table 19-4
Laboratory Values in Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
(DKA) and Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar 
State (HHS) (Representative Ranges at 
Presentation)
DKA
HHS
Glucose,a 
mmol/L (mg/dL)
13.9–33.3  
(250–600)
33.3–66.6  
(600–1200)
Sodium, meq/L
125–135
135–145
Potassiuma,b
Normal to ↑
Normal
Magnesiuma
Normal
Normal
Chloridea
Normal
Normal
Phosphatea,b
Normal
Normal
Creatinine
Slightly ↑
Moderately ↑
Osmolality  
(mosmol/mL)
300–320
330–380
Plasma ketonesa
++++
+/−
Serum 
bicarbonate,a 
meq/L
<15 meq/L
Normal to 
slightly ↓
Arterial pH
6.8–7.3
>7.3
Arterial Pco2,a 
mmHg
20–30
Normal
Anion gapa 
[Na − (Cl + HCO3)]
↑
Normal to 
slightly ↑
aLarge changes occur during treatment of DKA.
bAlthough plasma levels may be normal or high at presentation, 
total-body stores are usually depleted.
glucokinase (Fig. 19-4; Table 19-1), are transmitted as 
autosomal dominant disorders. MODY 1, MODY 3, 
and MODY 5 are caused by mutations in the hepato-
cyte nuclear transcription factor (HNF) 4α, HNF-1α, 
and HNF-1β, respectively. As their names imply, these 
transcription factors are expressed in the liver but also 
in other tissues, including the pancreatic islets and 
kidney. These factors most likely affect islet develop-
ment or the expression of genes important in glucose-
stimulated insulin secretion or the maintenance of beta 
cell mass. For example, individuals with an HNF-1α 
mutation (MODY 3) have a progressive decline in gly-
cemic control but may respond to sulfonylureas. In fact, 
some of these patients were initially thought to have 
type 1 DM but were later shown to respond to a sulfo-
nylurea, and insulin was discontinued. Individuals with 
an HNF-1β mutation have progressive impairment of 
insulin secretion, hepatic insulin resistance, and require 
insulin treatment (minimal response to sulfonylureas). 
These individuals often have other abnormalities such 
as renal cysts, mild pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, 
and abnormal liver function tests. Individuals with 
MODY 2, the result of mutations in the glucokinase 
gene, have mild to moderate, stable hyperglycemia that 
does not respond to oral hypoglycemic agents. Gluco-
kinase catalyzes the formation of glucose-6-phosphate 
from glucose, a reaction that is important for glucose 
sensing by the beta cells and for glucose utilization by 
the liver. As a result of glucokinase mutations, higher 
glucose levels are required to elicit insulin secretory 
responses, thus altering the set point for insulin secre-
tion. MODY 4 is a rare variant caused by mutations 
in the insulin promoter factor (IPF) 1, which is a tran-
scription factor that regulates pancreatic development 
and insulin gene transcription. Homozygous inactivat-
ing mutations cause pancreatic agenesis, whereas het-
erozygous mutations may result in DM. Studies of 
populations with type 2 DM suggest that mutations in 
MODY-associated genes are an uncommon (<5%) cause 
of type 2 DM.
Transient or permanent neonatal diabetes (onset 
<6 months of age) occurs. Permanent neonatal diabe-
tes may be caused by several genetic mutations and usu-
ally requires treatment with insulin. Mutations in the 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel subunits (Kir6.2 and 
ABCC8) and the insulin gene (interfere with proinsulin 
folding and processing) (Fig. 19-4) are the major causes 
of permanent neonatal diabetes. Although these acti-
vating mutations in the ATP-sensitive potassium chan-
nel subunits impair glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, 
these individuals may respond to sulfonylureas and be 
treated with these agents. These mutations are associated 
with a spectrum of neurologic dysfunction. Homozy-
gous glucokinase mutations cause a severe form of neo-
natal diabetes.
Acute Complications of DM
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperglycemic hyper-
osmolar state (HHS) are acute complications of diabetes. 
DKA was formerly considered a hallmark of type 1 DM, 
but also occurs in individuals who lack immunologic 
features of type 1 DM and who can sometimes subse-
quently be treated with oral glucose-lowering agents 
(these obese individuals with type 2 DM are often of 
Hispanic or African-American descent). The initial man-
agement of DKA is similar. HHS is primarily seen in 
individuals with type 2 DM. Both disorders are associ-
ated with absolute or relative insulin deficiency, vol-
ume depletion, and acid-base abnormalities. DKA and 
HHS exist along a continuum of hyperglycemia, with 
or without ketosis. The metabolic similarities and differ-
ences in DKA and HHS are highlighted in Table 19-4. 
Both disorders are associated with potentially serious 
complications if not promptly diagnosed and treated.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis
Clinical features
The symptoms and physical signs of DKA are listed 
in Table 19-5 and usually develop over 24 h. DKA 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
273
may be the initial symptom complex that leads to a diag-
nosis of type 1 DM, but more frequently it occurs in 
individuals with established diabetes. Nausea and vomit-
ing are often prominent, and their presence in an indi-
vidual with diabetes warrants laboratory evaluation for 
DKA. Abdominal pain may be severe and can resemble 
acute pancreatitis or ruptured viscus. Hyperglycemia 
leads to glucosuria, volume depletion, and tachycardia. 
Hypotension can occur because of volume depletion in 
combination with peripheral vasodilatation. Kussmaul 
respirations and a fruity odor on the patient’s breath 
(secondary to metabolic acidosis and increased acetone) 
are classic signs of the disorder. Lethargy and cen-
tral nervous system depression may evolve into coma 
with severe DKA but should also prompt evaluation 
for other reasons for altered mental status (infection, 
hypoxemia, etc.). Cerebral edema, an extremely serious 
complication of DKA, is seen most frequently in chil-
dren. Signs of infection, which may precipitate DKA, 
should be sought on physical examination, even in the 
absence of fever. Tissue ischemia (heart, brain) can also 
be a precipitating factor. Omission of insulin because of 
an eating disorder may sometimes precipitate DKA.
Pathophysiology
DKA results from relative or absolute insulin deficiency 
combined with counterregulatory hormone excess (glu-
cagon, catecholamines, cortisol, and growth hormone). 
Both insulin deficiency and glucagon excess, in particu-
lar, are necessary for DKA to develop. The decreased 
ratio of insulin to glucagon promotes gluconeogenesis, 
glycogenolysis, and ketone body formation in the liver, 
as well as increases in substrate delivery from fat and 
muscle (free fatty acids, amino acids) to the liver. Markers 
of inflammation (cytokines, C-reactive protein) are ele-
vated in both DKA and HHS.
Table 19-5
Manifestations of Diabetic Ketoacidosis
Symptoms
  Nausea/vomiting
  Thirst/polyuria
  Abdominal pain
  Shortness of breath
Precipitating Events
Inadequate insulin  
administration
Infection (pneumonia/UTI/
gastroenteritis/sepsis)
Infarction (cerebral,  
coronary, mesenteric, 
peripheral)
Drugs (cocaine)
Pregnancy
Physical Findings
Tachycardia
Dehydration/hypotension
Tachypnea/Kussmaul  
respirations/respiratory 
distress
Abdominal tenderness  
(may resemble acute  
pancreatitis or surgical 
abdomen)
Lethargy/obtundation/ 
cerebral edema/possibly 
coma
Abbreviation: UTI, urinary tract infection.
The combination of insulin deficiency and hypergly-
cemia reduces the hepatic level of fructose-2,6-bispho-
sphate, which alters the activity of phosphofructokinase 
and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Glucagon excess decreases 
the activity of pyruvate kinase, whereas insulin defi-
ciency increases the activity of phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase. These changes shift the handling of pyru-
vate toward glucose synthesis and away from glycolysis. 
The increased levels of glucagon and catecholamines in 
the face of low insulin levels promote glycogenolysis. 
Insulin deficiency also reduces levels of the GLUT4 glu-
cose transporter, which impairs glucose uptake into 
skeletal muscle and fat and reduces intracellular glucose 
metabolism (Fig. 19-5).
Ketosis results from a marked increase in free fatty 
acid release from adipocytes, with a resulting shift toward 
ketone body synthesis in the liver. Reduced insulin lev-
els, in combination with elevations in catecholamines 
and growth hormone, increase lipolysis and the release 
of free fatty acids. Normally, these free fatty acids are con-
verted to triglycerides or VLDL in the liver. However, 
in DKA, hyperglucagonemia alters hepatic metabolism 
to favor ketone body formation through activation of the 
enzyme carnitine palmitoyltransferase I. This enzyme is 
crucial for regulating fatty acid transport into the mito-
chondria, where beta oxidation and conversion to ketone 
bodies occur. At physiologic pH, ketone bodies exist as 
ketoacids, which are neutralized by bicarbonate. As bicar-
bonate stores are depleted, metabolic acidosis ensues. 
Increased lactic acid production also contributes to the 
acidosis. The increased free fatty acids increase triglyc-
eride and VLDL production. VLDL clearance is also 
reduced because the activity of insulin-sensitive lipopro-
tein lipase in muscle and fat is decreased. Hypertriglyc-
eridemia may be severe enough to cause pancreatitis.
DKA is often precipitated by increased insulin require-
ments, as occurs during a concurrent illness (Table 19-5). 
Failure to augment insulin therapy often compounds the 
problem. Complete omission or inadequate administra-
tion of insulin by the patient or health care team (in a 
hospitalized patient with type 1 DM) may precipitate 
DKA. Patients using insulin infusion devices with short-
acting insulin may develop DKA, since even a brief 
interruption in insulin delivery (e.g., mechanical mal-
function) quickly leads to insulin deficiency.
Laboratory abnormalities and diagnosis
The timely diagnosis of DKA is crucial and allows for 
prompt initiation of therapy. DKA is characterized by 
hyperglycemia, ketosis, and metabolic acidosis (increased 
anion gap) along with a number of secondary metabolic 
derangements (Table 19-4). Occasionally, the serum 
glucose is only minimally elevated. Serum bicarbon-
ate is frequently <10 mmol/L, and arterial pH ranges 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
274
Table 19-6
Management of Diabetic Ketoacidosis
	 1.	 Confirm diagnosis (↑ plasma glucose, positive serum 
ketones, metabolic acidosis).
	 2.	 Admit to hospital; intensive-care setting may be 
necessary for frequent monitoring or if pH <7.00 or 
unconscious.
	 3.	 Assess:
	
	   Serum electrolytes (K+, Na+, Mg2+, Cl−, bicarbonate, 
phosphate)
	
	   Acid-base status—pH, HCO3
−, Pco2, β-hydroxybutyrate
	
	   Renal function (creatinine, urine output)
	 4.	 Replace fluids: 2–3 L of 0.9% saline over first 1–3 h 
(15–20 mL/kg per hour); subsequently, 0.45% saline 
at 250–500 mL/h; change to 5% glucose and 0.45% 
saline at 150–250 mL/h when plasma glucose 
reaches 200 mg/dL (11.2 mmol/L).
	 5.	 Administer short-acting insulin: IV (0.1 units/kg), 
then 0.1 units/kg per hour by continuous IV infusion; 
increase two- to threefold if no response by 2–4 h. If 
the initial serum potassium is <3.3 mmol/L (3.3 meq/L), 
do not administer insulin until the potassium is cor-
rected. If the initial serum potassium is >5.2 mmol/L 
(5.2 meq/L), do not supplement K+ until the potassium 
is corrected.
	 6.	 Assess patient: What precipitated the episode (non-
compliance, infection, trauma, infarction, cocaine)? 
Initiate appropriate workup for precipitating event 
(cultures, CXR, ECG).
	 7.	 Measure capillary glucose every 1–2 h; measure elec-
trolytes (especially K+, bicarbonate, phosphate) and 
anion gap every 4 h for first 24 h.
	 8.	 Monitor blood pressure, pulse, respirations, mental 
status, fluid intake and output every 1–4 h.
	 9.	 Replace K+: 10 meq/h when plasma K+ <5.0–5.2 
meq/L (or 20–30 meq/L of infusion fluid), ECG normal, 
urine flow and normal creatinine documented; admin-
ister 40–80 meq/h when plasma K+ <3.5 meq/L or if 
bicarbonate is given. See text about bicarbonate or 
phosphate supplementation.
10.	 Continue above until patient is stable, glucose goal 
is 8.3–13.9 mmol/L (150–250 mg/dL), and acidosis is 
resolved. Insulin infusion may be decreased to  
0.05–0.1 units/kg per hour.
11.	 Administer long-acting insulin as soon as patient is 
eating. Allow for overlap in insulin infusion and SC 
insulin injection.
Abbreviations: CXR, chest x-ray; ECG, electrocardiogram.
Source: Adapted from M Sperling, in Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus 
and Related Disorders, American Diabetes Association, Alexandria, 
VA, 1998; and AE Kitabchi et al: Diabetes Care 32:1335, 2009.
between 6.8 and 7.3, depending on the severity of the 
acidosis. Despite a total-body potassium deficit, the 
serum potassium at presentation may be mildly elevated, 
secondary to the acidosis. Total-body stores of sodium, 
chloride, phosphorus, and magnesium are reduced in 
DKA but are not accurately reflected by their levels 
in the serum because of dehydration and hyperglycemia. 
Elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creati-
nine levels reflect intravascular volume depletion. Inter-
ference from acetoacetate may falsely elevate the serum 
creatinine measurement. Leukocytosis, hypertriglyceri-
demia, and hyperlipoproteinemia are commonly found 
as well. Hyperamylasemia may suggest a diagnosis of 
pancreatitis, especially when accompanied by abdomi-
nal pain. However, in DKA the amylase is usually of 
salivary origin and thus is not diagnostic of pancreati-
tis. Serum lipase should be obtained if pancreatitis is 
suspected.
The measured serum sodium is reduced as a consequence 
of the hyperglycemia [1.6-mmol/L (1.6 meq) reduction 
in serum sodium for each 5.6-mmol/L (100 mg/dL) 
rise in the serum glucose]. A normal serum sodium in the 
setting of DKA indicates a more profound water deficit. 
In “conventional” units, the calculated serum osmolality 
[2 × (serum sodium + serum potassium) + plasma glucose 
(mg/dL)/18 + BUN/2.8] is mildly to moderately ele-
vated, though to a lesser degree than that found in HHS 
(see section “Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar State”).
In DKA, the ketone body, β-hydroxybutyrate, is 
synthesized at a threefold greater rate than acetoacetate; 
however, acetoacetate is preferentially detected by a 
commonly used ketosis detection reagent (nitroprus-
side). Serum ketones are present at significant levels 
(usually positive at serum dilution of ≥1:8). The nitro-
prusside tablet, or stick, is often used to detect urine 
ketones; certain medications such as captopril or peni-
cillamine may cause false-positive reactions. Serum or 
plasma assays for β-hydroxybutyrate are preferred since 
they more accurately reflect the true ketone body level.
The metabolic derangements of DKA exist along a 
spectrum, beginning with mild acidosis with moderate 
hyperglycemia evolving into more severe findings. The 
degree of acidosis and hyperglycemia do not necessar-
ily correlate closely since a variety of factors determine 
the level of hyperglycemia (oral intake, urinary glucose 
loss). Ketonemia is a consistent finding in DKA and 
distinguishes it from simple hyperglycemia. The differ-
ential diagnosis of DKA includes starvation ketosis, alco-
holic ketoacidosis (bicarbonate usually >15 meq/L), and 
other forms of increased anion-gap acidosis.
Treatment	
Diabetic Ketoacidosis
The management of DKA is outlined in Table 19-6. 
After initiating IV fluid replacement and insulin therapy, 
the agent or event that precipitated the episode of 
DKA should be sought and aggressively treated. If the 
patient is vomiting or has altered mental status, a naso-
gastric tube should be inserted to prevent aspiration 
of gastric contents. Central to successful treatment of 
DKA is careful monitoring and frequent reassessment
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
275
to ensure that the patient and the metabolic derange-
ments are improving. A comprehensive flow sheet 
should record chronologic changes in vital signs, fluid 
intake and output, and laboratory values as a function 
of insulin administered.
After the initial bolus of normal saline, replacement 
of the sodium and free water deficit is carried out over 
the next 24 h (fluid deficit is often 3–5 L). When hemody-
namic stability and adequate urine output are achieved, 
IV fluids should be switched to 0.45% saline depending 
on the calculated volume deficit. The change to 0.45% 
saline helps to reduce the trend toward hyperchloremia 
later in the course of DKA. Alternatively, initial use of lac-
tated Ringer’s IV solution may reduce the hyperchlore-
mia that commonly occurs with normal saline.
A bolus of IV (0.1 units/kg) short-acting insulin should 
be administered immediately (Table 19-6), and sub-
sequent treatment should provide continuous and 
adequate levels of circulating insulin. IV administration 
is preferred (0.1 units/kg of regular insulin per hour), 
because it ensures rapid distribution and allows adjust-
ment of the infusion rate as the patient responds to 
therapy. In mild episodes of DKA, short-acting insulin 
analogues can be used SC. IV insulin should be contin-
ued until the acidosis resolves and the patient is meta-
bolically stable. As the acidosis and insulin resistance 
associated with DKA resolve, the insulin infusion rate 
can be decreased (to 0.05–0.1 units/kg per hour). Long-
acting insulin, in combination with SC short-acting 
insulin, should be administered as soon as the patient 
resumes eating, as this facilitates transition to an out-
patient insulin regimen and reduces length of hospital 
stay. It is crucial to continue the insulin infusion until 
adequate insulin levels are achieved by administering 
long-acting insulin by the SC route. Even relatively brief 
periods of inadequate insulin administration in this tran-
sition phase may result in DKA relapse.
Hyperglycemia usually improves at a rate of 4.2–5.6 
mmol/L (75–100 mg/dL) per hour as a result of insulin-
mediated glucose disposal, reduced hepatic glucose 
release, and rehydration. The latter reduces catechol-
amines, increases urinary glucose loss, and expands the 
intravascular volume. The decline in the plasma glucose 
within the first 1–2 h may be more rapid and is mostly 
related to volume expansion. When the plasma glu-
cose reaches 11.2 mmol/L (200 mg/dL), glucose should 
be added to the 0.45% saline infusion to maintain the 
plasma glucose in the 8.3–13.9 mmol/L (150–250 mg/dL) 
range, and the insulin infusion should be continued. 
Ketoacidosis begins to resolve as insulin reduces lipoly-
sis, increases peripheral ketone body use, suppresses 
hepatic ketone body formation, and promotes bicar-
bonate regeneration. However, the acidosis and ketosis 
resolve more slowly than hyperglycemia. As keto-
acidosis improves, β-hydroxybutyrate is converted to
acetoacetate. Ketone body levels may appear to increase 
if measured by laboratory assays that use the nitro-
prusside reaction, which only detects acetoacetate and 
acetone. The improvement in acidosis and anion gap, 
a result of bicarbonate regeneration and decline in 
ketone bodies, is reflected by a rise in the serum bicar-
bonate level and the arterial pH. Depending on the rise 
of serum chloride, the anion gap (but not bicarbonate) 
will normalize. A hyperchloremic acidosis [serum bicar-
bonate of 15–18 mmol/L (15–18 meq/L)] often follows 
successful treatment and gradually resolves as the 
kidneys regenerate bicarbonate and excrete chloride.
Potassium stores are depleted in DKA [estimated defi-
cit 3–5 mmol/kg (3–5 meq/kg)]. During treatment with 
insulin and fluids, various factors contribute to the devel-
opment of hypokalemia. These include insulin-mediated 
potassium transport into cells, resolution of the acidosis 
(which also promotes potassium entry into cells), and 
urinary loss of potassium salts of organic acids. Thus, 
potassium repletion should commence as soon as ade-
quate urine output and a normal serum potassium are 
documented. If the initial serum potassium level is ele-
vated, then potassium repletion should be delayed until 
the potassium falls into the normal range. Inclusion of 
20–40 meq of potassium in each liter of IV fluid is reason-
able, but additional potassium supplements may also be 
required. To reduce the amount of chloride administered, 
potassium phosphate or acetate can be substituted for 
the chloride salt. The goal is to maintain the serum potas-
sium at >3.5 mmol/L (3.5 meq/L).
Despite a bicarbonate deficit, bicarbonate replace-
ment is not usually necessary. In fact, theoretical argu-
ments suggest that bicarbonate administration and 
rapid reversal of acidosis may impair cardiac function, 
reduce tissue oxygenation, and promote hypokalemia. 
The results of most clinical trials do not support the 
routine use of bicarbonate replacement, and one study 
in children found that bicarbonate use was associated 
with an increased risk of cerebral edema. However, in 
the presence of severe acidosis (arterial pH <6.9), the 
ADA advises bicarbonate [50 mmol/L (meq/L) of sodium 
bicarbonate in 200 mL of sterile water with 10 meq/L 
KCl per hour for 2 h until the pH is >7.0]. Hypophos-
phatemia may result from increased glucose usage, but 
randomized clinical trials have not demonstrated that 
phosphate replacement is beneficial in DKA. If the serum 
phosphate is <0.32 mmol/L (1 mg/dL), then phosphate 
supplement should be considered and the serum cal-
cium monitored. Hypomagnesemia may develop during 
DKA therapy and may also require supplementation.
With appropriate therapy, the mortality rate of DKA 
is low (<1%) and is related more to the underlying or 
precipitating event, such as infection or myocardial 
infarction. Venous thrombosis, upper gastrointesti-
nal bleeding, and acute respiratory distress syndrome
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
276
occasionally complicate DKA. The major nonmetabolic 
complication of DKA therapy is cerebral edema, which 
most often develops in children as DKA is resolving. The 
etiology of and optimal therapy for cerebral edema are 
not well established, but overreplacement of free water 
should be avoided.
Following treatment, the physician and patient 
should review the sequence of events that led to DKA 
to prevent future recurrences. Foremost is patient 
education about the symptoms of DKA, its precipitat-
ing factors, and the management of diabetes during a 
concurrent illness. During illness or when oral intake is 
compromised, patients should (1) frequently measure 
the capillary blood glucose; (2) measure urinary ketones 
when the serum glucose is >16.5 mmol/L (300 mg/dL); 
(3) drink fluids to maintain hydration; (4) continue or 
increase insulin; and (5) seek medical attention if dehy-
dration, persistent vomiting, or uncontrolled hypergly-
cemia develop. Using these strategies, early DKA can be 
prevented or detected and treated appropriately on an 
outpatient basis.
Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar State
Clinical features
The prototypical patient with HHS is an elderly indi-
vidual with type 2 DM, with a several-week history of 
polyuria, weight loss, and diminished oral intake that 
culminates in mental confusion, lethargy, or coma. The 
physical examination reflects profound dehydration and 
hyperosmolality and reveals hypotension, tachycardia, 
and altered mental status. Notably absent are symptoms 
of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain and the Kussmaul 
respirations characteristic of DKA. HHS is often precip-
itated by a serious, concurrent illness such as myocar-
dial infarction or stroke. Sepsis, pneumonia, and other 
serious infections are frequent precipitants and should be 
sought. In addition, a debilitating condition (prior stroke 
or dementia) or social situation that compromises water 
intake usually contributes to the development of the 
disorder.
Pathophysiology
Relative insulin deficiency and inadequate fluid intake 
are the underlying causes of HHS. Insulin deficiency 
increases hepatic glucose production (through glycoge-
nolysis and gluconeogenesis) and impairs glucose utiliza-
tion in skeletal muscle (see above discussion of DKA). 
Hyperglycemia induces an osmotic diuresis that leads 
to intravascular volume depletion, which is exacerbated 
by inadequate fluid replacement. The absence of keto-
sis in HHS is not understood. Presumably, the insulin 
deficiency is only relative and less severe than in DKA. 
Lower levels of counterregulatory hormones and free 
fatty acids have been found in HHS than in DKA in 
some studies. It is also possible that the liver is less capa-
ble of ketone body synthesis or that the insulin/gluca-
gon ratio does not favor ketogenesis.
Laboratory abnormalities and diagnosis
The laboratory features in HHS are summarized in Table 
19-4. Most notable are the marked hyperglycemia [plasma 
glucose may be >55.5 mmol/L (1000 mg/dL)], hyper-
osmolality (>350 mosmol/L), and prerenal azotemia. 
The measured serum sodium may be normal or slightly 
low despite the marked hyperglycemia. The corrected 
serum sodium is usually increased [add 1.6 meq to mea-
sured sodium for each 5.6-mmol/L (100 mg/dL) rise 
in the serum glucose]. In contrast to DKA, acidosis and 
ketonemia are absent or mild. A small anion-gap meta-
bolic acidosis may be present secondary to increased 
lactic acid. Moderate ketonuria, if present, is secondary 
to starvation.
Treatment	
Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar State
Volume depletion and hyperglycemia are prominent 
features of both HHS and DKA. Consequently, therapy of 
these disorders shares several elements (Table 19-6). In 
both disorders, careful monitoring of the patient’s fluid 
status, laboratory values, and insulin infusion rate is 
crucial. Underlying or precipitating problems should be 
aggressively sought and treated. In HHS, fluid losses and 
dehydration are usually more pronounced than in DKA 
due to the longer duration of the illness. The patient 
with HHS is usually older, more likely to have mental sta-
tus changes, and more likely to have a life-threatening 
precipitating event with accompanying comorbidities. 
Even with proper treatment, HHS has a substantially 
higher mortality rate than DKA (up to 15% in some clini-
cal series).
Fluid replacement should initially stabilize the hemo-
dynamic status of the patient (1–3 L of 0.9% normal 
saline over the first 2–3 h). Because the fluid deficit 
in HHS is accumulated over a period of days to weeks, 
the rapidity of reversal of the hyperosmolar state must 
balance the need for free water repletion with the risk 
that too rapid a reversal may worsen neurologic func-
tion. If the serum sodium is >150 mmol/L (150 meq/L), 
0.45% saline should be used. After hemodynamic stabil-
ity is achieved, the IV fluid administration is directed at 
reversing the free water deficit using hypotonic fluids 
(0.45% saline initially, then 5% dextrose in water, D5W). 
The calculated free water deficit (which averages 9–10 L) 
should be reversed over the next 1–2 days (infusion 
rates of 200–300 mL/h of hypotonic solution). Potassium 
repletion is usually necessary and should be dictated
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
277
by repeated measurements of the serum potassium. In 
patients taking diuretics, the potassium deficit can be 
quite large and may be accompanied by magnesium 
deficiency. Hypophosphatemia may occur during ther-
apy and can be improved by using KPO4 and beginning 
nutrition.
As in DKA, rehydration and volume expansion lower 
the plasma glucose initially, but insulin is also required. 
A reasonable regimen for HHS begins with an IV insulin 
bolus of 0.1 units/kg followed by IV insulin at a constant 
infusion rate of 0.1 units/kg per hour. If the serum glu-
cose does not fall, increase the insulin infusion rate by 
twofold. As in DKA, glucose should be added to IV fluid 
when the plasma glucose falls to 13.9–16.7 mmol/L 
(250–300 mg/dL), and the insulin infusion rate should 
be decreased to 0.05–0.1 units/kg per hour. The insu-
lin infusion should be continued until the patient has 
resumed eating and can be transferred to an SC insu-
lin regimen. The patient should be discharged from 
the hospital on insulin, though some patients can later 
switch to oral glucose-lowering agents.
Chronic Complications of DM
The chronic complications of DM affect many organ 
systems and are responsible for the majority of morbidity 
and mortality associated with the disease. Chronic com-
plications can be divided into vascular and nonvascular 
complications (Table 19-7). The vascular complica-
tions of DM are further subdivided into microvascular 
Table 19-7
Chronic Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
Microvascular
  Eye disease
    Retinopathy (nonproliferative/proliferative)
    Macular edema
  Neuropathy
    Sensory and motor (mono- and polyneuropathy)
    Autonomic
  Nephropathy
Macrovascular
  Coronary heart disease
  Peripheral arterial disease
  Cerebrovascular disease
Other
  Gastrointestinal (gastroparesis, diarrhea)
  Genitourinary (uropathy/sexual dysfunction)
  Dermatologic
  Infectious
  Cataracts
  Glaucoma
  Periodontal disease
  Hearing loss
(retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy) and macrovascular 
complications [coronary heart disease (CHD), peripheral 
arterial disease (PAD), cerebrovascular disease]. Nonvas-
cular complications include problems such as gastropa-
resis, infections, and skin changes. Long-standing diabetes 
may be associated with hearing loss. Whether type 2 DM 
in elderly individuals is associated with impaired mental 
function is not clear.
The risk of chronic complications increases as a func-
tion of the duration and degree of hyperglycemia; they 
usually do not become apparent until the second decade 
of hyperglycemia. Since type 2 DM often has a long 
asymptomatic period of hyperglycemia, many individu-
als with type 2 DM have complications at the time of 
diagnosis.
The microvascular complications of both type 1 and 
type 2 DM result from chronic hyperglycemia. Large, 
randomized clinical trials of individuals with type 1 
or type 2 DM have conclusively demonstrated that a 
reduction in chronic hyperglycemia prevents or delays 
retinopathy, neuropathy, and nephropathy. Other incom-
pletely defined factors may modulate the development of 
complications. For example, despite long-standing DM, 
some individuals never develop nephropathy or retinopa-
thy. Many of these patients have glycemic control that is 
indistinguishable from those who develop microvascular 
complications, suggesting that there is a genetic suscepti-
bility for developing particular complications.
Evidence implicating a causative role for chronic 
hyperglycemia in the development of macrovascular 
complications is less conclusive. However, coronary 
heart disease events and mortality rate are two to four 
times greater in patients with type 2 DM. These events 
correlate with fasting and postprandial plasma glucose 
levels as well as with the A1C. Other factors (dyslip-
idemia and hypertension) also play important roles in 
macrovascular complications.
Mechanisms of Complications
Although chronic hyperglycemia is an important eti-
ologic factor leading to complications of DM, the 
mechanism(s) by which it leads to such diverse cellular 
and organ dysfunction is unknown. At least four promi-
nent theories, which are not mutually exclusive, have 
been proposed to explain how hyperglycemia might 
lead to the chronic complications of DM. An emerg-
ing hypothesis is that hyperglycemia leads to epigenetic 
changes in the affected cells.
One theory is that increased intracellular glucose 
leads to the formation of advanced glycosylation end 
products (AGEs), which bind to a cell surface receptor, 
via the nonenzymatic glycosylation of intra- and extra-
cellular proteins. Nonenzymatic glycosylation results 
from the interaction of glucose with amino groups on 
proteins. AGEs have been shown to cross-link proteins 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
278
(e.g., collagen, extracellular matrix proteins), accelerate 
atherosclerosis, promote glomerular dysfunction, reduce 
nitric oxide synthesis, induce endothelial dysfunction, 
and alter extracellular matrix composition and structure. 
The serum level of AGEs correlates with the level of 
glycemia, and these products accumulate as the glomer-
ular filtration rate (GFR) declines.
A second theory is based on the observation that 
hyperglycemia increases glucose metabolism via the sor-
bitol pathway. Intracellular glucose is predominantly 
metabolized by phosphorylation and subsequent gly-
colysis, but when increased, some glucose is converted 
to sorbitol by the enzyme aldose reductase. Increased 
sorbitol concentration alters redox potential, increases 
cellular osmolality, generates reactive oxygen species, 
and likely leads to other types of cellular dysfunction. 
However, testing of this theory in humans, using aldose 
reductase inhibitors, has not demonstrated significant 
beneficial effects on clinical endpoints of retinopathy, 
neuropathy, or nephropathy.
A third hypothesis proposes that hyperglycemia 
increases the formation of diacylglycerol leading to 
activation of protein kinase C (PKC). Among other 
actions, PKC alters the transcription of genes for fibro-
nectin, type IV collagen, contractile proteins, and extra-
cellular matrix proteins in endothelial cells and neurons. 
Inhibitors of PKC are being studied in clinical trials.
A fourth theory proposes that hyperglycemia increases 
the flux through the hexosamine pathway, which gener-
ates fructose-6-phosphate, a substrate for O-linked glyco-
sylation and proteoglycan production. The hexosamine 
pathway may alter function by glycosylation of proteins 
such as endothelial nitric oxide synthase or by changes 
in gene expression of transforming growth factor β 
(TGF-β) or plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1).
Growth factors appear to play an important role in 
some DM-related complications, and their produc-
tion is increased by most of these proposed pathways. 
Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) is 
increased locally in diabetic proliferative retinopathy 
and decreases after laser photocoagulation. TGF-β is 
increased in diabetic nephropathy and stimulates base-
ment membrane production of collagen and fibronectin 
by mesangial cells. Other growth factors, such as platelet-
derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, insulin-
like growth factor I, growth hormone, basic fibroblast 
growth factor, and even insulin, have been suggested to 
play a role in DM-related complications. A possible uni-
fying mechanism is that hyperglycemia leads to increased 
production of reactive oxygen species or superoxide in 
the mitochondria; these compounds may activate all four 
of the pathways described above. Although hyperglycemia 
serves as the initial trigger for complications of diabetes, 
it is still unknown whether the same pathophysiologic 
processes are operative in all complications or whether 
some pathways predominate in certain organs.
Glycemic Control and 
Complications
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) 
provided definitive proof that reduction in chronic 
hyperglycemia can prevent many of the early complica-
tions of type 1 DM. This large multicenter clinical trial 
randomized more than 1400 individuals with type 1 DM 
to either intensive or conventional diabetes manage-
ment and prospectively evaluated the development of 
retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. Individuals 
in the intensive diabetes management group received 
multiple administrations of insulin each day along with 
extensive educational, psychological, and medical sup-
port. Individuals in the conventional diabetes manage-
ment group received twice-daily insulin injections and 
quarterly nutritional, educational, and clinical evalua-
tion. The goal in the former group was normoglycemia; 
the goal in the latter group was prevention of symptoms 
of diabetes. Individuals in the intensive diabetes man-
agement group achieved a substantially lower hemo-
globin A1C (7.3%) than individuals in the conventional 
diabetes management group (9.1%).
The DCCT demonstrated that improvement of gly-
cemic control reduced nonproliferative and prolifera-
tive retinopathy (47% reduction), microalbuminuria (39% 
reduction), clinical nephropathy (54% reduction), and 
neuropathy (60% reduction). Improved glycemic control 
also slowed the progression of early diabetic complica-
tions. There was a nonsignificant trend in reduction of 
macrovascular events during the trial (most individuals 
were young and had a low risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease). The results of the DCCT predicted that individu-
als in the intensive diabetes management group would 
gain 7.7 additional years of vision, 5.8 additional years 
free from ESRD, and 5.6 years free from lower extrem-
ity amputations. If all complications of DM were com-
bined, individuals in the intensive diabetes management 
group would experience 15.3 more years of life without 
significant microvascular or neurologic complications 
of DM, compared to individuals who received standard 
therapy. This translates into an additional 5.1 years of 
life expectancy for individuals in the intensive diabetes 
management group. The long-term prognosis for type 1 
diabetes continues to improve as shown by 30-year 
incidence data in the intensively treated group from 
the DCCT of retinopathy (21%), nephropathy (9%), 
and cardiovascular disease (9%). During this follow-up, 
fewer than 1% of the cohort had become blind, lost a 
limb to amputation, or required dialysis. The benefit of 
the improved glycemic control during the DCCT per-
sisted even after the study concluded and glycemic con-
trol worsened. For example, individuals in the intensive 
diabetes management group for a mean of 6.5 years had 
a 42–57% reduction in cardiovascular events [nonfa-
tal myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, or death from a 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
279
cardiovascular event] at a mean follow-up of 17 years, 
even though their subsequent glycemic control was the 
same as those in the conventional diabetes management 
group from years 6.5–17 (discussed below).
The benefits of an improvement in glycemic control 
occurred over the entire range of A1C values (Fig. 19-8), 
suggesting that at any A1C level, an improvement in 
glycemic control is beneficial. The goal of therapy 
is to achieve an A1C level as close to normal as pos-
sible, without subjecting the patient to excessive risk of 
hypoglycemia.
The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study 
(UKPDS) studied the course of >5000 individuals with 
type 2 DM for >10 years. This study utilized multiple 
treatment regimens and monitored the effect of inten-
sive glycemic control and risk factor treatment on the 
development of diabetic complications. Newly diag-
nosed individuals with type 2 DM were randomized to 
(1) intensive management using various combinations of 
insulin, a sulfonylurea, or metformin or (2) conventional 
therapy using dietary modification and pharmacotherapy 
with the goal of symptom prevention. In addition, indi-
viduals were randomly assigned to different antihyper-
tensive regimens. Individuals in the intensive treatment 
arm achieved an A1C of 7%, compared to a 7.9% A1C 
in the standard treatment group. The UKPDS demon-
strated that each percentage point reduction in A1C was 
associated with a 35% reduction in microvascular com-
plications. As in the DCCT, there was a continuous 
relationship between glycemic control and development 
of complications. Improved glycemic control did not 
conclusively reduce (nor worsen) cardiovascular mortal-
ity rate during the period of the trial, but was associated 
with improvement with lipoprotein risk profiles, such as 
reduced triglycerides and increased HDL.
One of the major findings of the UKPDS was that 
strict blood pressure control significantly reduced both 
macro- and microvascular complications. In fact, the 
beneficial effects of blood pressure control were greater 
than the beneficial effects of glycemic control. Lower-
ing blood pressure to moderate goals (144/82 mmHg) 
reduced the risk of DM-related death, stroke, micro-
vascular end points, retinopathy, and heart failure (risk 
reductions between 32 and 56%).
Similar reductions in the risks of retinopathy and 
nephropathy were also seen in a small trial of lean Japanese 
individuals with type 2 DM randomized to either inten-
sive glycemic control or standard therapy with insulin 
(Kumamoto study). These results demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of improved glycemic control in individuals of 
different ethnicity and, presumably, a different etiology 
of DM (i.e., phenotypically different from those in the 
DCCT and UKPDS).
The findings of the DCCT, UKPDS, and Kumamoto 
study strongly support the idea that chronic hyperglyce-
mia plays a causative role in the pathogenesis of diabetic 
microvascular complications. These landmark studies 
prove the value of metabolic control and emphasize the 
importance of (1) intensive glycemic control in all forms 
of DM and (2) early diagnosis and strict blood pressure 
control in type 2 DM. Optimal targets for glycemic 
control and blood pressure are not entirely clear (see 
later in the chapter).
Ophthalmologic Complications of 
Diabetes Mellitus
DM is the leading cause of blindness between the ages 
of 20 and 74 in the United States. The gravity of this 
problem is highlighted by the finding that individu-
als with DM are 25 times more likely to become legally 
blind than individuals without DM. Blindness is pri-
marily the result of progressive diabetic retinopathy 
and clinically significant macular edema. Diabetic reti-
nopathy is classified into two stages: nonproliferative and 
proliferative. Nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy usu-
ally appears late in the first decade or early in the second 
decade of the disease and is marked by retinal vascular 
microaneurysms, blot hemorrhages, and cotton-wool spots 
(Fig. 19-9). Mild nonproliferative retinopathy progresses 
to more extensive disease, characterized by changes in 
venous vessel caliber, intraretinal microvascular abnor-
malities, and more numerous microaneurysms and hem-
orrhages. The pathophysiologic mechanisms invoked in 
nonproliferative retinopathy include loss of retinal peri-
cytes, increased retinal vascular permeability, alterations 
in retinal blood flow, and abnormal retinal microvascu-
lature, all of which lead to retinal ischemia.
The appearance of neovascularization in response to 
retinal hypoxemia is the hallmark of proliferative dia-
betic retinopathy (Fig. 19-9). These newly formed 
Mean A1C  11%
10%
9%
8%
7%
Retinopathy progression, rate
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
1
0
2
3
4
5
Length of follow-up, years
6
7
8
9
Figure 19-8
Relationship of glycemic control and diabetes duration 
to diabetic retinopathy. The progression of retinopathy in 
individuals in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial is 
graphed as a function of the length of follow-up with different 
curves for different A1C values. (Adapted from The Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial Research Group: Diabetes 
44:968, 1995.)
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
280
vessels appear near the optic nerve and/or macula and 
rupture easily, leading to vitreous hemorrhage, fibrosis, 
and ultimately retinal detachment. Not all individuals 
with nonproliferative retinopathy develop proliferative 
retinopathy, but the more severe the nonproliferative 
disease, the greater the chance of evolution to prolifera-
tive retinopathy within 5 years. This creates an impor-
tant opportunity for early detection and treatment of 
diabetic retinopathy. Clinically significant macular edema 
can occur when only nonproliferative retinopathy is 
present. Fluorescein angiography is useful to detect mac-
ular edema, which is associated with a 25% chance of 
moderate visual loss over the next 3 years.
Duration of DM and degree of glycemic control are 
the best predictors of the development of retinopathy; 
hypertension is also a risk factor. Nonproliferative reti-
nopathy is found in many individuals who have had 
DM for >20 years (25% incidence with 5 years, and 
80% incidence with 15 years of type 1 DM). Although 
there is genetic susceptibility for retinopathy, it confers 
less influence than either the duration of DM or the 
degree of glycemic control.
Treatment	
Diabetic Retinopathy
The most effective therapy for diabetic retinopathy is 
prevention. Intensive glycemic and blood pressure con-
trol will delay the development or slow the progres-
sion of retinopathy in individuals with either type 1 or 
type 2 DM. Paradoxically, during the first 6–12 months 
of improved glycemic control, established diabetic 
retinopathy may transiently worsen. Fortunately, this pro-
gression is temporary, and in the long term, improved gly-
cemic control is associated with less diabetic retinopathy. 
Figure 19-9
Diabetic retinopathy results in scattered hemorrhages, 
yellow exudates, and neovascularization. This patient has 
neovascular vessels proliferating from the optic disc, requir-
ing urgent panretinal laser photocoagulation.
Individuals with known retinopathy are candidates for 
prophylactic photocoagulation when initiating inten-
sive therapy. Once advanced retinopathy is present, 
improved glycemic control imparts less benefit, though 
adequate ophthalmologic care can prevent most 
blindness.
Regular, comprehensive eye examinations are essen-
tial for all individuals with DM. Most diabetic eye disease 
can be successfully treated if detected early. Routine, 
nondilated eye examinations by the primary care pro-
vider or diabetes specialist are inadequate to detect 
diabetic eye disease, which requires an ophthalmologist 
for optimal care of these disorders. Laser photocoagu-
lation is very successful in preserving vision. Prolifera-
tive retinopathy is usually treated with panretinal laser 
photocoagulation, whereas macular edema is treated 
with focal laser photocoagulation. Although exercise 
has not been conclusively shown to worsen prolifera-
tive diabetic retinopathy, most ophthalmologists advise 
individuals with advanced diabetic eye disease to limit 
physical activities associated with repeated Valsalva 
maneuvers. Aspirin therapy (650 mg/d) does not appear 
to influence the natural history of diabetic retinopathy.
Renal Complications of Diabetes 
Mellitus
Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of ESRD in the 
United States and a leading cause of DM-related morbid-
ity and mortality. Both micro- and macroalbuminuria in 
individuals with DM are associated with increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Individuals with diabetic nephropa-
thy commonly have diabetic retinopathy.
Like other microvascular complications, the patho-
genesis of diabetic nephropathy is related to chronic 
hyperglycemia. The mechanisms by which chronic hyper-
glycemia leads to ESRD, though incompletely defined, 
involve the effects of soluble factors (growth factors, 
angiotensin II, endothelin, AGEs), hemodynamic altera-
tions in the renal microcirculation (glomerular hyperfil-
tration or hyperperfusion, increased glomerular capillary 
pressure), and structural changes in the glomerulus (increased 
extracellular matrix, basement membrane thickening, 
mesangial expansion, fibrosis). Some of these effects may 
be mediated through angiotensin II receptors. Smok-
ing accelerates the decline in renal function. Because 
only 20–40% of patients with diabetes develop dia-
betic nephropathy, additional susceptibility factors remain 
unidentified. One known risk factor is a family history of 
diabetic nephropathy.
The natural history of diabetic nephropathy is char-
acterized by a fairly predictable sequence of events that 
was initially defined for individuals with type 1 DM 
but appears to be similar in type 2 DM (Fig. 19-10). 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
281
Glomerular hyperperfusion and renal hypertrophy occur 
in the first years after the onset of DM and are associated 
with an increase of the GFR. During the first 5 years of 
DM, thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, 
glomerular hypertrophy, and mesangial volume expansion 
occur as the GFR returns to normal. After 5–10 years 
of type 1 DM, ∼40% of individuals begin to excrete 
small amounts of albumin in the urine. Microalbumin-
uria is defined as 30–299 mg/d in a 24-h collection or 
30–299 μg/mg creatinine in a spot collection (preferred 
method). Although the appearance of microalbuminuria 
in type 1 DM is an important risk factor for progression 
to macroalbuminuria (>300 mg/d or >300 μg/mg cre-
atinine), only ∼50% of individuals progress to macroalbu-
minuria over the next 10 years. In some individuals with 
type 1 diabetes and microalbuminuria of short duration, 
the microalbuminuria regresses. Microalbuminuria is a 
risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Once macroalbu-
minuria is present, there is a steady decline in GFR, and 
∼50% of individuals reach ESRD in 7–10 years. Once 
macroalbuminuria develops, blood pressure rises slightly 
and the pathologic changes are likely irreversible.
The nephropathy that develops in type 2 DM dif-
fers from that of type 1 DM in the following respects: 
(1) microalbuminuria or macroalbuminuria may be pres-
ent when type 2 DM is diagnosed, reflecting its long 
asymptomatic period; (2) hypertension more commonly 
accompanies microalbuminuria or macroalbuminuria 
in type 2 DM; and (3) microalbuminuria may be less 
predictive of diabetic nephropathy and progression to 
macroalbuminuria in type 2 DM. Finally, it should be 
noted that albuminuria in type 2 DM may be second-
ary to factors unrelated to DM, such as hypertension, 
congestive heart failure (CHF), prostate disease, or infec-
tion. Diabetic nephropathy and ESRD secondary to DM 
develop more commonly in African Americans, Native 
Americans, and Hispanic individuals than in Caucasians 
with type 2 DM.
Type IV renal tubular acidosis (hyporeninemic hypo­
aldosteronism) may occur in type 1 or 2 DM. These indi-
viduals develop a propensity to hyperkalemia, which may 
be exacerbated by medications [especially angiotensin- 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin recep-
tor blockers (ARBs)]. Patients with DM are predisposed 
to radiocontrast-induced nephrotoxicity. Risk factors 
for radiocontrast-induced nephrotoxicity are preexist-
ing nephropathy and volume depletion. Individuals with 
DM undergoing radiographic procedures with contrast 
dye should be well hydrated before and after dye expo-
sure, and the serum creatinine should be monitored for 
24–48 h following the procedure.
Treatment	
Diabetic Nephropathy
The optimal therapy for diabetic nephropathy is preven-
tion by control of glycemia. As part of comprehensive 
diabetes care, microalbuminuria should be detected at 
an early stage when effective therapies can be insti-
tuted. The recommended strategy for detecting micro-
albuminuria is outlined in Fig. 19-11. Since some
Time from onset
  of diabetes, years
120
150
150
120
60
10
1.0
0.8
0.8
1.0
2.0
5
0
3
5
15
10
20
Microalbuminuria
Gross proteinuria
25
GFR, mL/min
Serum creatinine, mg/dL
Figure 19-10
Time course of development of diabetic nephropathy. 
The relationship of time from onset of diabetes, the glomeru-
lar filtration rate (GFR), and the serum creatinine are shown. 
(Adapted from RA DeFranzo, in Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus 
and Related Disorders, 3rd ed. American Diabetes Associa-
tion, Alexandria, VA, 1998.)
Annually
Exclude conditions that
  transiently increase
  albumin excretion
Repeat microalbuminuria
  test within 3- to 6-month
  period


Begin treatment
Yes
No
Test for microalbuminuria
  (spot collection)
Two of three
  microalbuminuria tests
  positive
Figure 19-11 
Screening for microalbuminuria should be performed in 
patients with type 1 diabetes for ≥5 years, in patients with 
type 2 diabetes, and during pregnancy. Non-diabetes-related 
conditions that might increase microalbuminuria are urinary 
tract infection, hematuria, heart failure, febrile illness, severe 
hyperglycemia, severe hypertension, and vigorous exercise. 
(Adapted from RA DeFronzo, in Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus 
and Related Disorders, 3rd ed. American Diabetes Associa-
tion, Alexandria, VA, 1998.)
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
282
individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM have a decline in 
GFR in the absence of micro- or macroalbuminuria, 
annual measurement of the serum creatinine to esti-
mate GFR should also be performed. Interventions 
effective in slowing progression from microalbuminuria 
to macroalbuminuria include (1) normalization of glyce-
mia, (2) strict blood pressure control, and (3) administra-
tion of ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Dyslipidemia should also 
be treated.
Improved glycemic control reduces the rate at which 
microalbuminuria appears and progresses in type 1 and 
type 2 DM. However, once macroalbuminuria exists, it 
is unclear whether improved glycemic control will slow 
progression of renal disease. During the later phase of 
declining renal function, insulin requirements may fall 
as the kidney is a site of insulin degradation. Further-
more, many glucose-lowering medications (sulfonyl-
ureas and metformin) are contraindicated in advanced 
renal insufficiency.
Many individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM develop 
hypertension. Numerous studies in both type 1 and 
type 2 DM demonstrate the effectiveness of strict blood 
pressure control in reducing albumin excretion and 
slowing the decline in renal function. Blood pressure 
should be maintained at <130/80 mmHg in diabetic 
individuals.
Either ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be used to 
reduce the progression from microalbuminuria to mac-
roalbuminuria and the associated decline in GFR that 
accompanies macroalbuminuria in individuals with 
type 1 or type 2 DM (see “Hypertension”). Although 
direct comparisons of ACE inhibitors and ARBs are lack-
ing, most experts believe that the two classes of drugs 
are equivalent in the patient with diabetes. ARBs can 
be used as an alternative in patients who develop  
ACE inhibitor–associated cough or angioedema. After 
2–3 months of therapy in patients with microalbumin-
uria, the drug dose is increased until either the microal-
buminuria disappears or the maximum dose is reached. 
If use of either ACE inhibitors or ARBs is not possible or 
the blood pressure is not controlled, then calcium chan-
nel blockers (non-dihydropyridine class), beta blockers, 
or diuretics should be used. However, their efficacy in 
slowing the fall in the GFR is not proven. Blood pressure 
control with any agent is extremely important, but a 
drug-specific benefit in diabetic nephropathy, indepen-
dent of blood pressure control, has been shown only for 
ACE inhibitors and ARBs in patients with DM.
The ADA suggests modest restriction of protein intake 
in diabetic individuals with microalbuminuria (0.8–1.0 g/kg 
per day) or macroalbuminuria (<0.8 g/kg per day).
Nephrology consultation should be considered when 
the estimated GFR is <60 mL/min per 1.743 m2. Once mac-
roalbuminuria ensues, the likelihood of ESRD is very high. 
As compared to nondiabetic individuals, hemodialysis in
patients with DM is associated with more frequent 
complications, such as hypotension (due to autonomic 
neuropathy or loss of reflex tachycardia), more difficult  
vascular access, and accelerated progression of retinopa-
thy. Survival after the onset of ESRD is shorter in the dia-
betic population compared to nondiabetics with similar 
clinical features. Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of 
death in diabetic individuals on dialysis, and hyperlipid-
emia should be treated aggressively. Renal transplanta-
tion from a living related donor is the preferred therapy 
but requires chronic immunosuppression. Combined 
pancreas-kidney transplant offers the promise of nor-
moglycemia and freedom from dialysis.
Neuropathy and Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetic neuropathy occurs in ∼50% of individuals with 
long-standing type 1 and type 2 DM. It may manifest as 
polyneuropathy, mononeuropathy, and/or autonomic 
neuropathy. As with other complications of DM, the 
development of neuropathy correlates with the dura-
tion of diabetes and glycemic control. Additional risk 
factors are BMI (the greater the BMI, the greater the 
risk of neuropathy) and smoking. The presence of car-
diovascular disease, elevated triglycerides, and hyperten-
sion is also associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy. 
Both myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers are lost. 
Because the clinical features of diabetic neuropathy are 
similar to those of other neuropathies, the diagnosis of 
diabetic neuropathy should be made only after other 
possible etiologies are excluded.
Polyneuropathy/mononeuropathy
The most common form of diabetic neuropathy is distal 
symmetric polyneuropathy. It most frequently presents 
with distal sensory loss, but up to 50% of patients do not 
have symptoms of neuropathy. Hyperesthesia, paresthe-
sia, and dysesthesia also may occur. Any combination of 
these symptoms may develop as neuropathy progresses. 
Symptoms may include a sensation of numbness, tin-
gling, sharpness, or burning that begins in the feet and 
spreads proximally. Neuropathic pain develops in some 
of these individuals, occasionally preceded by improve-
ment in their glycemic control. Pain typically involves 
the lower extremities, is usually present at rest, and wors-
ens at night. Both an acute (lasting <12 months) and a 
chronic form of painful diabetic neuropathy have been 
described. As diabetic neuropathy progresses, the pain 
subsides and eventually disappears, but a sensory deficit in 
the lower extremities persists. Physical examination reveals 
sensory loss, loss of ankle reflexes, and abnormal position 
sense.
Diabetic polyradiculopathy is a syndrome character-
ized by severe disabling pain in the distribution of one 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
283
or more nerve roots. It may be accompanied by motor 
weakness. Intercostal or truncal radiculopathy causes 
pain over the thorax or abdomen. Involvement of the 
lumbar plexus or femoral nerve may cause severe pain 
in the thigh or hip and may be associated with muscle 
weakness in the hip flexors or extensors (diabetic amy-
otrophy). Fortunately, diabetic polyradiculopathies are 
usually self-limited and resolve over 6–12 months.
Mononeuropathy (dysfunction of isolated cranial or 
peripheral nerves) is less common than polyneuropathy 
in DM and presents with pain and motor weakness in 
the distribution of a single nerve. A vascular etiology 
has been suggested, but the pathogenesis is unknown. 
Involvement of the third cranial nerve is most common 
and is heralded by diplopia. Physical examination reveals 
ptosis and ophthalmoplegia with normal pupillary con-
striction to light. Sometimes other cranial nerves IV, 
VI, or VII (Bell’s palsy) are affected. Peripheral mono-
neuropathies or simultaneous involvement of more than 
one nerve (mononeuropathy multiplex) may also occur.
Autonomic neuropathy
Individuals with long-standing type 1 or 2 DM may 
develop signs of autonomic dysfunction involving the 
cholinergic, noradrenergic, and peptidergic (peptides 
such as pancreatic polypeptide, substance P, etc.) systems. 
DM-related autonomic neuropathy can involve multiple 
systems, including the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, gen-
itourinary, sudomotor, and metabolic systems. Autonomic 
neuropathies affecting the cardiovascular system cause a 
resting tachycardia and orthostatic hypotension. Reports 
of sudden death have also been attributed to autonomic 
neuropathy. Gastroparesis and bladder-emptying abnor-
malities are often caused by the autonomic neuropathy 
seen in DM (discussed in the section “Gastrointestinal/
Genitourinary Dysfunction”). Hyperhidrosis of the upper 
extremities and anhidrosis of the lower extremities result 
from sympathetic nervous system dysfunction. Anhidrosis 
of the feet can promote dry skin with cracking, which 
increases the risk of foot ulcers. Autonomic neuropathy 
may reduce counterregulatory hormone release (espe-
cially catecholamines), leading to an inability to sense 
hypoglycemia appropriately (hypoglycemia unawareness; 
Chap. 20), thereby subjecting the patient to the risk of 
severe hypoglycemia and complicating efforts to improve 
glycemic control.
Treatment	
Diabetic Neuropathy
Treatment of diabetic neuropathy is less than satisfac-
tory. Improved glycemic control should be aggressively 
pursued and will improve nerve conduction velocity, 
but symptoms of diabetic neuropathy may not neces-
sarily improve. Efforts to improve glycemic control may
be confounded by autonomic neuropathy and hypo-
glycemia unawareness. Risk factors for neuropathy such 
as hypertension and hypertriglyceridemia should 
be treated. Avoidance of neurotoxins (alcohol) and 
smoking, supplementation with vitamins for possible 
deficiencies (B12, folate), and symptomatic treatment
are the mainstays of therapy. Loss of sensation in the 
foot places the patient at risk for ulceration and its 
sequelae; consequently, prevention of such problems 
is of paramount importance. Patients with symptoms 
or signs of neuropathy (see “Physical Examination”) 
should check their feet daily and take precautions (foot-
wear) aimed at preventing calluses or ulcerations. If foot 
deformities are present, a podiatrist should be involved.
Chronic, painful diabetic neuropathy is difficult to treat 
but may respond to antidepressants (tricyclic antidepres-
sants such as amitriptyline, desipramine, nortriptyline, 
and imipramine or selective serotonin norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors such as duloxetine) or anticonvulsants 
(gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine). 
Two agents, duloxetine and pregabalin, have been 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for pain associated with diabetic neuropathy. How-
ever, pending further study, most recommend begin-
ning with other agents such as a tricyclic antidepressant 
and switching if there is no response or if side effects 
develop. Referral to a pain management center may be 
necessary. Since the pain of acute diabetic neuropathy 
may resolve over time, medications may be discontinued 
as progressive neuronal damage from DM occurs.
Therapy of orthostatic hypotension secondary to 
autonomic neuropathy is also challenging. A variety of 
agents have limited success (fludrocortisone, midodrine, 
clonidine, octreotide, and yohimbine) but each has sig-
nificant side effects. Nonpharmacologic maneuvers 
(adequate salt intake, avoidance of dehydration and 
diuretics, and lower extremity support hose) may offer 
some benefit.
Gastrointestinal/Genitourinary 
Dysfunction
Long-standing type 1 and 2 DM may affect the motil-
ity and function of gastrointestinal (GI) and genitouri-
nary systems. The most prominent GI symptoms are 
delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) and altered 
small- and large-bowel motility (constipation or diar-
rhea). Gastroparesis may present with symptoms of 
anorexia, nausea, vomiting, early satiety, and abdominal 
bloating. Microvascular complications (retinopathy and 
neuropathy) are usually present. Nuclear medicine scin-
tigraphy after ingestion of a radiolabeled meal may doc-
ument delayed gastric emptying, but may not correlate 
well with the patient’s symptoms. Noninvasive “breath 
tests” following ingestion of a radiolabeled meal are 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
284
under development. Though parasympathetic dysfunc-
tion secondary to chronic hyperglycemia is important 
in the development of gastroparesis, hyperglycemia itself 
also impairs gastric emptying. Nocturnal diarrhea, alter-
nating with constipation, is a feature of DM-related 
GI autonomic neuropathy. In type 1 DM, these symptoms 
should also prompt evaluation for celiac sprue because of 
its increased frequency. Esophageal dysfunction in long- 
standing DM may occur but is usually asymptomatic.
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy may lead to genito-
urinary dysfunction including cystopathy, erectile dys-
function, and female sexual dysfunction (reduced sexual 
desire, dyspareunia, reduced vaginal lubrication). Symp-
toms of diabetic cystopathy begin with an inability to 
sense a full bladder and a failure to void completely. As 
bladder contractility worsens, bladder capacity and the 
postvoid residual increase, leading to symptoms of uri-
nary hesitancy, decreased voiding frequency, inconti-
nence, and recurrent urinary tract infections. Diagnostic 
evaluation includes cystometry and urodynamic studies.
Erectile dysfunction and retrograde ejaculation are 
very common in DM and may be one of the earliest 
signs of diabetic neuropathy (Chap. 15). Erectile dys-
function, which increases in frequency with the age of 
the patient and the duration of diabetes, may occur in the 
absence of other signs of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
Treatment	
Gastrointestinal/Genitourinary 
Dysfunction
Current treatments for these complications of DM are 
inadequate. Improved glycemic control should be a 
primary goal, as some aspects (neuropathy, gastric 
function) may improve. Smaller, more frequent meals 
that are easier to digest (liquid) and low in fat and fiber 
may minimize symptoms of gastroparesis. Agents with 
some efficacy include dopamine antagonists meto-
clopramide, 5–10 mg, and domperidone, 10–20 mg, 
before each meal. Erythromycin interacts with the moti-
lin receptor and may promote gastric emptying. Dia-
betic diarrhea in the absence of bacterial overgrowth 
is treated symptomatically with loperamide and may 
respond to octreotide (50–75 μg three times daily, SC). 
Treatment of bacterial overgrowth with antibiotics is 
sometimes useful.
Diabetic cystopathy should be treated with timed 
voiding or self-catheterization, possibly with the addi-
tion of bethanechol. Drugs that inhibit type 5 phospho-
diesterase are effective for erectile dysfunction, but their 
efficacy in individuals with DM is slightly lower than in 
the nondiabetic population (Chap. 15). Sexual dysfunc-
tion in women may be improved with use of vaginal 
lubricants, treatment of vaginal infections, and systemic 
or local estrogen replacement.
Cardiovascular Morbidity and 
Mortality
Cardiovascular disease is increased in individuals with 
type 1 or type 2 DM. The Framingham Heart Study 
revealed a marked increase in PAD, CHF, CHD, MI, 
and sudden death (risk increase from one- to fivefold) 
in DM. The American Heart Association has desig-
nated DM as a “CHD risk equivalent.” Type 2 diabe-
tes patients without a prior MI have a similar risk for 
coronary artery–related events as nondiabetic individu-
als who have had a prior MI. Because of the extremely 
high prevalence of underlying cardiovascular disease in 
individuals with diabetes (especially in type 2 DM), evi-
dence of atherosclerotic vascular disease (e.g., cardiac 
stress test) should be sought in an individual with dia-
betes who has symptoms suggestive of cardiac ischemia 
or peripheral or carotid arterial disease. The screening of 
asymptomatic individuals with diabetes for CHD is con-
troversial, and recent studies have not shown a clinical 
benefit. The absence of chest pain (“silent ischemia”) is 
common in individuals with diabetes, and a thorough 
cardiac evaluation should be considered in individuals 
undergoing major surgical procedures. The progno-
sis for individuals with diabetes who have CHD or MI 
is worse than that for nondiabetics. CHD is more likely 
to involve multiple vessels in individuals with DM.
The increase in cardiovascular morbidity and mor-
tality rates appears to relate to the synergism of hyper-
glycemia with other cardiovascular risk factors. For 
example, after controlling for all known cardiovascu-
lar risk factors, type 2 DM increases the cardiovascular 
death rate twofold in men and fourfold in women. Risk 
factors for macrovascular disease in diabetic individu-
als include dyslipidemia, hypertension, obesity, reduced 
physical activity, and cigarette smoking. Additional risk 
factors more prevalent in the diabetic population include 
microalbuminuria, macroalbuminuria, an elevation of 
serum creatinine, and abnormal platelet function. Insulin 
resistance, as reflected by elevated serum insulin levels, is 
associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular com-
plications in individuals with and without DM. Individ-
uals with insulin resistance and type 2 DM have elevated 
levels of plasminogen activator inhibitors (especially 
PAI-1) and fibrinogen, which enhances the coagula-
tion process and impairs fibrinolysis, thus favoring the 
development of thrombosis. Diabetes is also associated 
with endothelial, vascular smooth-muscle, and platelet 
dysfunction.
Improved glycemic control started soon after the diag-
nosis of diabetes reduces cardiovascular complications in 
DM, but the glycemic goal for individuals with long-
standing diabetes remains unclear. In both the DCCT 
(type 1 diabetes) and the UKPDS (type 2 diabetes), car-
diovascular events were not reduced by intensive treat-
ment during the trial but were reduced at follow-up 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
285
10–17 years later (this effect has been termed legacy effect 
or metabolic memory). During the DCCT, an improve-
ment in the lipid profile of individuals in the intensive 
group (lower total and LDL cholesterol, lower triglycer-
ides) during intensive diabetes management was noted. 
Trials to examine whether very aggressive glycemic tar-
gets (A1C near 6%) reduce cardiovascular events in type 2 
diabetes did not show a survival benefit of reducing 
the A1C below 7% (and in one trial, the outcome was 
worse). Current recommendations do not suggest more 
aggressive glucose lowering in this patient population. 
The possibility of atherogenic potential of insulin is sug-
gested by the data in nondiabetic individuals showing 
higher serum insulin levels (indicative of insulin resistance) 
in association with greater risk of cardiovascular mor-
bidity and mortality. However, treatment with insulin 
and the sulfonylureas did not appear to increase the risk 
of cardiovascular disease in individuals with type 2 DM, 
refuting prior claims about the atherogenic potential of 
these agents.
In addition to CHD, cerebrovascular disease is 
increased in individuals with DM (threefold increase 
in stroke). Individuals with DM have an increased 
incidence of CHF. The etiology of this abnormality 
is probably multifactorial and includes factors such as 
myocardial ischemia from atherosclerosis, hypertension, 
and myocardial cell dysfunction secondary to chronic 
hyperglycemia.
Treatment	
Cardiovascular Disease
In general, the treatment of coronary disease is not 
different in the diabetic individual. Revascularization 
procedures for CHD, including percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI) and coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG), may be less efficacious in the diabetic individ-
ual. Initial success rates of PCI in diabetic individuals are 
similar to those in the nondiabetic population, but dia-
betic patients have higher rates of restenosis and lower 
long-term patency and survival rates in older studies. 
More recently, the use of drug-eluting stents and a 
GPIIb/IIIa platelet inhibitor has improved the outcomes 
in diabetic patients, and whether there is a difference 
in efficacy of PCI in diabetic individuals is not clear. 
Although CABG may be preferred over PCI in diabetic 
individuals with multivessel coronary artery disease  
or recent Q-wave MI, PCI is preferred in patients with 
single-vessel coronary artery disease or two-vessel dis-
ease (no involvement of left anterior descending).
The ADA has emphasized the importance of glycemic 
control and aggressive cardiovascular risk modification 
in all individuals with DM (see section “Cardiovascular 
Risk Factors”). Past trepidation about using beta block-
ers in individuals who have diabetes should not prevent
the use of these agents since they clearly benefit diabetic 
patients after MI. ACE inhibitors (or ARBs) may also be 
particularly beneficial and should be considered in indi-
viduals with type 2 DM and other risk factors (smoking, 
dyslipidemia, history of cardiovascular disease, microalbu-
minuria). Patients with atypical chest pain or an abnormal 
resting ECG should be considered for screening for CHD.
Antiplatelet therapy reduces cardiovascular events 
in individuals with DM who have CHD. Current recom-
mendations by the ADA include the use of aspirin for 
secondary prevention of coronary events and the con-
sideration of aspirin use in diabetic individuals with an 
increased cardiovascular risk (based on risk stratification 
using risk factors such as hypertension, smoking, family 
history, albuminuria, or dyslipidemia). Data demonstrat-
ing efficacy of aspirin in primary prevention of coronary 
events in individuals with DM and a low risk for CHD are 
lacking. The aspirin dose (75–162 mg) is the same as that 
in nondiabetic individuals. Aspirin therapy does not have 
detrimental effects on renal function or hypertension, nor 
does it influence the course of diabetic retinopathy.
Cardiovascular risk factors
Dyslipidemia
Individuals with DM may have several forms of dyslip-
idemia (Chap. 21). Because of the additive cardiovas-
cular risk of hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia, lipid 
abnormalities should be assessed aggressively and treated 
as part of comprehensive diabetes care. The most com-
mon pattern of dyslipidemia is hypertriglyceridemia 
and reduced HDL cholesterol levels. DM itself does 
not increase levels of LDL, but the small, dense LDL 
particles found in type 2 DM are more atherogenic 
because they are more easily glycated and susceptible to 
oxidation.
Almost all treatment studies of diabetic dyslipidemia 
have been performed in individuals with type 2 DM 
because of the greater frequency of dyslipidemia in this 
form of diabetes. Interventional studies have shown that 
the beneficial effects of LDL reduction are similar in the 
diabetic and nondiabetic populations. Large, prospective 
trials of primary and secondary intervention for CHD 
have included some individuals with type 2 DM, and 
subset analyses have consistently found that reductions in 
LDL reduce cardiovascular events and morbidity in indi-
viduals with DM. No prospective studies have addressed 
similar questions in individuals with type 1 DM. Since 
the frequency of cardiovascular disease is low in children 
and young adults with diabetes, assessment of CV risk 
should be incorporated into the guidelines discussed in 
the following paragraphs.
Based on the guidelines provided by the ADA and 
the American Heart Association, priorities in the treat-
ment of dyslipidemia are as follows: (1) lower the LDL 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
286
cholesterol, (2) raise the HDL cholesterol, and (3) decrease 
the triglycerides. A treatment strategy depends on the 
pattern of lipoprotein abnormalities. Initial therapy for 
all forms of dyslipidemia should include dietary changes, 
as well as the same lifestyle modifications recommended 
in the nondiabetic population (smoking cessation, blood 
pressure control, weight loss, increased physical activ-
ity). The dietary recommendations for individuals with 
DM are similar to those advocated by the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (Chap. 21) and include 
increased monounsaturated fat and carbohydrates and 
reduced saturated fats and cholesterol. Though viewed 
as important, the response to dietary alterations is often 
modest (<10% reduction in the LDL). Improvement 
in glycemic control will lower triglycerides and have a 
modest beneficial effect by raising HDL. HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors are the agents of choice for lowering 
the LDL. According to guidelines of the ADA and the 
American Heart Association, the target lipid values in 
diabetic individuals (age >40 years) without cardiovas-
cular disease should be as follows: LDL <2.6 mmol/L 
(100 mg/dL); HDL >1 mmol/L (40 mg/dL) in men 
and >1.3 mmol/L (50 mg/dL) in women; and triglycer-
ides <1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dL). In patients >40 years, 
the ADA recommends addition of a statin, regardless of 
the LDL level in patients with CHD and those without 
CHD, but who have CHD risk factors.
If the patient is known to have CHD, the ADA rec-
ommends an LDL goal of <1.8 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) 
as an “option” [in keeping with evidence that such a 
goal is beneficial in nondiabetic individuals with CHD 
(Chap. 21)]. Older studies with fibrates indicated effi-
cacy, but recent trials have not shown a benefit of this 
class of agents. Combination therapy with an HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitor and a fibrate or another lipid-
lowering agent (ezetimibe, niacin) may be considered 
to reach LDL goals, but statin/fibrate combinations 
increase the possibility of side effects such as myositis. 
Nicotinic acid effectively raises HDL and can be used 
in patients with diabetes, but high doses (>2 g/d) may 
worsen glycemic control and increase insulin resistance. 
Bile acid–binding resins should not be used if hypertri-
glyceridemia is present.
Hypertension
Hypertension can accelerate other complications of DM, 
particularly cardiovascular disease and nephropathy. In 
targeting a goal of BP <130/80 mmHg, therapy should 
first emphasize lifestyle modifications such as weight 
loss, exercise, stress management, and sodium restriction. 
Realizing that more than one agent is usually required 
to reach the blood pressure goal, the ADA recommends 
that all patients with diabetes and hypertension be treated 
with an ACE inhibitor or an ARB. Subsequently, agents 
that reduce cardiovascular risk (beta blockers, thia-
zide diuretics, and calcium channel blockers) should be 
incorporated into the regimen. While ACE inhibi-
tors and ARBs are likely equivalent in most patients 
with diabetes and renal disease, the ADA notes (1) in 
patients with type 1 diabetes, hypertension, and micro- 
or macroalbuminuria, an ACE inhibitor slowed progres-
sion of nephropathy; (2) an ACE inhibitor or an ARB 
slowed the progression to macroalbuminuria in patients 
with type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and microalbumin-
uria; and (3) ARB slowed the decline in GFR in patients 
with type 2 diabetes, hypertension, macroalbuminuria, 
and renal insufficiency. Additional points of emphasis 
include the following:
1.	 ACE inhibitors are either glucose and lipid neu-
tral or glucose and lipid beneficial and thus positively 
impact the cardiovascular risk profile. Calcium channel 
blockers, central adrenergic antagonists, and vasodi-
lators are lipid and glucose neutral.
2.	 Beta blockers and thiazide diuretics can increase insu-
lin resistance and negatively impact the lipid profile; 
beta blockers may slightly increase the risk of devel-
oping type 2 DM. Beta blockers are safe in patients 
with diabetes and reduce cardiovascular events.
3.	 Sympathetic inhibitors and α-adrenergic blockers 
may worsen orthostatic hypotension in the diabetic 
individual with autonomic neuropathy.
4.	 Equivalent reduction in blood pressure by different 
classes of agents may not translate into equivalent 
protection from cardiovascular and renal endpoints. 
Thiazides, beta blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs 
positively impact cardiovascular endpoints (MI or 
stroke).
5.	 Serum potassium and renal function should be 
monitored.
Because of the high prevalence of atherosclerotic dis-
ease in individuals with type 2 DM, the possibility of 
renovascular hypertension should be considered when 
the blood pressure is not readily controlled.
Lower Extremity Complications
DM is the leading cause of nontraumatic lower extremity 
amputation in the United States. Foot ulcers and infec-
tions are also a major source of morbidity in individu-
als with DM. The reasons for the increased incidence of 
these disorders in DM involve the interaction of several 
pathogenic factors: neuropathy, abnormal foot biome-
chanics, PAD, and poor wound healing. The periph-
eral sensory neuropathy interferes with normal protective 
mechanisms and allows the patient to sustain major or 
repeated minor trauma to the foot, often without knowl-
edge of the injury. Disordered proprioception causes 
abnormal weight bearing while walking and subsequent 
formation of callus or ulceration. Motor and sensory 
neuropathy lead to abnormal foot muscle mechanics and 
to structural changes in the foot (hammertoe, claw toe 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
287
deformity, prominent metatarsal heads, Charcot joint). 
Autonomic neuropathy results in anhidrosis and altered 
superficial blood flow in the foot, which promote dry-
ing of the skin and fissure formation. PAD and poor 
wound healing impede resolution of minor breaks 
in the skin, allowing them to enlarge and to become 
infected.
Approximately 15% of individuals with type 2 DM 
develop a foot ulcer (great toe or MTP areas are most 
common), and a significant subset will ultimately undergo 
amputation (14–24% risk with that ulcer or subsequent 
ulceration). Risk factors for foot ulcers or amputation 
include male sex, diabetes >10 years’ duration, peripheral 
neuropathy, abnormal structure of foot (bony abnor-
malities, callus, thickened nails), peripheral arterial dis-
ease, smoking, history of previous ulcer or amputation, 
and poor glycemic control. Large calluses are often pre-
cursors to or overlie ulcerations.
Treatment	
Lower Extremity Complications
The optimal therapy for foot ulcers and amputations is 
prevention through identification of high-risk patients, 
education of the patient, and institution of measures to 
prevent ulceration. High-risk patients should be identi-
fied during the routine foot examination performed 
on all patients with DM (see “Ongoing Aspects of Com-
prehensive Diabetes Care”). Patient education should 
emphasize (1) careful selection of footwear, (2) daily 
inspection of the feet to detect early signs of poor-
fitting footwear or minor trauma, (3) daily foot hygiene 
to keep the skin clean and moist, (4) avoidance of self-
treatment of foot abnormalities and high-risk behavior 
(e.g., walking barefoot), and (5) prompt consultation 
with a health care provider if an abnormality arises. 
Patients at high risk for ulceration or amputation may 
benefit from evaluation by a foot care specialist. Inter-
ventions directed at risk factor modification include 
orthotic shoes and devices, callus management, nail 
care, and prophylactic measures to reduce increased 
skin pressure from abnormal bony architecture. Atten-
tion to other risk factors for vascular disease (smoking, 
dyslipidemia, hypertension) and improved glycemic 
control are also important.
Despite preventive measures, foot ulceration and 
infection are common and represent a serious prob-
lem. Due to the multifactorial pathogenesis of lower 
extremity ulcers, management of these lesions is mul-
tidisciplinary and often demands expertise in ortho-
pedics, vascular surgery, endocrinology, podiatry, and 
infectious diseases. The plantar surface of the foot is the 
most common site of ulceration. Ulcers may be primarily 
neuropathic (no accompanying infection) or may have 
surrounding cellulitis or osteomyelitis. Cellulitis without
ulceration is also frequent and should be treated with 
antibiotics that provide broad-spectrum coverage, 
including anaerobes (see below).
An infected ulcer is a clinical diagnosis, since super-
ficial culture of any ulceration will likely find multiple 
possible bacterial species. The infection surrounding 
the foot ulcer is often the result of multiple organisms 
(gram-positive and -negative organisms and anaer-
obes), and gas gangrene may develop in the absence 
of clostridial infection. Cultures taken from the surface 
of the ulcer are not helpful; a culture from the debrided 
ulcer base or from purulent drainage or aspiration of 
the wound is the most helpful. Wound depth should 
be determined by inspection and probing with a blunt-
tipped sterile instrument. Plain radiographs of the foot 
should be performed to assess the possibility of osteo-
myelitis in chronic ulcers that have not responded to 
therapy. Nuclear medicine bone scans may be helpful, 
but overlying subcutaneous infection is often difficult 
to distinguish from osteomyelitis. Indium-labeled white 
cell studies are more useful in determining if the infec-
tion involves bony structures or only soft tissue, but 
they are technically demanding. MRI of the foot may 
be the most specific modality, although distinguishing 
bony destruction due to osteomyelitis from destruction 
secondary to Charcot arthropathy is difficult. If surgical 
debridement is necessary, bone biopsy and culture may 
provide the answer.
Osteomyelitis is best treated by a combination 
of prolonged antibiotics (IV, then oral) and possibly 
debridement of infected bone. The possible contribu-
tion of vascular insufficiency should be considered in 
all patients. Noninvasive blood-flow studies are often 
unreliable in DM, and angiography may be required, 
recognizing the risk of contrast-induced nephrotoxicity. 
Peripheral arterial bypass procedures are often effec-
tive in promoting wound healing and in decreasing the 
need for amputation of the ischemic limb.
A growing number of possible treatments for dia-
betic foot ulcers exist, but they have yet to demonstrate 
clear efficacy in prospective, controlled trials. A consen-
sus statement from the ADA identified six interventions 
with demonstrated efficacy in diabetic foot wounds: 
(1) off-loading, (2) debridement, (3) wound dressings, 
(4) appropriate use of antibiotics, (5) revascularization, 
and (6) limited amputation. Off-loading is the com-
plete avoidance of weight bearing on the ulcer, which 
removes the mechanical trauma that retards wound 
healing. Bed rest and a variety of orthotic devices  
or contact casting limit weight bearing on wounds or 
pressure points. Surgical debridement is important 
and effective, but clear efficacy of other modalities for 
wound cleaning (enzymes, soaking, whirlpools) is lack-
ing. Dressings such as hydrocolloid dressings promote 
wound healing by creating a moist environment and
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
288
protecting the wound. Antiseptic agents should be 
avoided. Topical antibiotics are of limited value. Referral 
for physical therapy, orthotic evaluation, and rehabilita-
tion should occur once the infection is controlled.
Mild or non-limb-threatening infections can be 
treated with oral antibiotics (cephalosporin, clindamy-
cin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, and fluoroquinolones), sur-
gical debridement of necrotic tissue, local wound care 
(avoidance of weight bearing over the ulcer), and close 
surveillance for progression of infection. More severe 
ulcers may require IV antibiotics as well as bed rest and 
local wound care. Urgent surgical debridement may be 
required. Strict control of glycemia should be a goal (see 
below). IV antibiotics should provide broad-spectrum 
coverage directed toward Staphylococcus aureus, strep-
tococci, gram-negative aerobes, and anaerobic bacte-
ria. Initial antimicrobial regimens include ertapenem, 
piperacillin/tazobactam, cefotetan, ampicillin/sulbac-
tam, linezolid, or the combination of clindamycin and 
a fluoroquinolone. Severe infections, or infections that 
do not improve after 48 h of antibiotic therapy, require 
expansion of antimicrobial therapy to treat methicillin-
resistant S. aureus (e.g., vancomycin) and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. If the infection surrounding the ulcer is not 
improving with IV antibiotics, reassessment of antibiotic 
coverage and reconsideration of the need for surgical 
debridement or revascularization are indicated. With 
clinical improvement, oral antibiotics and local wound 
care can be continued on an outpatient basis with close 
follow-up.
New information about wound biology has led to a 
number of new technologies (e.g., living skin equiva-
lents and growth factors) that may prove useful, espe-
cially in neuropathic ulcers. Hyperbaric oxygen has been 
used, but rigorous proof of efficacy is lacking. Negative 
wound pressure has been shown to accelerate healing 
of plantar wounds.
Infections
Individuals with DM have a greater frequency and sever-
ity of infection. The reasons for this include incom-
pletely defined abnormalities in cell-mediated immunity 
and phagocyte function associated with hyperglycemia, 
as well as diminished vascularization. Hyperglycemia 
aids the colonization and growth of a variety of organ-
isms (Candida and other fungal species). Many common 
infections are more frequent and severe in the diabetic 
population, whereas several rare infections are seen 
almost exclusively in the diabetic population. Examples 
of this latter category include rhinocerebral mucormycosis, 
emphysematous infections of the gall bladder and urinary 
tract, and “malignant” or invasive otitis externa. Invasive 
otitis externa is usually secondary to P. aeruginosa infec-
tion in the soft tissue surrounding the external auditory 
canal, usually begins with pain and discharge, and may 
rapidly progress to osteomyelitis and meningitis. These 
infections should be sought, in particular, in patients pre-
senting with HHS.
Pneumonia, urinary tract infections, and skin and soft 
tissue infections are all more common in the diabetic 
population. In general, the organisms that cause pulmo-
nary infections are similar to those found in the non-
diabetic population; however, gram-negative organisms, 
S. aureus, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis are more fre-
quent pathogens. Urinary tract infections (either lower 
tract or pyelonephritis) are the result of common bac-
terial agents such as Escherichia coli, though several yeast 
species (Candida and Torulopsis glabrata) are commonly
observed. Complications of urinary tract infections include 
emphysematous pyelonephritis and emphysematous cys-
titis. Bacteriuria occurs frequently in individuals with dia-
betic cystopathy. Susceptibility to furunculosis, superficial 
candidal infections, and vulvovaginitis are increased. Poor 
glycemic control is a common denominator in individu-
als with these infections. Diabetic individuals have an 
increased rate of colonization of S. aureus in the skinfolds 
and nares. Diabetic patients also have a greater risk of 
postoperative wound infections. Strict glycemic control 
reduces postoperative infections in diabetic individuals 
undergoing CABG and should be the goal in all diabetic 
patients with an infection.
Dermatologic Manifestations
The most common skin manifestations of DM are pro-
tracted wound healing and skin ulcerations. Diabetic 
dermopathy, sometimes termed pigmented pretibial papules, 
or “diabetic skin spots,” begins as an erythematous area 
and evolves into an area of circular hyperpigmentation. 
These lesions result from minor mechanical trauma in 
the pretibial region and are more common in elderly 
men with DM. Bullous diseases, such as bullosa diabeti-
corum (shallow ulcerations or erosions in the pretibial 
region), are also seen. Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum is 
a rare disorder of DM that predominantly affects young 
women with type 1 DM, neuropathy, and retinopathy. 
It usually begins in the pretibial region as an erythem-
atous plaque or papules that gradually enlarge, darken, 
and develop irregular margins, with atrophic centers and 
central ulceration. They may be painful. Vitiligo occurs 
at increased frequency in individuals with type 1 diabetes. 
Acanthosis nigricans (hyperpigmented velvety plaques seen 
on the neck, axilla, or extensor surfaces) is sometimes 
a feature of severe insulin resistance and accompany-
ing diabetes. Generalized or localized granuloma annulare 
(erythematous plaques on the extremities or trunk) and 
scleredema (areas of skin thickening on the back or neck 
at the site of previous superficial infections) are more 
common in the diabetic population. Lipoatrophy and 
lipohypertrophy can occur at insulin injection sites but 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
289
are now unusual with the use of human insulin. Xerosis 
and pruritus are common and are relieved by skin 
moisturizers.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Diabetes Mellitus
DM and its complications produce a wide range of 
symptoms and signs; those secondary to acute hyper-
glycemia may occur at any stage of the disease, whereas 
those related to chronic complications begin to appear 
during the second decade of hyperglycemia. Individuals 
with previously undetected type 2 DM may present with 
chronic complications of DM at the time of diagnosis. 
The history and physical examination should assess for 
symptoms or signs of acute hyperglycemia and should 
screen for the chronic complications and conditions 
associated with DM.
History  A complete medical history should be 
obtained with special emphasis on DM-relevant aspects 
such as weight, family history of DM and its complica-
tions, risk factors for cardiovascular disease, exercise, 
smoking, and ethanol use. Symptoms of hyperglycemia 
include polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, fatigue, weak-
ness, blurry vision, frequent superficial infections (vagi-
nitis, fungal skin infections), and slow healing of skin 
lesions after minor trauma. Metabolic derangements 
relate mostly to hyperglycemia (osmotic diuresis) and to 
the catabolic state of the patient (urinary loss of glucose 
and calories, muscle breakdown due to protein degra-
dation and decreased protein synthesis). Blurred vision 
results from changes in the water content of the lens 
and resolves as the hyperglycemia is controlled.
In a patient with established DM, the initial assess-
ment should also include special emphasis on prior 
diabetes care, including the type of therapy, prior A1C 
levels, self-monitoring blood glucose results, frequency 
of hypoglycemia, presence of DM-specific complica-
tions, and assessment of the patient’s knowledge about 
diabetes, exercise, and nutrition. The chronic complica-
tions may afflict several organ systems, and an individual 
patient may exhibit some, all, or none of the symp-
toms related to the complications of DM (see above). 
In addition, the presence of DM-related comorbidities 
should be sought (cardiovascular disease, hypertension,  
dyslipidemia).
Physical Examination  In addition to a com-
plete physical examination, special attention should 
be given to DM-relevant aspects such as weight or 
BMI, retinal examination, orthostatic blood pressure, 
foot examination, peripheral pulses, and insulin injec-
tion sites. Blood pressure >130/80 mmHg is considered 
hypertension in individuals with diabetes. Careful exam-
ination of the lower extremities should seek evidence
of peripheral arterial disease (pedal pulses), peripheral 
neuropathy, calluses, superficial fungal infections, nail 
disease, ankle reflexes, and foot deformities (such as 
hammertoes or claw toes and Charcot foot) in order to 
identify sites of potential skin ulceration. Vibratory sen-
sation (128-MHz tuning fork at the base of the great 
toe), the ability to sense touch with a monofilament 
(5.07, 10-g monofilament), pinprick sensation, testing 
for ankle reflexes, and vibration perception threshold 
(using a biothesiometer) are used to detect moderately 
advanced diabetic neuropathy. Since periodontal dis-
ease is more frequent in DM, the teeth and gums should 
also be examined.
Classification of DM in an Individual 
Patient  The etiology of diabetes in an individual 
with new-onset disease can usually be assigned on the 
basis of clinical criteria. Individuals with type 1 DM tend 
to have the following characteristics: (1) onset of disease 
prior to age 30 years; (2) lean body habitus; (3) require-
ment of insulin as the initial therapy; (4) propensity to 
develop ketoacidosis; and (5) an increased risk of other 
autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune thyroid  
disease, adrenal insufficiency, pernicious anemia, celiac 
disease, and vitiligo. In contrast, individuals with type 2 DM 
often exhibit the following features: (1) develop diabe-
tes after the age of 30 years; (2) are usually obese (80% 
are obese, but elderly individuals may be lean); (3) may 
not require insulin therapy initially; and (4) may have 
associated conditions such as insulin resistance, hyper-
tension, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia, or PCOS. 
In type 2 DM, insulin resistance is often associated with 
abdominal obesity (as opposed to hip and thigh obesity) 
and hypertriglyceridemia. Although most individuals 
diagnosed with type 2 DM are older, the age of diagno-
sis is declining, and there is a marked increase among 
overweight children and adolescents. Some individuals 
with phenotypic type 2 DM present with DKA but lack 
autoimmune markers and may be later treated with oral 
glucose-lowering agents rather than insulin (this clinical 
picture is sometimes referred to as ketosis-prone type 2 DM). 
On the other hand, some individuals (5–10%) with the 
phenotypic appearance of type 2 DM do not have abso-
lute insulin deficiency but have autoimmune mark-
ers (ICA, GAD autoantibodies) suggestive of type 1 DM 
(termed latent autoimmune diabetes of the adult). Such 
individuals are more likely to be <50 years of age, have 
a normal BMI, and have a personal or family history of 
other autoimmune disease. They are much more likely 
to require insulin treatment within 5 years. Monogenic 
forms of diabetes (discussed above) should be consid-
ered in those with diabetes onset <30 years of age, an 
autosomal pattern of diabetes inheritance, and the lack 
of nearly complete insulin deficiency. Despite recent 
advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis of 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
290
Table 19-8
Treatment Goals for Adults With Diabetesa
Index
Goal
Glycemic controlb
  A1C
<7.0%c
Preprandial capillary 
plasma glucose
3.9–7.2 mmol/L (70–130 mg/dL)
Peak postprandial  
capillary plasma  
glucosed
<10.0 <1.7 mmol/L (<180 mg/dL)
Blood pressure
<130/80
Lipidse
Low-density  
lipoprotein
<2.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL)
High-density  
lipoprotein
>1 mmol/L (40 mg/dL) in men
>1.3 mmol/L (50 mg/dL) in women
Triglycerides
<1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dL)
aAs recommended by the ADA; goals should be individualized for each 
patient (see text). Goals may be different for certain patient populations.
bA1C is primary goal.
cNormal range for A1C: 4.0–6.0% (DCCT-based assay).
dOne to two hours after beginning of a meal.
eIn decreasing order of priority.
Source: Adapted from American Diabetes Association: Diabetes 
Care 34:S11, 2011.
diabetes, it remains difficult to categorize some patients 
unequivocally. Individuals who deviate from the clini-
cal profile of type 1 and type 2 DM, or who have other 
associated defects such as deafness, pancreatic exocrine 
disease, and other endocrine disorders, should be classi-
fied accordingly (Table 19-1).
Laboratory 
Assessment  The laboratory 
assessment should first determine whether the patient 
meets the diagnostic criteria for DM (Table 19-2) and then 
assess the degree of glycemic control (A1C, discussed in 
“Monitoring the Level of Glycemic Control”). In addition 
to the standard laboratory evaluation, the patient should 
be screened for DM-associated conditions (e.g., microal-
buminuria, dyslipidemia, thyroid dysfunction). Individuals 
at high risk for cardiovascular disease should be screened 
for asymptomatic CHD by appropriate cardiac stress test-
ing, when indicated.
The classification of the type of DM may be facilitated 
by laboratory assessments. Serum insulin or C-peptide 
measurements do not always distinguish type 1 from 
type 2 DM, but a low C-peptide level confirms a patient’s 
need for insulin. Many individuals with new-onset 
type 1 DM retain some C-peptide production. Mea-
surement of islet cell antibodies at the time of diabetes 
onset may be useful if the type of DM is not clear based 
on the characteristics described previously.
Long-Term Treatment
Overall Principles
The goals of therapy for type 1 or type 2 DM are to 
(1) eliminate symptoms related to hyperglycemia, (2) reduce 
or eliminate the long-term microvascular and macrovas-
cular complications of DM, and (3) allow the patient to 
achieve as normal a lifestyle as possible. To reach these 
goals, the physician should identify a target level of gly-
cemic control for each patient, provide the patient with 
the educational and pharmacologic resources necessary 
to reach this level, and monitor/treat DM-related com-
plications. Symptoms of diabetes usually resolve when 
the plasma glucose is <11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL), and 
thus most DM treatment focuses on achieving the sec-
ond and third goals. The treatment goals for patients 
with diabetes are summarized in Table 19-8.
The care of an individual with either type 1 or type 2 DM 
requires a multidisciplinary team. Central to the success 
of this team are the patient’s participation, input, and 
enthusiasm, all of which are essential for optimal diabetes 
management. Members of the health care team include 
the primary care provider and/or the endocrinologist or 
diabetologist, a certified diabetes educator, and a nutri-
tionist. In addition, when the complications of DM arise, 
subspecialists (including neurologists, nephrologists, vascular 
surgeons, cardiologists, ophthalmologists, and podiatrists) 
with experience in DM-related complications are essential.
A number of names are sometimes applied to differ-
ent approaches to diabetes care, such as intensive insulin 
therapy, intensive glycemic control, and “tight control.” 
The current chapter, and other sources, use the term 
comprehensive diabetes care to emphasize the fact that opti-
mal diabetes therapy involves more than plasma glu-
cose management. Though glycemic control is central 
to optimal diabetes therapy, comprehensive diabetes 
care of both type 1 and type 2 DM should also detect 
and manage DM-specific complications and modify risk 
factors for DM-associated diseases. In addition to the 
physical aspects of DM, social, family, financial, cultural, 
and employment-related issues may impact diabetes 
care. The International Diabetes Federation (IDF), rec-
ognizing that resources available for diabetes care varies 
widely throughout the world, has issued guidelines for 
standard care (a well-developed service base and with 
health care funding systems consuming a significant part 
of their national wealth), minimal care (health care set-
tings with very limited resources), and comprehensive 
care (health care settings with considerable resources). 
This chapter provides guidance for this comprehensive 
level of diabetes care.
Patient Education About DM, 
Nutrition, and Exercise
The patient with type 1 or type 2 DM should receive 
education about nutrition, exercise, care of diabetes 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
291
during illness, and medications to lower the plasma glu-
cose. Along with improved compliance, patient edu-
cation allows individuals with DM to assume greater 
responsibility for their care. Patient education should 
be viewed as a continuing process with regular vis-
its for reinforcement; it should not be a process that is 
completed after one or two visits to a nurse educator 
or nutritionist. The ADA refers to education about the 
individualized management plan for the patient as diabe-
tes self-management education (DSME). More frequent 
contact between the patient and the diabetes manage-
ment team (electronic, telephone, etc.) improves glyce-
mic control.
Diabetes education
The diabetes educator is a health care professional (nurse, 
dietician, or pharmacist) with specialized patient educa-
tion skills who is certified in diabetes education (e.g., 
American Association of Diabetes Educators). Education 
topics important for optimal diabetes care include self-
monitoring of blood glucose; urine ketone monitoring 
(type 1 DM); insulin administration; guidelines for dia-
betes management during illnesses; prevention and man-
agement of hypoglycemia (Chap. 20); foot and skin care; 
diabetes management before, during, and after exercise; 
and risk factor–modifying activities.
Nutrition
Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) is a term used by the 
ADA to describe the optimal coordination of caloric 
intake with other aspects of diabetes therapy (insulin, 
exercise, weight loss). Primary prevention measures of 
MNT are directed at preventing or delaying the onset of 
type 2 DM in high-risk individuals (obese or with pre-
diabetes) by promoting weight reduction. Medical treat-
ment of obesity is a rapidly evolving area and is discussed 
in Chap. 17. Secondary prevention measures of MNT 
are directed at preventing or delaying diabetes-related 
complications in diabetic individuals by improving gly-
cemic control. Tertiary prevention measures of MNT 
are directed at managing diabetes-related complications 
(cardiovascular disease, nephropathy) in diabetic indi-
viduals. For example, in individuals with diabetes and 
chronic kidney disease, protein intake should be limited 
to 0.8 g/kg of body weight per day. MNT in patients 
with diabetes and cardiovascular disease should incorpo-
rate dietary principles used in nondiabetic patients with 
cardiovascular disease. While the recommendations for 
all three types of MNT overlap, this chapter emphasizes 
secondary prevention measures of MNT. Pharmacologic 
approaches that facilitate weight loss and bariatric surgery 
should be considered in selected patients (Chap. 17).
In general, the components of optimal MNT are 
similar for individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM and 
Table 19-9
Nutritional Recommendations for Adults 
With Diabetesa
Weight loss diet (in prediabetes and type 2 DM)
•  Hypocaloric diet that is low fat or low carbohydrate
Fat in diet
•  Minimal trans fat consumption
Carbohydrate in diet
•  Monitor carbohydrate intake in regard to calories
•  Sucrose-containing foods may be consumed with 
adjustments in insulin dose
•  Amount of carbohydrate determined by estimating 
grams of carbohydrate in diet (for type 1 DM)
•  Glycemic index reflects how consumption of a particular 
food affects the blood glucose
Protein in diet: as part of an optimal diet
Other components
•  Nonnutrient sweeteners
•  Routine supplements of vitamins, antioxidants, or trace 
elements not advised
aSee text for differences for patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. 
As for the general population, a healthy diet includes fruits, vegeta-
bles, and fiber-containing foods.
Source: Adapted from American Diabetes Association: Diabetes 
Care 34:S11, 2011.
similar to those for the general population (fruits, vege-
tables, fiber-containing foods, and low fat; Table 19-9). 
MNT education is an important component of com-
prehensive diabetes care and should be reinforced by 
regular patient education. Historically, nutrition educa-
tion imposed restrictive, complicated regimens on the 
patient. Current practices have greatly changed, though 
many patients and health care providers still view the 
diabetic diet as monolithic and static. For example, 
MNT now includes foods with sucrose and seeks to 
modify other risk factors such as hyperlipidemia and 
hypertension rather than focusing exclusively on weight 
loss in individuals with type 2 DM. The glycemic index is 
an estimate of the postprandial rise in the blood glucose 
when a certain amount of that food is consumed. Con-
sumption of foods with a low glycemic index appears 
to reduce postprandial glucose excursions and improve 
glycemic control. Reduced calorie and nonnutritive 
sweeteners are useful. Currently, evidence does not sup-
port supplementation of the diet with vitamins, antioxi-
dants (vitamin C and E), or micronutrients (chromium) 
in patients with diabetes.
The goal of MNT in the individual with type 1 DM 
is to coordinate and match the caloric intake, both tem-
porally and quantitatively, with the appropriate amount 
of insulin. MNT in type 1 DM and self-monitoring of 
blood glucose must be integrated to define the optimal 
insulin regimen. The ADA encourages patients and pro-
viders to utilize carbohydrate counting or exchange sys-
tems to estimate the nutrient content of a meal or snack. 
Based on the patient’s estimate of the carbohydrate 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
292
content of a meal, an insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio 
determines the bolus insulin dose for a meal or snack. 
MNT must be flexible enough to allow for exercise, and 
the insulin regimen must allow for deviations in caloric 
intake. An important component of MNT in type 1 DM 
is to minimize the weight gain often associated with inten-
sive diabetes management.
The goals of MNT in type 2 DM should focus on 
weight loss and address the greatly increased prevalence 
of cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, dyslipidemia, 
obesity) and disease in this population. The majority of 
these individuals are obese, and weight loss is strongly 
encouraged and should remain an important goal. Hypo-
caloric diets and modest weight loss (5–7%) often result 
in rapid and dramatic glucose lowering in individuals 
with new-onset type 2 DM. Nevertheless, numerous 
studies document that long-term weight loss is uncom-
mon. MNT for type 2 DM should emphasize modest 
caloric reduction (low-carbohydrate or low-fat), reduced 
fat intake, and increased physical activity. Increased con-
sumption of soluble, dietary fiber may improve glycemic 
control in individuals with type 2 DM. Weight loss and 
exercise improve insulin resistance.
Exercise
Exercise has multiple positive benefits including cardio-
vascular risk reduction, reduced blood pressure, mainte-
nance of muscle mass, reduction in body fat, and weight 
loss. For individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM, exercise 
is also useful for lowering plasma glucose (during and 
following exercise) and increasing insulin sensitivity. In 
patients with diabetes, the ADA recommends 150 min/
week (distributed over at least 3 days) of moderate aero-
bic physical activity. The exercise regimen should also 
include resistance training.
Despite its benefits, exercise presents challenges for 
individuals with DM because they lack the normal glu-
coregulatory mechanisms (normally, insulin falls and 
glucagon rises during exercise). Skeletal muscle is a 
major site for metabolic fuel consumption in the resting 
state, and the increased muscle activity during vigor-
ous, aerobic exercise greatly increases fuel requirements. 
Individuals with type 1 DM are prone to either hyper-
glycemia or hypoglycemia during exercise, depend-
ing on the pre-exercise plasma glucose, the circulating 
insulin level, and the level of exercise-induced catechol-
amines. If the insulin level is too low, the rise in cate-
cholamines may increase the plasma glucose excessively, 
promote ketone body formation, and possibly lead to 
ketoacidosis. Conversely, if the circulating insulin level 
is excessive, this relative hyperinsulinemia may reduce 
hepatic glucose production (decreased glycogenolysis, 
decreased gluconeogenesis) and increase glucose entry 
into muscle, leading to hypoglycemia.
To avoid exercise-related hyper- or hypoglycemia, 
individuals with type 1 DM should (1) monitor blood 
glucose before, during, and after exercise; (2) delay 
exercise if blood glucose is >14 mmol/L (250 mg/dL) 
and ketones are present; (3) if the blood glucose is <5.6 
mmol/L (100 mg/dL), ingest carbohydrate before exer-
cising; (3) monitor glucose during exercise and ingest 
carbohydrate to prevent hypoglycemia; (4) decrease 
insulin doses (based on previous experience) before 
exercise and inject insulin into a non-exercising area; 
and (5) learn individual glucose responses to different 
types of exercise and increase food intake for up to 24 h 
after exercise, depending on intensity and duration of 
exercise. In individuals with type 2 DM, exercise-related 
hypoglycemia is less common but can occur in individu-
als taking either insulin or insulin secretagogues.
Because asymptomatic cardiovascular disease appears 
at a younger age in both type 1 and type 2 DM, formal 
exercise tolerance testing may be warranted in diabetic 
individuals with any of the following: age >35 years, 
diabetes duration >15 years (type 1 DM) or >10 years 
(type 2 DM), microvascular complications of DM (reti-
nopathy, microalbuminuria, or nephropathy), PAD, 
other risk factors of CHD, or autonomic neuropathy. 
Untreated proliferative retinopathy is a relative contra-
indication to vigorous exercise, as this may lead to vit-
reous hemorrhage or retinal detachment.
Monitoring the Level of Glycemic 
Control
Optimal monitoring of glycemic control involves plasma 
glucose measurements by the patient and an assessment 
of long-term control by the physician (measurement 
of hemoglobin A1C and review of the patient’s self- 
measurements of plasma glucose). These measurements 
are complementary: the patient’s measurements provide 
a picture of short-term glycemic control, whereas the 
A1C reflects average glycemic control over the previous 
2–3 months.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose
Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) is the stan-
dard of care in diabetes management and allows the 
patient to monitor his or her blood glucose at any time. 
In SMBG, a small drop of blood and an easily detectable 
enzymatic reaction allow measurement of the capillary 
plasma glucose. Many glucose monitors can rapidly and 
accurately measure glucose (calibrated to provide plasma 
glucose value even though blood glucose is measured) 
in small amounts of blood (3–10 μL) obtained from the 
fingertip; alternative testing sites (e.g., forearm) are less 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
293
reliable, especially when the blood glucose is chang-
ing rapidly (postprandially). A large number of blood 
glucose monitors are available, and the certified diabe-
tes educator is critical in helping the patient select the 
optimal device and learn to use it properly. By combin-
ing glucose measurements with diet history, medication 
changes, and exercise history, the diabetes management 
team and patient can improve the treatment program.
The frequency of SMBG measurements must be 
individualized and adapted to address the goals of dia-
betes care. Individuals with type 1 DM or individuals 
with type 2 DM taking multiple insulin injections each 
day should routinely measure their plasma glucose three 
or more times per day to estimate and select mealtime 
boluses of short-acting insulin and to modify long-acting 
insulin doses. Most individuals with type 2 DM require 
less frequent monitoring, though the optimal frequency 
of SMBG has not been clearly defined. Individuals 
with type 2 DM who are taking insulin should uti-
lize SMBG more frequently than those on oral agents. 
Individuals with type 2 DM who are on oral medica-
tions should utilize SMBG as a means of assessing the 
efficacy of their medication and the impact of diet. 
Since plasma glucose levels fluctuate less in these indi-
viduals, one to two SMBG measurements per day (or 
fewer in patients who are on oral agents or are diet-
controlled) may be sufficient. Most measurements in 
individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM should be per-
formed prior to a meal and supplemented with post-
prandial measurements to assist in reaching postprandial 
glucose targets (Table 19-8).
Devices for continuous blood glucose monitoring 
(CGM) have been approved by the FDA, and others are 
in various stages of development. These devices do not 
replace the need for traditional glucose measurements. 
This rapidly evolving technology requires substantial 
expertise on the part of the diabetes management team 
and the patient. Current continuous glucose-monitoring 
systems measure the glucose in interstitial fluid, which 
is in equilibrium with the blood glucose. These devices 
provide useful short-term information about the pat-
terns of glucose changes as well as an enhanced abil-
ity to detect hypoglycemic episodes. Alarms notify the 
patient if the blood glucose falls into the hypoglycemic 
range. Clinical experience with these devices is rapidly 
growing, and they are most useful in individuals with 
hypoglycemia unawareness, frequent hypoglycemia, or 
those who have not achieved glycemic targets despite 
major efforts. The utility of CGM in the ICU setting 
remains to be determined.
Ketones are an indicator of early diabetic ketoaci-
dosis and should be measured in individuals with type 
1 DM when the plasma glucose is consistently >16.7 
mmol/L (300 mg/dL) during a concurrent illness or 
with symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, or abdominal 
pain. Blood measurement of β-hydroxybutyrate is pre-
ferred over urine testing with nitroprusside-based assays 
that measure only acetoacetate and acetone.
Assessment of long-term glycemic control
Measurement of glycated hemoglobin is the stan-
dard method for assessing long-term glycemic control. 
When plasma glucose is consistently elevated, there is 
an increase in nonenzymatic glycation of hemoglobin; 
this alteration reflects the glycemic history over the pre-
vious 2–3 months, since erythrocytes have an average 
life span of 120 days (glycemic level in the preceding 
month contributes about 50% to the A1C value). There 
are numerous laboratory methods for measuring the 
various forms of glycated hemoglobin, and these have 
significant interassay variations; assays that are calibrated 
against the DCCT A1C assay are essential. Depend-
ing on the assay methodology, hemoglobinopathies, 
anemias, reticulocytosis, transfusions, and uremia may 
interfere with the A1C result. Measurement of A1C at 
the “point of care” allows for more rapid feedback and 
may therefore assist in adjustment of therapy.
A1C should be measured in all individuals with DM 
during their initial evaluation and as part of their com-
prehensive diabetes care. As the primary predictor of 
long-term complications of DM, the A1C should mir-
ror, to a certain extent, the short-term measurements 
of SMBG. These two measurements are complemen-
tary in that recent intercurrent illnesses may impact 
the SMBG measurements but not the A1C. Likewise, 
postprandial and nocturnal hyperglycemia may not be 
detected by the SMBG of fasting and preprandial capil-
lary plasma glucose but will be reflected in the A1C. In 
standardized assays, the A1C approximates the follow-
ing mean plasma glucose values: an A1C of 6% = 7.0 
mmol/L (126 mg/dL), 7% = 8.6 mmol/L (154 mg/dL), 
8% = 10.2 mmol/L (183 mg/dL), 9% = 11.8 mmol/L 
(212 mg/dL), 10% = 13.4 mmol/L (240 mg/dL), 11% =
14.9 mmol/L (269 mg/dL), and 12% = 16.5 mmol/L 
(298 mg/dL). In patients achieving their glycemic goal, 
the ADA recommends measurement of the A1C at least 
twice per year. More frequent testing (every 3 months) 
is warranted when glycemic control is inadequate or 
when therapy has changed. The degree of glycation of 
other proteins, such as albumin, can be used as an alter-
native indicator of glycemic control when the A1C is 
inaccurate (hemolytic anemia, hemoglobinopathies). The 
fructosamine assay (measuring glycated albumin) reflects 
the glycemic status over the prior 2 weeks. Alternative 
assays of glycemic control should not be routinely used 
since studies demonstrating that it accurately predicts 
the complications of DM are lacking.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
294
Treatment	
Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Establishment of Target Level of 
Glycemic 
Control  Because the complica-
tions of DM are related to glycemic control, normo-
glycemia or near-normoglycemia is the desired but 
often elusive goal for most patients. However, normal-
ization of the plasma glucose for long periods of time 
is extremely difficult, as demonstrated by the DCCT. 
Regardless of the level of hyperglycemia, improvement 
in glycemic control will lower the risk of diabetes com-
plications (Fig. 19-8).
The target for glycemic control (as reflected by the 
A1C) must be individualized, and the goals of therapy 
should be developed in consultation with the patient 
after considering a number of medical, social, and 
lifestyle issues. Some important factors to consider 
include the patient’s age and ability to understand and 
implement a complex treatment regimen, presence 
and severity of complications of diabetes, ability to 
recognize hypoglycemic symptoms, presence of other 
medical conditions or treatments that might alter the 
response to therapy, lifestyle and occupation (e.g., pos-
sible consequences of experiencing hypoglycemia on 
the job), and level of support available from family and 
friends.
The ADA suggests that the glycemic goal is to 
achieve an A1C as close to normal as possible without 
significant hypoglycemia. In general, the target A1C 
should be <7% (Table 19-8) with a more stringent target 
for some patients. A higher A1C goal may be appropriate 
for the very young or old or in individuals with limited 
life span or comorbid conditions. The major consider-
ation is the frequency and severity of hypoglycemia, 
since this becomes more common with a more strin-
gent A1C goal. More stringent glycemic control (A1C of 
6% or less) is not beneficial and may be deterimental in 
type 2 DM and a high risk of CV disease.
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
General Aspects  The ADA recommendations for 
fasting and bedtime glycemic goals and A1C targets 
are summarized in Table 19-8. The goal is to design and 
implement insulin regimens that mimic physiologic 
insulin secretion. Because individuals with type 1 DM 
partially or completely lack endogenous insulin produc-
tion, administration of basal insulin is essential for regu-
lating glycogen breakdown, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, 
and ketogenesis. Likewise, insulin replacement for meals 
should be appropriate for the carbohydrate intake and 
promote normal glucose utilization and storage.
Intensive Management  Intensive diabetes man-
agement has the goal of achieving euglycemia or 
near-normal glycemia. This approach requires multiple 
resources, including thorough and continuing patient
education, comprehensive recording of plasma glucose 
measurements and nutrition intake by the patient, and 
a variable insulin regimen that matches glucose intake 
and insulin dose. Insulin regimens usually include 
multiple-component insulin regimens, multiple daily 
injections (MDIs), or insulin infusion devices (each dis-
cussed below).
The benefits of intensive diabetes management 
and improved glycemic control include a reduction in 
the microvascular complications of DM and a reduc-
tion in the macrovascular complications of DM, which 
persists after a period of near normoglycemia. From 
a psychological standpoint, the patient experiences 
greater control over his or her diabetes and often notes 
an improved sense of well-being, greater flexibility in 
the timing and content of meals, and the capability to 
alter insulin dosing with exercise. In addition, intensive 
diabetes management prior to and during pregnancy 
reduces the risk of fetal malformations and morbidity. 
Intensive diabetes management is strongly encouraged 
in newly diagnosed patients with type 1 DM because it 
may prolong the period of C-peptide production, which 
may result in better glycemic control and a reduced risk 
of serious hypoglycemia.
Although intensive management confers impressive 
benefits, it is also accompanied by significant personal 
and financial costs and is therefore not appropriate for 
all individuals.
Insulin Preparations  Current insulin preparations 
are generated by recombinant DNA technology and 
consist of the amino acid sequence of human insulin or 
variations thereof. In the United States, most insulin is 
formulated as U-100 (100 units/mL). Regular insulin for- 
mulated as U-500 (500 units/mL) is available and some-
times useful in patients with severe insulin resistance. 
Human insulin has been formulated with distinctive 
pharmacokinetics or genetically modified to more closely 
mimic physiologic insulin secretion. Insulins can be clas-
sified as short acting or long acting (Table 19-10). For 
example, one short-acting insulin formulation, insu-
lin lispro, is an insulin analogue in which the 28th and 
29th amino acids (lysine and proline) on the insulin B 
chain have been reversed by recombinant DNA tech-
nology. Insulin aspart and insulin glulisine are other 
genetically modified insulin analogues with proper-
ties similar to lispro. These insulin analogues have full 
biologic activity but less tendency for self-aggregation, 
resulting in more rapid absorption and onset of action 
and a shorter duration of action. These characteristics 
are particularly advantageous for allowing entrainment 
of insulin injection and action to rising plasma glucose 
levels following meals. The shorter duration of action 
also appears to be associated with a decreased num-
ber of hypoglycemic episodes, primarily because the
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
295
decay of insulin action corresponds to the decline in 
plasma glucose after a meal. Thus, insulin aspart, lispro, 
or glulisine is preferred over regular insulin for prandial 
coverage. Insulin glargine is a long-acting biosynthetic 
human insulin that differs from normal insulin in that 
asparagine is replaced by glycine at amino acid 21, and 
two arginine residues are added to the C terminus of the 
B chain. Compared to NPH insulin, the onset of insulin 
glargine action is later, the duration of action is longer 
(∼24 h), and there is a less pronounced peak. A lower 
incidence of hypoglycemia, especially at night, has been 
reported with insulin glargine when compared to NPH 
insulin. The possible association between glargine and 
increased cancer risk is being investigated (FDA review 
under way) and is controversial. Insulin detemir has a 
fatty acid side chain that prolongs its action by slow-
ing absorption and catabolism. Twice-daily injections or 
glargine of detemir are sometimes required to provide 
24-h coverage. Regular and NPH insulin have the native 
insulin amino acid sequence.
Basal insulin requirements are provided by long-
acting (NPH insulin, insulin glargine, or insulin detemir) 
Table 19-10
 Properties of Insulin Preparations
Time of Action
Preparation
Onset, h
Peak, h
Effective 
Duration, h
Short acting
  Aspart
<0.25
0.5–1.5
3–4
  Glulisine
<0.25
0.5–1.5
3–4
  Lispro
<0.25
0.5–1.5
3–4
  Regular
0.5–1.0
2–3
4–6
Long acting
  Detemir
1–4
—a
Up to 24
  Glargine
1–4
—a
Up to 24
  NPH
1–4
6–10
10–16
Insulin combinations
75/25–75%  
protamine lispro, 
25% lispro
<0.25
1.5 h
Up to 10–16
70/30–70%  
protamine aspart, 
30% aspart
<0.25
1.5 h
Up to 10–16
50/50–50%  
protamine lispro, 
50% lispro
<0.25
1.5 h
Up to 10–16
70/30–70% NPH, 
30% regular
0.5–1
Dualb
10–16
aGlargine and detemir have minimal peak activity.
bDual: two peaks—one at 2–3 h and the second one several hours 
later.
Source: Adapted from JS Skyler, Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus and 
Related Disorders, American Diabetes Association, Alexandria, VA, 
2004.
insulin formulations. These are usually prescribed with 
short-acting insulin in an attempt to mimic physiologic 
insulin release with meals. Although mixing of NPH 
and short-acting insulin formulations is common prac-
tice, this mixing may alter the insulin absorption profile 
(especially the short-acting insulins). For example, lispro 
absorption is delayed by mixing with NPH. The altera-
tion in insulin absorption when the patient mixes differ-
ent insulin formulations should not discourage mixing 
insulins. However, the following guidelines should be 
followed: (1) Mix the different insulin formulations in 
the syringe immediately before injection (inject within 
2 min after mixing); (2) do not store insulin as a mixture; 
(3) follow the same routine in terms of insulin mixing 
and administration to standardize the physiologic 
response to injected insulin; and (4) do not mix insulin 
glargine or detemir with other insulins. The miscibility 
of human regular and NPH insulin allows for the pro-
duction of combination insulins that contain 70% NPH 
and 30% regular (70/30) or equal mixtures of NPH and 
regular (50/50). Other combination insulin formula-
tions are insulin aspart (70/30) and insulin lispro (75/25 
and 50/50). By including the insulin analogue mixed 
with protamine, these combinations have a short-
acting and long-acting profile (Table 19-10). While more 
convenient for the patient (only two injections/day), 
combination insulin formulations do not allow inde-
pendent adjustment of short-acting and long-acting 
activity. Several insulin formulations are available as 
insulin “pens,” which may be more convenient for some 
patients. Insulin delivery by inhalation is no longer avail-
able but remains under investigation.
Insulin Regimens  Representations of the vari-
ous insulin regimens that may be utilized in type 1 DM 
are illustrated in Fig. 19-12. Although the insulin pro-
files are depicted as “smooth,” symmetric curves, there 
is considerable patient-to-patient variation in the peak 
and duration. In all regimens, long-acting insulins (NPH, 
glargine, or detemir) supply basal insulin, whereas reg-
ular, insulin aspart, glulisine, or lispro insulin provides 
prandial insulin. Short-acting insulin analogues should 
be injected just before (<20 min) or just after a meal; 
regular insulin is given 30–45 min prior to a meal.
A shortcoming of current insulin regimens is that 
injected insulin immediately enters the systemic circu-
lation, whereas endogenous insulin is secreted into the 
portal venous system. Thus, exogenous insulin adminis-
tration exposes the liver to subphysiologic insulin levels. 
No insulin regimen reproduces the precise insulin secre-
tory pattern of the pancreatic islet. However, most physi-
ologic regimens entail more frequent insulin injections, 
greater reliance on short-acting insulin, and more fre-
quent capillary plasma glucose measurements. In gen-
eral, individuals with type 1 DM require 0.5–1 U/kg per day
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
296
of insulin divided into multiple doses, with ∼50% of the 
insulin given as basal insulin.
Multiple-component insulin regimens refer to the 
combination of basal insulin and bolus insulin (pre-
prandial short-acting insulin). The timing and dose of 
short-acting, preprandial insulin are altered to accom-
modate the SMBG results, anticipated food intake, and 
physical activity. Such regimens offer the patient with 
type 1 diabetes more flexibility in terms of lifestyle and 
the best chance for achieving near normoglycemia. One 
such regimen, shown in Fig. 19-12B, consists of basal 
insulin with glargine or detemir and preprandial lispro, 
glulisine, or insulin aspart. The insulin aspart, glulisine, 
or lispro dose is based on individualized algorithms that 
integrate the preprandial glucose and the anticipated car-
bohydrate intake. To determine the meal component of 
the preprandial insulin dose, the patient uses an insulin-  
to-carbohydrate ratio (a common ratio for type 1 DM is 
1–1.5 units/10 g of carbohydrate, but this must be deter-
mined for each individual). To this insulin dose is added 
the supplemental or correcting insulin based on the pre-
prandial blood glucose [one formula uses 1 unit of insu-
lin for every 2.7 mmol/L (50 mg/dL) over the preprandial 
glucose target; another formula uses (body weight in kg) × 
(blood glucose − desired glucose in mg/dL)/1700]. An 
alternative multiple-component insulin regimen con-
sists of bedtime NPH insulin, a small dose of NPH insulin 
at breakfast (20–30% of bedtime dose), and preprandial 
short-acting insulin. Other variations of this regimen 
are in use but have the disadvantage that NPH has a 
significant peak, making hypoglycemia more common. 
Frequent SMBG (more than three times per day) is abso-
lutely essential for these types of insulin regimens.
One commonly used regimen consists of twice-daily 
injections of NPH mixed with a short-acting insulin 
before the morning and evening meals (Fig. 19-12B). 
Such regimens usually prescribe two-thirds of the total 
daily insulin dose in the morning (with about two-thirds 
given as long-acting insulin and one-third as short 
acting) and one-third before the evening meal (with 
approximately one-half given as long-acting insulin and 
one-half as short acting). The drawback to such a regi-
men is that it enforces a rigid schedule on the patient, 
in terms of daily activity and the content and timing 
of meals. Although it is simple and effective at avoid-
ing severe hyperglycemia, it does not generate near-
normal glycemic control in individuals with type 1 DM. 
Moreover, if the patient’s meal pattern or content var-
ies or if physical activity is increased, hyperglycemia 
or hypoglycemia may result. Moving the long-acting 
insulin from before the evening meal to bedtime may 
avoid nocturnal hypoglycemia and provide more insu-
lin as glucose levels rise in the early morning (so-called 
dawn phenomenon). The insulin dose in such regimens 
should be adjusted based on SMBG results with the fol-
lowing general assumptions: (1) the fasting glucose is 
primarily determined by the prior evening long-acting 
insulin; (2) the pre-lunch glucose is a function of the 
morning short-acting insulin; (3) the pre-supper glucose 
is a function of the morning long-acting insulin; and 
(4) the bedtime glucose is a function of the pre-supper, 
short-acting insulin. This is not an optimal regimen for 
the patient with type 1 DM, but is sometimes used 
for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Continuous SC insulin infusion (CSII) is a very effec-
tive insulin regimen for the patient with type 1 diabetes 
Figure 19-12 
Representative insulin regimens for the treatment of dia-
betes. For each panel, the y-axis shows the amount of insu-
lin effect and the x-axis shows the time of day. B, breakfast; 
CSII, continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion; HS, bedtime; 
L, lunch; S, supper. aLispro, glulisine, or insulin aspart can 
be used. The time of insulin injection is shown with a vertical 
arrow. The type of insulin is noted above each insulin curve. 
A. A multiple- component insulin regimen consisting of long-
acting insulinA glargine or detemir may be required each day to 
provide basal insulin coverage and three shots of glulisine, lispro, 
or insulin aspart to provide glycemic coverage for each meal. 
Morning Afternoon Evening Night
Insulin effect
L
B
S
HS
B
Insulin
 ana-
loguea
Insulin
 ana-
loguea
Insulin
 ana-
loguea
Long-acting
Insulin^
Meals
A
Insulin effect
L
B
S
HS
B
Meals
Regular
Regular
NPH
NPH
Night
Morning Afternoon Evening
Insulin
analoguea
Insulin
analoguea
B
Morning Afternoon Evening Night
Insulin effect
L
B
S
HS
B
Meals
Bolus
Bolus
Bolus
Basal Infusion
C
B. The injection of two shots of long-acting insulin (NPH) and 
short-acting insulin [glulisine, lispro, insulin aspart (solid red 
line), or regular (green dashed line)]. Only one formulation of 
short-acting insulin is used. C. Insulin administration by insu-
lin infusion device is shown with the basal insulin and a bolus 
injection at each meal. The basal insulin rate is decreased 
during the evening and increased slightly prior to the patient 
awakening in the morning. Glulisine, lispro, or insulin aspart 
is used in the insulin pump. (Adapted from H Lebovitz [ed]: 
Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus. American Diabetes Associa-
tion, Alexandria, VA, 2004.)
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
297
(Fig. 19-12C ). To the basal insulin infusion, a prepran-
dial insulin (“bolus”) is delivered by the insulin infusion 
device based on instructions from the patient, who 
uses an individualized algorithm incorporating the pre-
prandial plasma glucose and anticipated carbohydrate 
intake (see earlier in this section). These sophisticated 
insulin infusion devices can accurately deliver small doses 
of insulin (microliters per hour) and have several advan-
tages: (1) multiple basal infusion rates can be programmed 
to accommodate nocturnal versus daytime basal insulin 
requirement, (2) basal infusion rates can be altered dur-
ing periods of exercise, (3) different waveforms of insulin 
infusion with meal-related bolus allow better matching 
of insulin depending on meal composition, and (4) pro-
grammed algorithms consider prior insulin administra-
tion and blood glucose values in calculating the insulin 
dose. These devices require instruction by a health pro-
fessional with considerable experience with insulin 
infusion devices and very frequent patient interactions 
with the diabetes management team. Insulin infusion 
devices present unique challenges, such as infection  
at the infusion site, unexplained hyperglycemia because 
the infusion set becomes obstructed, or diabetic keto-
acidosis if the pump becomes disconnected. Since most 
physicians use lispro, glulisine, or insulin aspart in CSII, 
the extremely short half-life of these insulins quickly 
lead to insulin deficiency if the delivery system is inter-
rupted. Essential to the safe use of infusion devices is 
thorough patient education about pump function and 
frequent SMBG. Efforts to create a closed-loop system 
in which data from continuous glucose measurement 
regulates the insulin infusion rate continue.
Other Agents That Improve Glucose Control 
The role of amylin, a 37-amino-acid peptide co-secreted 
with insulin from pancreatic beta cells, in normal glu-
cose homeostasis is uncertain. However, based on the 
rationale that patients who are insulin deficient are also 
amylin deficient, an analogue of amylin (pramlintide) 
was created and found to reduce postprandial glycemic 
excursions in type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients taking 
insulin. Pramlintide injected just before a meal slows 
gastric emptying and suppresses glucagon but does not 
alter insulin levels. Pramlintide is approved for insulin-
treated patients with type 1 and type 2 DM. Addition 
of pramlintide produces a modest reduction in the A1C 
and seems to dampen meal-related glucose excursions. 
In type 1 diabetes, pramlintide is started as a 15-μg SC 
injection before each meal and titrated up to a maxi-
mum of 30–60 μg as tolerated. In type 2 DM, pramlint-
ide is started as a 60-μg SC injection before each meal 
and may be titrated up to a maximum of 120 μg. The 
major side effects are nausea and vomiting, and dose 
escalations should be slow to limit these side effects. 
Because pramlintide slows gastric emptying, it may
influence absorption of other medications and should 
not be used in combination with other drugs that slow 
GI motility. The short-acting insulin given before the 
meal should initially be reduced to avoid hypoglyce-
mia and then titrated as the effects of the pramlintide 
become evident. α-Glucosidase inhibitors are another 
type of agent that is sometimes used in conjunction in 
patients with type 1 DM.
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
General Aspects  The goals of therapy for type 2 DM
are similar to those in type 1. While glycemic control 
tends to dominate the management of type 1 DM, the 
care of individuals with type 2 DM must also include 
attention to the treatment of conditions associated with 
type 2 DM (obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, cardio­
vascular disease) and detection/management of DM-related 
complications (Fig. 19-13). DM-specific complications 
may be present in up to 20–50% of individuals with newly 
diagnosed type 2 DM. Reduction in cardiovascular risk is 
of paramount importance as this is the leading cause of 
mortality in these individuals. Efforts to achieve blood 
pressure and lipid goals (Table 19-8) should begin in con-
cert with glucose-lowering interventions.
Type 2 diabetes management should begin with 
MNT (discussed earlier in the chapter). An exercise 
regimen to increase insulin sensitivity and promote 
weight loss should also be instituted. Pharmacologic 
approaches to the management of type 2 DM include 
oral glucose-lowering agents, insulin, and other agents 
that improve glucose control; most physicians and 
patients prefer oral glucose- lowering agents as the ini-
tial choice (discussed in the next section) after review 
of various medications. Any therapy that improves 
glycemic control reduces “glucose toxicity” to the islet 
cells and improves endogenous insulin secretion. How-
ever, type 2 DM is a progressive disorder and ultimately 
requires multiple therapeutic agents and often insulin.
Glycemic control
  • Diet/lifestyle
  • Exercise
  • Medication
Treat associated 
conditions
   • Dyslipidemia
   • Hypertension
   • Obesity
   • Coronary heart
     disease
Screen for/manage
complications
of diabetes
• Retinopathy
• Cardiovascular
  disease
• Nephropathy
• Neuropathy
• Other complications
Management of
Type 2 Diabetes
Figure 19-13 
Essential elements in comprehensive care of type 2 
diabetes.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
298
Glucose-Lowering 
Agents  Advances in the 
therapy of type 2 DM have generated oral glucose-
lowering agents that target different pathophysiologic 
processes in type 2 DM. Based on their mechanisms of 
action, glucose-lowering agents are subdivided into 
agents that increase insulin secretion, reduce glucose 
production, increase insulin sensitivity, and enhance 
GLP-1 action (Table 19-11). Glucose-lowering agents 
other than insulin (with the exception of amylin ana-
logue and α-glucosidase inhibitors) are ineffective in 
type 1 DM and should not be used for glucose manage-
ment of severely ill individuals with type 2 DM. Insulin is 
sometimes the initial glucose-lowering agent in type 2 
diabetes.
Biguanides  Metformin, 
representative 
of 
this 
class of agents, reduces hepatic glucose production 
and improves peripheral glucose utilization slightly 
(Table 19-11). Metformin activates AMP-dependent 
protein kinase and enters cells through organic cat-
ion transporters (polymorphisms of these may influ-
ence the response to metformin). Metformin reduces 
fasting plasma glucose and insulin levels, improves 
the lipid profile, and promotes modest weight loss. 
The initial starting dose of 500 mg once or twice a day 
can be increased to 1000 mg bid. An extended-release 
form is available and may have fewer gastrointestinal 
side effects (diarrhea, anorexia, nausea, metallic taste). 
Because of its relatively slow onset of action and gastro-
intestinal symptoms with higher doses, the dose should 
be escalated every 2–3 weeks based on SMBG measure-
ments. Metformin is effective as monotherapy and can 
be used in combination with other oral agents or with 
insulin. The major toxicity of metformin, lactic acido-
sis, is very rare and can be prevented by careful patient 
selection. Vitamin B12 levels are ∼30% lower during 
metformin treatment. Metformin should not be used in 
patients with renal insufficiency (GFR <60 mL/min), any 
form of acidosis, CHF, liver disease, or severe hypoxemia. 
Metformin should be discontinued in patients who are 
seriously ill, in patients who can take nothing orally, and 
in those receiving radiographic contrast material. Insulin 
should be used until metformin can be restarted.
Insulin Secretagogues—Agents That Affect 
the ATP-Sensitive K+ Channel  Insulin secreta-
gogues stimulate insulin secretion by interacting with 
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel on the beta cell 
(Fig. 19-4). These drugs are most effective in individuals 
with type 2 DM of relatively recent onset (<5 years), who 
have residual endogenous insulin production. First-
generation sulfonylureas (chlorpropamide, tolazamide, 
tolbutamide; not shown in Table 19-12) have a longer 
half-life, a greater incidence of hypoglycemia, and more 
frequent drug interactions, and are now rarely used.
Second-generation sulfonylureas have a more rapid 
onset of action and better coverage of the postpran-
dial glucose rise, but the shorter half-life of some agents 
may require more than once-a-day dosing (Table 19-12). 
Sulfonylureas reduce both fasting and postprandial 
glucose and should be initiated at low doses and 
increased at 1- to 2-week intervals based on SMBG. In 
general, sulfonylureas increase insulin acutely and thus 
should be taken shortly before a meal; with chronic 
therapy, though, the insulin release is more sustained. 
Glimepiride and glipizide can be given in a single daily 
dose and are preferred over glyburide. Repaglinide and 
nateglinide are not sulfonylureas but also interact with 
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Because of their 
short half-life, these agents are given with each meal 
or immediately before to reduce meal-related glucose 
excursions.
These insulin secretagogues are generally well toler-
ated. These agents, especially the longer-acting ones, 
have the potential to cause profound and persistent 
hypoglycemia, especially in elderly individuals. Hypo-
glycemia is usually related to delayed meals, increased 
physical activity, alcohol intake, or renal insufficiency. 
Individuals who ingest an overdose of some agents 
develop prolonged and serious hypoglycemia and 
should be monitored closely in the hospital (Chap. 20). 
Most sulfonylureas are metabolized in the liver to com-
pounds (some of which are active) that are cleared by 
the kidney. Thus, their use in individuals with significant 
hepatic or renal dysfunction is not advisable. Weight 
gain, a common side effect of sulfonylurea therapy, 
results from the increased insulin levels and improve-
ment in glycemic control. Some sulfonylureas have 
significant drug interactions with alcohol and some 
medications including warfarin, aspirin, ketoconazole, 
α-glucosidase inhibitors, and fluconazole. A related 
isoform of ATP-sensitive potassium channels is present 
in the myocardium and the brain. All of these agents 
except glyburide have a low affinity for this isoform. 
Despite concerns that this agent might affect the myo-
cardial response to ischemia and observational studies 
suggesting that sulfonylureas increase cardiovascular 
risk, studies have not shown an increased cardiac mor-
tality with glyburide.
Insulin Secretagogues—Agents That Enhance 
GLP-1 Receptor Signaling  “Incretins” amplify 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (Fig. 19-4). Agents 
that either act as a GLP-1 agonist or enhance endog-
enous GLP-1 activity are approved for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes (Table 19-12). Agents in this class do not 
cause hypoglycemia because of the glucose-dependent 
nature of incretin-stimulated insulin secretion (unless 
there is concomitant use of an agent that can lead to 
hypoglycemia—sulfonylureas, etc.). Exenatide, a synthetic
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
299
Table 19-11
Agents Used for Treatment of Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes
Mechanism of 
Action
Examples
A1C 
Reduction 
(%)a
Agent- 
Specific 
Advantages
Agent-Specific 
Disadvantages
Contraindications
Oral
Biguanidesb
↓ Hepatic 
glucose  
production
Metformin
1–2
Weight neutral, 
do not cause 
hypoglycemia, 
inexpensive
Diarrhea, nausea, 
lactic acidosis
Serum creatinine  
>1.5 mg/dL 
(men) >1.4 mg/
dL (women), CHF, 
radiographic con-
trast studies, seri-
ously ill patients, 
acidosis
α-Glucosidase 
inhibitorsb
↓ GI glucose 
absorption
Acarbose, 
miglitol
0.5–0.8
Reduce  
postprandial 
glycemia
GI flatulence, liver 
function tests
Renal/liver disease
Dipeptidyl  
peptidase IV 
inhibitorsb
Prolong  
endogenous 
GLP-1 action
Saxagliptin, 
sitagliptin, 
vildagliptin
0.5–0.8
Do not cause 
hypoglycemia
Reduce dose with 
renal disease
Insulin  
secretagogues:  
sulfonylureasb
↑ Insulin 
secretion
See text 
and Table 
19-12
1–2
Inexpensive
Hypoglycemia, 
weight gain
Renal/liver disease
Insulin  
secretagogues: 
non-sulfonyl-
ureasb
↑ Insulin 
secretion
See text 
and Table 
19-12
1–2
Short onset of 
action, lower 
postprandial 
glucose
Hypoglycemia
Renal/liver disease
Thiazolidinedionesb
↓ Insulin 
resistance,  
↑ glucose 
utilization
Rosigli-
tazone,  
piogli-
tazone
0.5–1.4
Lower insulin 
requirements
Peripheral edema, 
CHF, weight gain, 
fractures, macular 
edema; rosiglitazone 
may increase  
cardiovascular risk
CHF, liver disease; 
see text about  
rosiglitazone
Bile acid  
sequestrants
Bind bile acids; 
mechanism  
of glucose  
lowering not 
known
Colesevelam
0.5
Constipation, dys-
pepsia, abdominal 
pain, nausea,  
↑ triglycerides, 
interfere with 
absorption of other 
drugs, intestinal 
obstruction
Elevated plasma  
triglycerides
Parenteral
Insulinb,c
↑ Glucose 
utilization, 
↓ hepatic 
glucose pro-
duction, and 
other anabolic 
actions
See text 
and Table 
19-10
Not limited
Known safety 
profile
Injection,  
weight gain,  
hypoglycemia
GLP-1 receptor 
agonistsb
↑ Insulin,  
↓ glucagon, 
slow gastric 
emptying,  
satiety
Exenatide, 
liraglutide
0.5–1.0
Weight loss, 
do not cause 
hypoglycemia
Injection, nausea, 
↑ risk of hypogly-
cemia with insulin 
secretagogues, 
pancreatitis, renal 
failure
Renal disease, 
agents that also 
slow GI motility;  
see text
Amylin agonistsb,c
Slow gastric 
emptying,  
↓ glucagon
Pramlintide
0.25–0.5
Reduce  
postprandial  
glycemia; 
weight loss
Injection, nausea,  
↑ risk of hypoglycemia 
with insulin
Agents that also 
slow GI motility
Medical nutrition  
therapy and  
physical activityb,c
↓ Insulin 
resistance,  
↑ insulin 
secretion
Low-calorie, 
low-fat diet, 
exercise
1–3
Other health 
benefits
Compliance difficult, 
long-term success 
low
aA1C reduction (absolute) depends partly on starting A1C.
bUsed for treatment of type 2 diabetes.
cUsed in conjunction with insulin for treatment of type 1 diabetes.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
300
version of a peptide initially identified in the saliva of 
the Gila monster (exendin-4), is an analogue of GLP-1. 
Unlike native GLP-1, which has a half-life of <5 min, dif-
ferences in the exenatide amino acid sequence render 
it resistant to the enzyme that degrades GLP-1 (dipep-
tidyl peptidase IV, or DPP-IV). Thus, exenatide has pro-
longed GLP-1-like action and binds to GLP-1 receptors 
found in islets, the gastrointestinal tract, and the brain. 
Liraglutide, another GLP-1 receptor agonist, is almost 
identical to native GLP-1 except for an amino acid sub-
stitution and addition of a fatty acyl group (coupled 
with a γ-glutamic acid spacer) that promote binding to 
albumin and plasma proteins and prolong its half-life. 
GLP-1 receptor agonists increase glucose-stimulated 
insulin secretion, suppress glucagon, and slow gastric 
emptying. These agents do not promote weight gain; 
in fact, most patients experience modest weight loss 
and appetite suppression. Treatment with these agents 
should start at a low dose to minimize initial side effects 
(nausea being the limiting one). Exenatide is approved 
for monotherapy and for use as combination therapy 
with metformin, sulfonylureas, and thiazolidinediones. 
Some patients taking insulin secretagogues may require 
a reduction in those agents to prevent hypoglycemia. 
GLP-1 receptor agonists should not be used in patients 
taking insulin. The major side effects are nausea, vom-
iting, and diarrhea; pancreatitis and reduced renal 
function have been reported in surveillance data with 
exenatide. Liraglutide carries a black box warning from
the FDA because of an increased risk of thyroid C-cell 
tumors in rodents and is contraindicated in individuals 
with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid and multiple 
endocrine neoplasia. Because GLP-1 receptor agonists 
slow gastric emptying, they may influence the absorp-
tion of other drugs. Whether GLP-1 receptor agonists 
enhance beta cell survival, promote beta cell prolif-
eration, or alter the natural history of type 2 DM is not 
known. Other GLP-1 receptor agonists and formulations 
are under development.
DPP-IV inhibitors inhibit degradation of native GLP-1 
and thus enhance the incretin effect. DPP-IV, which is 
widely expressed on the cell surface of endothelial cells 
and some lymphocytes, degrades a wide range of pep-
tides (not GLP-1 specific). DPP-IV inhibitors promote 
insulin secretion in the absence of hypoglycemia or 
weight gain, and appear to have a preferential effect on 
postprandial blood glucose. DPP-IV inhibitors are used 
either alone or in combination with other oral agents in 
adults with type 2 DM. Reduced doses should be given 
to patients with renal insufficiency. These agents have 
relatively few side effects.
`-Glucosidase Inhibitors  α-Glucosidase inhibi-
tors (acarbose and miglitol) reduce postprandial hyper-
glycemia by delaying glucose absorption; they do 
not affect glucose utilization or insulin secretion 
(Table 19-11). Postprandial hyperglycemia, second-
ary to impaired hepatic and peripheral glucose dis-
posal, contributes significantly to the hyperglycemic 
state in type 2 DM. These drugs, taken just before 
each meal, reduce glucose absorption by inhibiting 
the enzyme that cleaves oligosaccharides into simple 
sugars in the intestinal lumen. Therapy should be initi-
ated at a low dose (25 mg of acarbose or miglitol) with 
the evening meal and may be increased to a maximal 
dose over weeks to months (50–100 mg for acarbose 
or 50 mg for miglitol with each meal). The major side 
effects (diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal distention) are 
related to increased delivery of oligosaccharides to 
the large bowel and can be reduced somewhat by 
gradual upward dose titration. α-Glucosidase inhibitors 
may increase levels of sulfonylureas and increase the 
incidence of hypoglycemia. Simultaneous treatment 
with bile acid resins and antacids should be avoided. 
These agents should not be used in individuals with 
inflammatory bowel disease, gastroparesis, or a serum 
creatinine >177 μmol/L (2 mg/dL). This class of agents 
is not as potent as other oral agents in lowering the 
A1C but is unique because it reduces the postpran-
dial glucose rise even in individuals with type 1 DM. If 
hypoglycemia from other diabetes treatments occurs 
while taking these agents, the patient should consume 
glucose since the degradation and absorption of com-
plex carbohydrates will be retarded.
Table 19-12
Properties of Insulin Secretagogues
Class/Generic Name
Daily Dosage, 
mg
Duration of 
Action, h
Sulfonylureas
Glimepiride
1–8
24
Glipizide
5–40
12–18
Glipizide (extended 
release)
5–20
24
Glyburide
1.25–20
12–24
Glyburide (micronized)
0.75–12
12–24
Nonsulfonylureas 
(Meglititinides)
Repaglinide
0.5–16
2–6
Nateglinide
180–360
2–4
GLP-1 agonist
Exenatide
0.01–0.02
4–6
Liraglutide
0.6–1.8
12–24
Dipeptidyl Pepti-
dase-4 Inhibitors
Saxagliptin
2.5–5
12–16
Sitagliptin
100
At least 24
Vildagliptin
50–100
12–24
Abbreviation: GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1.
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
301
Thiazolidinediones  Thiazolidinediones reduce insulin
resistance by binding to the PPAR-γ (peroxisome prolifer-
ator-activated receptor γ) nuclear receptor (which forms 
a heterodimer with the retinoid X receptor). The PPAR-γ 
receptor is found at highest levels in adipocytes but is 
expressed at lower levels in many other tissues. Agonists 
of this receptor regulate a large number of genes, pro-
mote adipocyte differentiation, reduce hepatic fat accu-
mulation, and promote fatty acid storage (Table 19-11). 
Thiazolidinediones promote a redistribution of fat from 
central to peripheral locations. Circulating insulin levels 
decrease with use of the thiazolidinediones, indicating 
a reduction in insulin resistance. Although direct comparisons 
are not available, the two currently available thiazoli-
dinediones appear to have similar efficacy; the thera-
peutic range for pioglitazone is 15–45 mg/d in a single 
daily dose, and for rosiglitazone the total daily dose is  
2–8 mg/d administered either once daily or twice daily in 
divided doses. The prototype of this class of drugs, trogli-
tazone, was withdrawn from the U.S. market after reports 
of hepatotoxicity and an association with an idiosyn-
cratic liver reaction that sometimes led to hepatic failure. 
Although rosiglitazone and pioglitazone do not appear 
to induce the liver abnormalities seen with troglitazone, 
the FDA recommends measurement of liver function 
tests prior to initiating therapy with a thiazolidinedione 
and at regular intervals (every 2 months for the first year 
and then periodically).
Rosiglitazone raises LDL, HDL, and triglycerides 
slightly. Pioglitazone raises HDL to a greater degree and 
LDL to a lesser degree but lowers triglycerides. The clini-
cal significance of the lipid changes with these agents is 
not known and may be difficult to ascertain since most 
patients with type 2 diabetes are also treated with a 
statin.
Thiazolidinediones are associated with weight gain 
(2–3 kg), a small reduction in the hematocrit, and a mild 
increase in plasma volume. Peripheral edema and CHF 
are more common in individuals treated with these 
agents. These agents are contraindicated in patients 
with liver disease or CHF (class III or IV). The FDA has 
issued an alert that rare patients taking these agents 
may experience a worsening of diabetic macular edema. 
An increased risk of fractures has been noted in women 
taking these agents. Thiazolidinediones have been 
shown to induce ovulation in premenopausal women 
with PCOS. Women should be warned about the risk 
of pregnancy, since the safety of thiazolidinediones in 
pregnancy is not established.
Recent concerns about increased cardiovascular 
risk associated with rosiglitazone have led to consider-
able restrictions on its use. The FDA issued a “black box” 
warning for rosiglitazone in 2007. Under recent FDA 
guidelines (September 2010), new prescriptions for rosi-
glitazone in the United States must be written under a 
“risk evaluation and mitigation strategy” and only for 
patients with diabetes that cannot be controlled by 
other medications. The European Medicines Agency 
(2010) advised removal of rosiglitazone and formula-
tions containing rosiglitazone from the European mar-
ket. As a result of these rulings, rosiglitazone will be 
available in the United States on a limited basis, but will 
not be available in Europe.
Other therapies for type 2 diabetes  Bile 
acid–binding resins. Bile acid metabolism is abnormal 
type 2 diabetes. The bile acid–binding resin colesevelam 
has been approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes 
(already approved for treatment of hypercholesterol-
emia). Emerging evidence indicates that bile acids, by 
signaling through nuclear receptors, may have a role 
in metabolism. Since bile acid–binding resins are mini-
mally absorbed into the systemic circulation, how bile 
acid–binding resins lower blood glucose is not known. 
Colesevelam (available as a powder for oral solution and 
as 625-mg tablets) is prescribed as 3–6 tablets prior to 
meals. The most common side effects are gastrointes-
tinal (constipation, abdominal pain, and nausea). Bile 
acid–binding resins can increase plasma triglycerides 
and should be used cautiously in patients with a ten-
dency to hypertriglyceridemia. The role of this class 
of drugs in the treatment of type 2 diabetes is not yet 
defined.
Bromocriptine. A formulation of the dopamine 
receptor agonist bromocriptine (Cycloset) has been 
approved by the FDA for the treatment of type 2 diabe-
tes (approved in 2009). However, this formulation is not 
available in the United States, and its role in the treat-
ment of type 2 diabetes is uncertain.
Insulin Therapy in Type 2 DM  Insulin should 
be considered as the initial therapy in type 2 DM, par-
ticularly in lean individuals or those with severe weight 
loss, in individuals with underlying renal or hepatic 
disease that precludes oral glucose-lowering agents, or 
in individuals who are hospitalized or acutely ill. Insulin 
therapy is ultimately required by a substantial number 
of individuals with type 2 DM because of the progressive 
nature of the disorder and the relative insulin deficiency 
that develops in patients with long-standing diabetes. 
Both physician and patient reluctance often delay the 
initiation of insulin therapy, but glucose control and 
patient well-being are improved by insulin therapy in 
patients who have not reached the glycemic target.
Because endogenous insulin secretion continues 
and is capable of providing some coverage of meal-
time caloric intake, insulin is usually initiated in a single 
dose of long-acting insulin (0.3–0.4 U/kg per day), given 
either before breakfast and in the evening (NPH) or just 
before bedtime (NPH, glargine, detemir). Since fasting 
hyperglycemia and increased hepatic glucose production 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
302
are prominent features of type 2 DM, bedtime insu-
lin is more effective in clinical trials than a single dose 
of morning insulin. Glargine given at bedtime has less 
nocturnal hypoglycemia than NPH insulin. Some phy-
sicians prefer a relatively low, fixed starting dose of 
long-acting insulin (5–15 units) to reduce the chance 
of hypoglycemia in the initial treatment period. The 
insulin dose may then be adjusted in 10% increments 
as dictated by SMBG results. Both morning and bedtime 
long-acting insulin may be used in combination with 
oral glucose-lowering agents. Initially, basal insulin may 
be sufficient, but more often prandial insulin coverage 
with multiple insulin injections is needed as diabetes 
progresses (see insulin regimens used for type 1 diabe-
tes). Other insulin formulations that have a combination 
of short-acting and long-acting insulin (Table 19-10) are 
sometimes used in patients with type 2 DM because of 
convenience but do not allow independent adjustment 
of short-acting and long-acting insulin dose and often 
do not achieve the same degree of glycemic control as 
basal/bolus regimens. In selected patients with type 2 DM 
(usually insulin deficient as defined by C-peptide level), 
insulin infusion devices may be considered.
Choice of Initial Glucose-Lowering Agent 
The level of hyperglycemia should influence the ini-
tial choice of therapy. Assuming maximal benefit of 
MNT and increased physical activity has been realized, 
patients with mild to moderate hyperglycemia [FPG 
<11.1–13.9 mmol/L (200–250 mg/dL)] often respond 
well to a single oral glucose-lowering agent. Patients 
with more severe hyperglycemia [FPG >13.9 mmol/L 
(250 mg/dL)] may respond partially but are unlikely 
to achieve normoglycemia with oral monotherapy. A 
stepwise approach that starts with a single agent and 
adds a second agent to achieve the glycemic target can 
be used (see “Combination Therapy,” following). Insulin 
can be used as initial therapy in individuals with severe 
hyperglycemia [FPG >13.9–16.7 mmol/L (250–300 mg/dL)] 
or in those who are symptomatic from the hypergly-
cemia. This approach is based on the rationale that 
more rapid glycemic control will reduce “glucose tox-
icity” to the islet cells, improve endogenous insulin 
secretion, and possibly allow oral glucose-lowering 
agents to be more effective. If this occurs, the insulin 
may be discontinued.
Insulin secretagogues, biguanides, α-glucosidase inhibi­
tors, thiazolidinediones, GLP-1 receptor agonists, DPP-IV 
inhibitors, and insulin are approved for monotherapy of 
type 2 DM. Although each class of oral glucose-lowering 
agents has unique advantages and disadvantages, cer- 
tain generalizations apply: (1) insulin secretagogues, big- 
uanides, GLP-1 receptor agonists, and thiazolidinediones  
improve glycemic control to a similar degree (1–2% reduc-
tion in A1C) and are more effective than α-glucosidase
inhibitors and DPP-IV inhibitors; (2) assuming a similar 
degree of glycemic improvement, no clinical advantage 
to one class of drugs has been demonstrated, and any 
therapy that improves glycemic control is likely benefi-
cial; (3) insulin secretagogues, GLP-1 receptor agonists, 
DPP-IV inhibitors, and α-glucosidase inhibitors begin 
to lower the plasma glucose immediately, whereas 
the glucose-lowering effects of the biguanides and 
thiazolidinediones are delayed by several weeks; (4) not 
all agents are effective in all individuals with type 2 DM 
(primary failure); (5) biguanides, α-glucosidase inhibi-
tors, GLP-1 receptor agonists, DPP-IV inhibitors, and 
thiazolidinediones do not directly cause hypoglyce-
mia; and (6) most individuals will eventually require 
treatment with more than one class of oral glucose-
lowering agents or insulin, reflecting the progressive 
nature of type 2 DM; (7) durability of glycemic control 
is slightly less for glyburide compared to metformin or 
rosiglitazone.
Considerable clinical experience exists with metfor-
min and sulfonylureas because they have been available 
for several decades. It is assumed that the α-glucosidase 
inhibitors, GLP-1 agonists, DPP-IV inhibitors, and thia-
zolidinediones, which are newer classes of oral glucose-
lowering drugs, will reduce DM-related complications 
by improving glycemic control, although long-term data 
are not yet available. The thiazolidinediones are theo-
retically attractive because they target a fundamental 
abnormality in type 2 DM, namely insulin resistance. 
However, all of these agents are currently more costly 
than metformin and sulfonylureas.
A reasonable treatment algorithm for initial ther-
apy uses metformin as initial therapy because of its 
efficacy, known side-effect profile, and relatively low 
cost (Fig.  19-14). Metformin has the advantage that 
it promotes mild weight loss, lowers insulin levels, 
and improves the lipid profile slightly. Based on SMBG 
results and the A1C, the dose of metformin should be 
increased until the glycemic target is achieved or maxi-
mum dose is reached.
Combination Therapy with Glucose-Lowering 
Agents  A number of combinations of therapeutic 
agents are successful in type 2 DM, and the dosing of 
agents in combination is the same as when the agents 
are used alone. Because mechanisms of action of the 
first and second agents used are different, the effect on 
glycemic control is usually additive. Several fixed dose 
combinations of oral agents are available, but evidence 
that they are superior to titration of a single agent to a 
maximum dose and then addition of a second agent 
is lacking. If adequate control is not achieved with the 
combination of two agents (based on reassessment 
of the A1C every 3 months), a third oral agent or basal 
insulin should be added (Fig. 19-14).
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
303
Treatment with insulin becomes necessary as type 2 DM 
enters the phase of relative insulin deficiency (as 
seen in long-standing DM) and is signaled by inad-
equate glycemic control with one or two oral glucose-
lowering agents. Insulin alone or in combination should 
be used in patients who fail to reach the glycemic tar-
get. For example, a single dose of long-acting insulin 
at bedtime is effective in combination with metformin. 
As endogenous insulin production falls further, mul-
tiple injections of long-acting and short-acting insulin 
regimens are necessary to control postprandial glu-
cose excursions. These insulin regimens are identical 
to the long-acting and short-acting combination regi-
mens discussed above for type 1 DM. Since the hyper-
glycemia of type 2 DM tends to be more “stable,” these 
regimens can be increased in 10% increments every 
2–3 days using the FBG results. The daily insulin dose 
required can become quite large (1–2 units/kg per day) 
as endogenous insulin production falls and insulin 
resistance persists. Individuals who require >1 unit/kg 
per day of long-acting insulin should be considered for 
combination therapy with metformin or a thiazolidine-
dione. The addition of metformin or a thiazolidinedione 
can reduce insulin requirements in some individuals 
with type 2 DM, while maintaining or even improving 
glycemic control. Insulin plus a thiazolidinedione
Insulin + metformin
Reassess A1C
Reassess A1C
Reassess A1C
Patient with type 2 diabetes
Medical nutrition therapy,
increased physical activity,
weight loss
+
metformin
Combination therapy
-metformin + second agent
Combination therapy
-metformin + two
other agents
Figure 19-14 
Glycemic management of type 2 diabetes. See text for 
discussion of treatment of severe hyperglycemia or symp-
tomatic hyperglycemia. Agents that can be combined with 
metformin include insulin secretagogues, thiazolidinedio-
nes, α-glucosidase inhibitors, DPP-IV inhibitors, and GLP-1 
receptor agonists. A1C, hemoglobin A1C.
promotes weight gain and is associated with peripheral 
edema. Addition of a thiazolidinedione to a patient’s 
insulin regimen may necessitate a reduction in the insu-
lin dose to avoid hypoglycemia.
Emerging Therapies  Whole pancreas transplan-
tation (performed concomitantly with a renal transplant)  
may normalize glucose tolerance and is an important 
therapeutic option in type 1 DM with ESRD, though it 
requires substantial expertise and is associated with 
the side effects of immunosuppression. Pancreatic islet 
transplantation has been plagued by limitations in pan-
creatic islet supply and graft survival and remains an 
area of clinical investigation. Many individuals with long-
standing type 1 DM still produce very small amounts of 
insulin or have insulin-positive cells within the pancreas. 
This suggests that beta cells may slowly regenerate but 
are quickly destroyed by the autoimmune process. Thus, 
efforts to suppress the autoimmune process and to 
stimulate beta cell regeneration are being tested both at 
the time of diagnosis and in years after the diagnosis of 
type 1 DM. Closed-loop pumps that infuse the appro-
priate amount of insulin in response to changing glu-
cose levels are potentially feasible now that continuous 
glucose-monitoring technology has been developed. 
New therapies under development for type 2 diabetes 
include an inhibitor of the sodium-glucose co-transporter 
in the kidney, activators of glucokinase, an inhibitor of  
11 β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1, and salsalate.
Bariatric surgery for markedly obese individuals with 
type 2 diabetes has shown considerable promise—
sometimes with resolution of the diabetes or major 
reductions in the needed dose of glucose-lowering 
therapies (Chap. 17). The ADA clinical guidelines state 
that bariatric surgery should be considered in individu-
als with DM and a BMI >35 kg/m2.
Complications of Therapy for 
Diabetes Mellitus
As with any therapy, the benefits of efforts directed 
toward glycemic control must be balanced against the 
risks of treatment. Side effects of intensive treatment 
include an increased frequency of serious hypoglyce-
mia, weight gain, increased economic costs, and greater 
demands on the patient. In the DCCT, quality of life 
was very similar in the intensive and standard therapy 
groups. The most serious complication of therapy for 
DM is hypoglycemia, and its treatment with oral glu-
cose or glucagon injection is discussed in Chap. 20. 
Severe, recurrent hypoglycemia warrants examination 
of treatment regimen and glycemic goal for the indi-
vidual patient. Weight gain occurs with most (insulin, 
insulin secretagogues, thiazolidinediones) but not all 
(metformin, α-glucosidase inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
304
agonists, DPP-IV inhibitors) therapies that improve 
glycemic control. The weight gain is partially due 
to the anabolic effects of insulin and the reduction in 
glucosuria. In the DCCT, individuals with the great-
est weight gain exhibited increases in LDL cholesterol 
and triglycerides as well as increases in blood pressure 
(both systolic and diastolic) similar to those seen in indi-
viduals with type 2 DM and insulin resistance. These 
effects could increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. 
As discussed previously, transient worsening of diabetic 
retinopathy or neuropathy sometimes accompanies 
improved glycemic control. As a result of recent con-
troversies about the optimal glycemic goal and concerns 
about safety, the FDA now requires information about 
the cardiovascular safety profile as part of its new evalu-
ation for treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Ongoing Aspects of 
Comprehensive Diabetes Care
The morbidity and mortality rates of DM-related com-
plications can be greatly reduced by timely and con-
sistent surveillance procedures (Table 19-13). These 
screening procedures are indicated for all individuals 
with DM, but many individuals with diabetes do not 
receive comprehensive diabetes care. Screening for dyslip-
idemia and hypertension should be performed annually. In 
addition to routine health maintenance, individuals with 
diabetes should also receive the pneumococcal and teta-
nus vaccines (at recommended intervals) and the influ-
enza vaccine (annually). As discussed above, aspirin 
therapy should be considered in many patients with dia-
betes (primary prevention in type 1 or type 2 DM men 
>50 years or women >60 years with one risk factor CV 
disease), but its role in primary prevention in low-risk 
individuals is uncertain and not recommended.
An annual comprehensive eye examination should be 
performed by a qualified optometrist or ophthalmologist. 
If abnormalities are detected, further evaluation and treat-
ment require an ophthalmologist skilled in diabetes-
related eye disease. Because many individuals with 
type 2 DM have had asymptomatic diabetes for several 
years before diagnosis, the ADA recommends the follow-
ing ophthalmologic examination schedule: (1) individuals 
with type 1 DM should have an initial eye examination 
within 5 years of diagnosis; (2) individuals with type 2 DM 
should have an initial eye examination at the time of dia-
betes diagnosis; (3) women with DM who are pregnant 
or contemplating pregnancy should have an eye exami-
nation prior to conception and during the first trimes-
ter; and (4) if eye exam is normal, repeat examination in 
2–3 years may be appropriate.
An annual foot examination should (1) assess blood 
flow, sensation (monofilament testing, pinprick, or tun-
ing fork), ankle reflexes, and nail care; (2) look for the 
presence of foot deformities such as hammer or claw 
toes and Charcot foot; and (3) identify sites of potential 
ulceration. The ADA recommends annual screening for 
distal symmetric neuropathy beginning with the initial 
diagnosis of diabetes and annual screening for autonomic 
neuropathy 5 years after diagnosis of type 1 DM and at 
the time of diagnosis of type 2 DM. This includes testing 
for loss of protective sensation (LOPS) using monofila-
ment testing plus one of the following tests: vibration, 
pinprick, ankle reflexes, or vibration perception thresh-
old (using a biothesiometer). If the monofilament test or 
one of the other tests is abnormal, the patient is diag-
nosed with LOPS and counseled accordingly. Calluses 
and nail deformities should be treated by a podiatrist; 
the patient should be discouraged from self-care of even 
minor foot problems but should be strongly encour-
aged to check his or her feet daily for any early lesions. 
Providers should consider screening for asymptomatic 
peripheral arterial disease using ankle-brachial index test-
ing in high-risk individuals.
An annual microalbuminuria measurement (albumin-to- 
creatinine ratio in spot urine) is advised in individuals 
with type 1 or type 2 DM (Fig. 19-10). The urine pro-
tein measurement in a routine urinalysis does not detect 
these low levels of albumin excretion (microalbumin-
uria). Screening for microalbuminuria should commence 
5 years after the onset of type 1 DM and at the time of 
diagnosis of type 2 DM. Regardless of protein excretion 
results, the GFR should be estimated using the serum 
creatinine in all patients on an annual basis.
Special Considerations in 
Diabetes Mellitus
Psychosocial Aspects
Because the individual with DM can face challenges that 
affect many aspects of daily life, psychosocial assessment and 
treatment are a critical part of providing comprehensive 
Table 19-13 
Guidelines for Ongoing Medical Care for 
Patients With Diabetes
•  Self-monitoring of blood glucose (individualized frequency)
•  A1C testing (2–4 times/year)
•  Patient education in diabetes management (annual)
•  Medical nutrition therapy and education (annual)
•  Eye examination (annual)
•  Foot examination (1–2 times/year by physician; daily by 
patient)
•  Screening for diabetic nephropathy (annual; see Fig. 19-11)
•  Blood pressure measurement (quarterly)
•  Lipid profile and serum creatinine (estimate GFR) (annual)
•  Influenza/pneumococcal immunizations
•  Consider antiplatelet therapy (see text)
Abbreviation: A1C, hemoglobin A1C.
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
305
diabetes care. The individual with DM must accept 
that he or she may develop complications related to 
DM. Even with considerable effort, normoglycemia can 
be an elusive goal, and solutions to worsening glyce-
mic control may not be easily identifiable. The patient 
should view him- or herself as an essential member of 
the diabetes care team and not as someone who is cared 
for by the diabetes management team. Emotional stress 
may provoke a change in behavior so that individuals 
no longer adhere to a dietary, exercise, or therapeu-
tic regimen. This can lead to the appearance of either 
hyper- or hypoglycemia. Eating disorders, including 
binge eating disorders, bulimia, and anorexia nervosa, 
appear to occur more frequently in individuals with 
type 1 or type 2 DM.
Management in the Hospitalized 
Patient
Virtually all medical and surgical subspecialties are 
involved in the care of hospitalized patients with diabe-
tes. Hyperglycemia, whether in a patient with known 
diabetes or in someone without known diabetes, 
appears to be a predictor of poor outcome in hospital-
ized patients. General anesthesia, surgery, infection, or 
concurrent illness raises the levels of counterregulatory 
hormones (cortisol, growth hormone, catecholamines, 
and glucagon) and cytokines that may lead to transient 
insulin resistance and hyperglycemia. These factors 
increase insulin requirements by increasing glucose pro-
duction and impairing glucose utilization and thus may 
worsen glycemic control. The concurrent illness or sur-
gical procedure may lead to variable insulin absorption 
and also prevent the patient with DM from eating nor-
mally, and thus may promote hypoglycemia. Glycemic 
control should be assessed on admission using the A1C. 
Electrolytes, renal function, and intravascular volume 
status should be assessed as well. The high prevalence of 
cardiovascular disease in individuals with DM (especially 
in type 2 DM) may require preoperative cardiovascular 
evaluation.
The goals of diabetes management during hospital-
ization are near-normoglycemia, avoidance of hypo-
glycemia, and transition back to the outpatient diabetes 
treatment regimen. Glycemic control appears to improve 
the clinical outcomes in a variety of settings, but optimal 
glycemic goals for the hospitalized patient are incom-
pletely defined. In a number of cross-sectional studies 
of patients with diabetes, a greater degree of hyperglyce-
mia was associated with worse cardiac, neurologic, and 
infectious outcomes. In some studies, patients who do 
not have preexisting diabetes but who develop mod-
est blood glucose elevations during their hospitalization 
appear to benefit from achieving near-normoglycemia 
using insulin treatment. However, a large randomized 
clinical trial (NICE-SUGAR) of individuals in the 
intensive care unit (most of whom were receiving 
mechanical ventilation) found an increased mortality 
rate and a greater number of episodes of severe hypo-
glycemia with very strict glycemic control (target BG 
of 4.5–6 mmol/L or 81–108 mg/dL) compared to indi-
viduals with a more moderate glycemic goal (mean 
blood glucose of 8 mmol/L or 144 mg/dL). Currently, 
most data suggest that very strict blood glucose con-
trol in acutely ill patients likely worsens outcomes and 
increases the frequency of hypoglycemia. The ADA 
suggests these glycemic goals for hospitalized patients: 
(1) in critically ill patients: glucose of 7.8–10.0 mmol/L 
or 140–180 mg/dL; (2) in non–critically ill patients: 
pre-meal glucose <7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL) and at 
other times BG <10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL).
The physician caring for an individual with diabetes 
in the perioperative period, during times of infection 
or serious physical illness, or simply when the patient 
is fasting for a diagnostic procedure must monitor the 
plasma glucose vigilantly, adjust the diabetes treat-
ment regimen, and provide glucose infusion as needed. 
Hypoglycemia is frequent in hospitalized patients, and 
many of these episodes are avoidable. Measures to 
reduce or prevent hypoglycemia include frequent glu-
cose monitoring and anticipating potential modifi-
cations of insulin/glucose administration because of 
changes in the clinical situation or treatment (tapering 
of glucocorticoids, etc.) or interruption of enteral or 
parenteral infusions or PO intake.
Depending on the severity of the patient’s illness 
and the hospital setting, the physician can use either 
an insulin infusion or SC insulin. Insulin infusions are 
preferred in the ICU or in a clinically unstable set-
ting. The absorption of SC insulin may be variable in 
such situations. Insulin infusions can also effectively 
control plasma glucose in the perioperative period and 
when the patient is unable to take anything by mouth. 
Regular insulin is preferred over insulin analogues for 
IV insulin infusion since it is less expensive and equally 
effective. The physician must consider carefully the 
clinical setting in which an insulin infusion will be uti-
lized, including whether adequate ancillary personnel 
are available to monitor the plasma glucose frequently 
and whether they can adjust the insulin infusion rate to 
maintain the plasma glucose within the optimal range. 
Insulin-infusion algorithms should integrate the insulin 
sensitivity of the patient, frequent blood glucose moni-
toring, and the trend of changes in the blood glucose 
to determine the insulin-infusion rate. Insulin-infusion 
algorithms jointly developed and implemented by nurs-
ing and physician staff are advised. Because of the short 
half-life of IV regular insulin, it is necessary to admin-
ister long-acting insulin prior to discontinuation of the 
insulin infusion (2–4 h) to avoid a period of insulin 
deficiency.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
306
In patients who are not critically ill or not in the 
ICU, basal or “scheduled” insulin is provided by SC 
long-acting insulin supplemented by prandial and/or 
“corrective” insulin using a short-acting insulin (insulin 
analogues preferred). The use of “sliding scale” short-
acting insulin alone, where no insulin is given unless the 
blood glucose is elevated, is inadequate for in-patient 
glucose management and should not be used. The 
short-acting, preprandial insulin dose should include 
coverage for food consumption (based on anticipated 
carbohydrate intake) plus a corrective or supplemental 
insulin based on the patient’s insulin sensitivity and the 
blood glucose. For example, if the patient is thin (and 
likely insulin sensitive), a corrective insulin supplement 
might be 1 unit for each 2.7 mmol/L (50 mg/dL) over 
the glucose target. If the patient is obese and insulin 
resistant, then the insulin supplement might be 2 units 
for each 2.7 mmol/L (50 mg/dL) over the glucose tar-
get. It is critical to individualize the regimen and adjust 
the basal or “scheduled” insulin dose frequently, based 
on the corrective insulin required. A “consistent car-
bohydrate diabetes meal plan” for hospitalized patients 
provides a predictable amount of carbohydrate for a 
particular meal each day (but not necessarily the same 
amount for breakfast, lunch, and supper). The hospital 
diet should be determined by a nutritionist; terms such 
as ADA diet or low-sugar diet are no longer used.
Individuals with type 1 DM who are undergoing 
general anesthesia and surgery, or who are seriously ill, 
should receive continuous insulin, either through an 
IV insulin infusion or by SC administration of a reduced 
dose of long-acting insulin. Short-acting insulin alone is 
insufficient. Prolongation of a surgical procedure or delay 
in the recovery room is not uncommon and may result in 
periods of insulin deficiency leading to DKA. Insulin 
infusion is the preferred method for managing patients 
with type 1 DM in the perioperative period or when 
serious concurrent illness is present (0.5–1.0 units/h of 
regular insulin). If the diagnostic or surgical procedure is 
brief and performed under local or regional anesthesia, 
a reduced dose of SC long-acting insulin may suffice 
(30–50% reduction, with short-acting insulin withheld 
or reduced). This approach facilitates the transition back 
to long-acting insulin after the procedure. Glucose may 
be infused to prevent hypoglycemia. The blood glucose 
should be monitored frequently during the illness or in 
the perioperative period.
Individuals with type 2 DM can be managed with 
either an insulin infusion or SC long-acting insulin 
(25–50% reduction depending on clinical setting) plus 
preprandial, short-acting insulin. Oral glucose-lowering 
agents should be discontinued upon admission and are 
not useful in regulating the plasma glucose in clinical sit-
uations where the insulin requirements and glucose intake 
are changing rapidly. Moreover, these oral agents may 
be dangerous if the patient is fasting (e.g., hypoglycemia 
with sulfonylureas). Metformin should be withheld 
when radiographic contrast media will be given or 
if severe CHF, acidosis, or declining renal function is 
present.
Total parenteral nutrition
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) greatly increases insu-
lin requirements. In addition, individuals not previously 
known to have DM may become hyperglycemic dur-
ing TPN and require insulin treatment. IV insulin infu-
sion is the preferred treatment for hyperglycemia, and 
rapid titration to the required insulin dose is done most 
efficiently using a separate insulin infusion. After the 
total insulin dose has been determined, insulin may be 
added directly to the TPN solution or, preferably, given 
as a separate infusion. Often, individuals receiving either 
TPN or enteral nutrition receive their caloric loads 
continuously and not at “meal times”; consequently, SC 
insulin regimens must be adjusted.
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids increase insulin resistance, decrease glu-
cose utilization, increase hepatic glucose production, and 
impair insulin secretion. These changes lead to a wors-
ening of glycemic control in individuals with DM and 
may precipitate diabetes in other individuals (“steroid- 
induced diabetes”). The effects of glucocorticoids on 
glucose homeostasis are dose related, usually reversible, 
and most pronounced in the postprandial period. If the 
FPG is near the normal range, oral diabetes agents (e.g., 
sulfonylureas, metformin) may be sufficient to reduce 
hyperglycemia. If the FPG >11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL), 
oral agents are usually not efficacious and insulin ther-
apy is required. Short-acting insulin may be required to 
supplement long-acting insulin in order to control post-
prandial glucose excursions.
Reproductive issues
Reproductive capacity in either men or women with 
DM appears to be normal. Menstrual cycles may be asso-
ciated with alterations in glycemic control in women 
with DM. Pregnancy is associated with marked insulin 
resistance; the increased insulin requirements often pre-
cipitate DM and lead to the diagnosis of GDM. Glucose, 
which at high levels is a teratogen to the developing 
fetus, readily crosses the placenta, but insulin does not. 
Thus, hyperglycemia from the maternal circulation may 
stimulate insulin secretion in the fetus. The anabolic 
and growth effects of insulin may result in macrosomia. 
GDM complicates ∼7% of pregnancies in the United States. 
The incidence of GDM is greatly increased in certain 
ethnic groups, including African Americans and Latinas, 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diabetes Mellitus
307
consistent with a similar increased risk of type 2 DM. 
Current recommendations advise screening for glucose 
intolerance between weeks 24 and 28 of pregnancy 
in women with increased risk for GDM (≥25 years; 
obesity; family history of DM; member of an ethnic 
group such as Latina, Native American, Asian American, 
African American, or Pacific Islander). Therapy for 
GDM is similar to that for individuals with pregnancy-
associated diabetes and involves MNT and insulin, if 
hyperglycemia persists. Oral glucose-lowering agents 
are not approved for use during pregnancy, but stud-
ies using metformin or glyburide have shown efficacy 
and have not found toxicity. However, most physicians 
use insulin to treat GDM. With current practices, the 
morbidity and mortality rates of the mother with GDM 
and the fetus are not different from those in the non-
diabetic population. Individuals who develop GDM are 
at marked increased risk for developing type 2 DM in 
the future and should be screened periodically for DM. 
Most individuals with GDM revert to normal glucose 
tolerance after delivery, but some will continue to have 
overt diabetes or impairment of glucose tolerance after 
delivery. In addition, children of women with GDM 
appear to be at risk for obesity and glucose intolerance 
and have an increased risk of diabetes beginning in the 
later stages of adolescence.
Pregnancy in individuals with known DM requires 
meticulous planning and adherence to strict treatment 
regimens. Intensive diabetes management and normal-
ization of the A1C are essential for individuals with 
existing DM who are planning pregnancy. The most 
crucial period of glycemic control is soon after fertilization. 
The risk of fetal malformations is increased 4–10 times in 
individuals with uncontrolled DM at the time of con-
ception, and normal plasma glucose during the precon-
ception period and throughout the periods of organ 
development in the fetus should be the goal.
Lipodystrophic DM
Lipodystrophy, or the loss of subcutaneous fat tissue, 
may be generalized in certain genetic conditions such 
as leprechaunism. Generalized lipodystrophy is associ-
ated with severe insulin resistance and is often accompa-
nied by acanthosis nigricans and dyslipidemia. Localized 
lipodystrophy associated with insulin injections has been 
reduced considerably by the use of human insulin.
Protease inhibitors and lipodystrophy
Protease inhibitors used in the treatment of HIV disease 
have been associated with a centripetal accumulation of 
fat (visceral and abdominal area), accumulation of fat in 
the dorsocervical region, loss of extremity fat, decreased 
insulin sensitivity (elevations of the fasting insulin level 
and reduced glucose tolerance on IV glucose tolerance 
testing), and dyslipidemia. Although many aspects of 
the physical appearance of these individuals resemble 
Cushing’s syndrome, increased cortisol levels do not 
account for this appearance. The possibility remains 
that this is related to HIV infection by some undefined 
mechanism, since some features of the syndrome were 
observed before the introduction of protease inhibi-
tors. Therapy for HIV-related lipodystrophy is not well 
established.
 Philip E. Cryer  I   Stephen N. Davis 
308
 Hypoglycemia is most commonly caused by drugs used 
to treat diabetes mellitus or by exposure to other drugs, 
including alcohol. However, a number of other dis-
orders, including critical organ failure, sepsis and ina-
nition, hormone defi ciencies, non–beta-cell tumors, 
insulinoma, and prior gastric surgery, may cause hypo-
glycemia  ( Table 20-1 ) . Hypoglycemia is most con-
vincingly documented by  Whipple’s triad : (1) symptoms 
consistent with hypoglycemia, (2) a low plasma glucose 
concentration measured with a precise method (not a
 HYPOGLYCEMIA 
 CHAPTER 20 
glucose monitor), and (3) relief of those symptoms after 
the plasma glucose level is raised. The lower limit of 
the fasting plasma glucose concentration is normally 
approximately 70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L), but substan-
tially lower venous glucose levels occur normally, late 
after a meal. Glucose levels <55 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L) 
with symptoms that are relieved promptly after the 
glucose level is raised document hypoglycemia. Hypo-
glycemia can cause serious morbidity; if severe and pro-
longed, it can be fatal. It should be considered in any 
patient with episodes of confusion, an altered level of 
consciousness, or a seizure. 
 SYSTEMIC GLUCOSE BALANCE AND 
GLUCOSE COUNTERREGULATION 
 Glucose is an obligate metabolic fuel for the brain under 
physiologic conditions. The brain cannot synthesize 
glucose or store more than a few minutes’ supply as 
glycogen and therefore requires a continuous supply 
of glucose from the arterial circulation. As the arterial 
plasma glucose concentration falls below the physiologic 
range, blood-to-brain glucose transport becomes insuffi -
cient to support brain energy metabolism and function. 
However, redundant glucose counterregulatory mecha-
nisms normally prevent or rapidly correct hypoglycemia. 
 Plasma glucose concentrations are normally maintained 
within a relatively narrow range, roughly 70–110 mg/dL
(3.9–6.1 mmol/L) in the fasting state with transient 
higher excursions after a meal, despite wide variations in 
exogenous glucose delivery from meals and in endog-
enous glucose utilization by, for example, exercising 
muscle. Between meals and during fasting, plasma glu-
cose levels are maintained by endogenous glucose pro-
duction, hepatic glycogenolysis, and hepatic (and renal) 
gluconeogenesis  ( Fig. 20-1 ) . Although hepatic glyco-
gen stores are usually suffi cient to maintain plasma glu-
cose levels for approximately 8 h, this time period can be 
Table 20-1
 Causes of hyPoglyCeMia in adults 
 III or medicated individual 
 1. Drugs 
  
Insulin or insulin secretagogue 
  
Alcohol 
  
Others 
 2. Critical illness 
  
Hepatic, renal, or cardiac failure 
  
Sepsis 
  
Inanition 
 3. Hormone defi ciency 
  
Cortisol 
 Glucagon and epinephrine (in insulin-defi cient 
diabetes) 
 4. Non–islet cell tumor 
 Seemingly well individual 
 5. Endogenous hyperinsulinism 
  
Insulinoma 
  
Functional beta-cell disorders (nesidioblastosis) 
  
 Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia 
  
 Post–gastric bypass hypoglycemia 
  
Insulin autoimmune hypoglycemia 
  
 Antibody to insulin 
  
 Antibody to insulin receptor 
  
Insulin secretagogue 
  
Other 
 6. Accidental, surreptitious, or malicious hypoglycemia 
 Source: From PE Cryer et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:709, 2009. 
© The Endocrine Society, 2009.
 
CHAPTER 20
Hypoglycemia
309
shorter if glucose demand is increased by exercise or if 
glycogen stores are depleted by illness or starvation.
Gluconeogenesis normally requires low insulin lev-
els and the presence of anti-insulin (counterregulatory) 
hormones, together with a coordinated supply of pre-
cursors from muscle and adipose tissue to the liver (and 
kidneys). Muscle provides lactate, pyruvate, alanine, 
glutamine, and other amino acids. Triglycerides in adi-
pose tissue are broken down into fatty acids and glyc-
erol, which is a gluconeogenic precursor. Fatty acids 
provide an alternative oxidative fuel to tissues other 
than the brain (which requires glucose).
Systemic glucose balance—maintenance of the nor-
mal plasma glucose concentration—is accomplished by 
a network of hormones, neural signals, and substrate 
effects that regulate endogenous glucose production 
and glucose utilization by tissues other than the brain 
(Chap. 19). Among the regulatory factors, insulin plays 
a dominant role (Table 20-2; Fig. 20-1). As plasma
glucose levels decline within the physiologic range in 
the fasting state, pancreatic beta-cell insulin secretion 
decreases, thereby increasing hepatic glycogenolysis and 
hepatic (and renal) gluconeogenesis. Low insulin levels also 
reduce glucose utilization in peripheral tissues, inducing 
lipolysis and proteolysis, thereby releasing gluconeogenic 
precursors. Thus, a decrease in insulin secretion is the first 
defense against hypoglycemia.
As plasma glucose levels decline just below the 
physiologic range, glucose counterregulatory (plasma 
glucose–raising) hormones are released (Table 20-2; 
Fig. 20-1). Among these, pancreatic α-cell glucagon, 
which stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis, plays a primary 
role. Glucagon is the second defense against hypogly-
cemia. Adrenomedullary epinephrine, which stimulates 
hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis (and renal 
gluconeogenesis), is not normally critical. However, it 
becomes critical when glucagon is deficient. Epineph-
rine is the third defense against hypoglycemia. When 
hypoglycemia is prolonged beyond ∼4 hours, cortisol 
and growth hormone also support glucose production 
and limit glucose utilization, albeit only ∼20% of that of 
epinephrine.
As plasma glucose levels fall to lower levels, symp-
toms prompt the behavioral defense against hypogly-
cemia, including the ingestion of food (Table 20-2; 
Fig. 20-1).
The normal glycemic thresholds for these responses 
to decreasing plasma glucose concentrations are shown 
in Table 20-2. However, these thresholds are dynamic. 
They shift to higher-than-normal glucose levels in people 
with poorly controlled diabetes who can experience 
symptoms of hypoglycemia when their glucose levels 
decline into the normal range. On the other hand, they 
shift to lower-than-normal glucose levels in people with 
recurrent hypoglycemia, e.g., those with aggressively treated 
diabetes or an insulinoma. Such patients have symptoms 
at glucose levels lower than those that cause symptoms in 
healthy individuals.
Brain
Pituitary
Growth
hormone
(ACTH)
Adrenal
cortex
Cortisol
Pancreas
Arterial Glucose
Insulin
Liver
Kidneys
Glucose
production
Arterial
glucose
Fat
Muscle
Gluconeogenic
precursor (lactate,
amino acids, glycerol)
Glucagon
Sympathoadrenal
outflow
Sympathetic
postganglionic
neurons
Adrenal
medullae
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
Acetylcholine
Glucose
clearance
Symptoms
(Ingestion)
Figure 20-1
Physiology of glucose counterregulation—the mechanisms 
that normally prevent or rapidly correct hypoglycemia.
In insulin-deficient diabetes, the key counterregulatory 
responses—suppression of insulin and increase of glucagon— 
are lost, and the stimulation of sympathoadrenal outflow is 
attenuated.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
310
Clinical Manifestations
Neuroglycopenic symptoms of hypoglycemia are the 
direct result of central nervous system (CNS) glucose 
deprivation. They include behavioral changes, confu-
sion, fatigue, seizure, loss of consciousness, and, if hypo-
glycemia is severe and prolonged, death. Neurogenic 
(or autonomic) symptoms of hypoglycemia are the 
result of the perception of physiologic changes caused 
by the CNS-mediated sympathoadrenal discharge trig-
gered by hypoglycemia. They include adrenergic symp-
toms (mediated largely by norepinephrine released from 
sympathetic postganglionic neurons but perhaps also by 
epinephrine released from the adrenal medullae) such 
as palpitations, tremor, and anxiety. They also include 
cholinergic symptoms (mediated by acetylcholine released 
from sympathetic postganglionic neurons) such as sweat-
ing, hunger, and paresthesias. Clearly, these are non-
specific symptoms. Their attribution to hypoglycemia 
requires a corresponding low plasma glucose concentra-
tion and their resolution after the glucose level is raised 
(Whipple’s triad).
Common signs of hypoglycemia include diaphore-
sis and pallor. Heart rate and systolic blood pressure are 
typically increased but may not be raised in an individual 
who has experienced repeated, recent episodes of hypo-
glycemia. Neuroglycopenic manifestations are often 
observable. Transient focal neurologic deficits occur 
occasionally. Permanent neurologic deficits are rare.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Hypoglycemia is most commonly a result of the treat-
ment of diabetes. This topic is therefore addressed 
before considering other causes of hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia in Diabetes
Impact and frequency
Hypoglycemia is the limiting factor in the glycemic 
management of diabetes. First, it causes recurrent mor-
bidity in most people with type 1 diabetes (T1DM) 
and many with advanced type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and 
is sometimes fatal. Second, it precludes maintenance of 
euglycemia over a lifetime of diabetes and thus full real-
ization of the well-established vascular benefits of glyce-
mic control. Third, it causes a vicious cycle of recurrent 
hypoglycemia by producing hypoglycemia-associated 
autonomic failure—the clinical syndromes of defec-
tive glucose counterregulation and of hypoglycemia 
unawareness.
Hypoglycemia is a fact of life for people with T1DM. 
They suffer an average of two episodes of symptom-
atic hypoglycemia per week and at least one episode of 
severe, at least temporarily disabling, hypoglycemia each 
year. An estimated 6–10% of people with T1DM die as 
a result of hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia occurs less fre-
quently in T2DM. However, its prevalence in insulin-
requiring T2DM is greater than commonly appreciated. 
Recent studies investigating insulin pump or multiple 
injection therapies have revealed a hypoglycemia preva-
lence approaching 70%. Metformin, thiazolidinedio-
nes, α-glucosidase inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1) receptor agonists, and dipeptidyl peptidase-IV 
(DPP-IV) inhibitors should not cause hypoglycemia. 
However, they increase the risk when combined with 
an insulin secretagogue, such as one of the sulfonylureas 
or glinides, or with insulin. Notably, the frequency of 
hypoglycemia approaches that in T1DM as persons with 
T2DM develop absolute insulin deficiency and require 
more complex treatment with insulin.
Table 20-2
Physiologic Responses to Decreasing Plasma Glucose Concentrations
Response
Glycemic Threshold, 
mmol/L (mg/dL)
Physiologic  
Effects
Role in the Prevention or Correction of 
Hypoglycemia (Glucose Counterregulation)
↓ Insulin
4.4–4.7 (80–85)
↑ Ra (↓ Rd)
Primary glucose regulatory factor/first defense against 
hypoglycemia
↑ Glucagon
3.6–3.9 (65–70)
↑ Ra
Primary glucose counterregulatory factor/second 
defense against hypoglycemia
↑ Epinephrine
3.6–3.9 (65–70)
↑ Ra, ↓ Rc
Third defense against hypoglycemia, critical when  
glucagon is deficient
↑ Cortisol and 
growth hormone
3.6–3.9 (65–70)
↑ Ra, ↓ Rc
Involved in defense against prolonged hypoglycemia, 
not critical
Symptoms
2.8–3.1 (50–55)
Recognition of 
hypoglycemia
Prompt behavioral defense against hypoglycemia  
(food ingestion)
↓ Cognition
<2.8 (<50)
—
(Compromises behavioral defense against hypoglycemia)
Note: Ra, rate of glucose appearance, glucose production by the liver and kidneys; Rc, rate of glucose clearance, glucose utilization relative to the 
ambient plasma glucose concentration; Rd, rate of glucose disappearance, glucose utilization by the brain (which is unaltered by the glucoregula-
tory hormones) and by insulin-sensitive tissues such as skeletal muscle (which is regulated by insulin, epinephrine, cortisol, and growth hormone).
Source: From PE Cryer: Hypoglycemia, in Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 11th ed, HM Kronenberg et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.
 
CHAPTER 20
Hypoglycemia
311
Conventional risk factors
The conventional risk factors for hypoglycemia in dia-
betes are based on the premise that relative or absolute 
insulin excess is the sole determinant of risk. Relative 
or absolute insulin excess occurs when (1) insulin (or 
insulin secretagogue) doses are excessive, ill-timed, or 
of the wrong type; (2) the influx of exogenous glucose 
is reduced (e.g., during an overnight fast or following 
missed meals or snacks); (3) insulin-independent glucose 
utilization is increased (e.g., during exercise); (4) sensitiv-
ity to insulin is increased (e.g., with improved glycemic 
control, in the middle of the night, late after exercise, 
or with increased fitness or weight loss); (5) endogenous 
glucose production is reduced (e.g., following alcohol 
ingestion); and (6) insulin clearance is reduced (e.g., in 
renal failure). However, these conventional risk factors 
alone explain a minority of episodes; other factors are 
typically involved.
Hypoglycemia-associated autonomic failure
While marked insulin excess alone can cause hypo-
glycemia, iatrogenic hypoglycemia in diabetes is typi-
cally the result of the interplay of relative or absolute 
therapeutic insulin excess and compromised physi-
ologic and behavioral defenses against falling plasma 
glucose concentrations (Table 20-2; Fig. 20-2). Defec-
tive glucose counterregulation compromises physiologic 
defense (particularly decrements in insulin and incre-
ments in glucagon and epinephrine), and hypoglycemia 
unawareness compromises behavioral defense (ingestion 
of carbohydrate).
Defective glucose counterregulation
In the setting of absolute endogenous insulin deficiency, 
insulin levels do not decrease as plasma glucose levels 
fall; the first defense against hypoglycemia is lost. Fur-
thermore, probably because the decrement in intraislet 
insulin is normally a signal to stimulate glucagon secre-
tion, glucagon levels do not increase as plasma glucose 
levels fall further; the second defense against hypogly-
cemia is lost. Finally, the increase in epinephrine lev-
els, the third defense against hypoglycemia, in response 
to a given level of hypoglycemia is typically attenu-
ated. The glycemic threshold for the sympathoadrenal 
(adrenomedullary epinephrine and sympathetic neural 
norepinephrine) response is shifted to lower plasma glu-
cose concentrations. That is typically the result of recent 
antecedent iatrogenic hypoglycemia. In the setting of 
absent decrements in insulin and of absent increments 
in glucagon, the attenuated increment in epinephrine 
causes the clinical syndrome of defective glucose coun-
terregulation. Affected patients are at twenty-five-fold 
Early T2DM
(Relative β-cell failure)
Marked absolute Therapeutic
Hyperinsulinemia →
Falling glucose levels
Isolated episodes
of hypoglycemia
Advanced T2DM and T1DM
(Absolute β-cell failure)
Relative or mild-moderate absolute
Therapeutic Hyperinsulinemia →
Falling glucose levels
Attenuated sympathoadrenal
responses to hypoglycemia
(HAAF)
β-cell failure → No ↓
Insulin and No ↑ Glucagon
Episodes of Hypoglycemia
Sleep
Exercise
↓ Adrenomedullary
epinephrine responses
↓ Sympathetic
neural responses
Hypoglycemia
unawareness
Defective glucose
counterregulation
Recurrent
hypoglycemia
HYPOGLYCEMIA-ASSOCIATED AUTONOMIC FAILURE
Figure 20-2
Hypoglycemia-associated autonomic failure in insulin-deficient diabetes.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
312
or greater increased risk of severe iatrogenic hypogly-
cemia during aggressive glycemic therapy of their dia-
betes compared with those with normal epinephrine 
responses. This functional, and reversible, disorder is 
distinct from classical diabetic autonomic neuropathy, a 
structural and irreversible disorder.
Hypoglycemia unawareness
The attenuated sympathoadrenal response (largely the 
reduced sympathetic neural response) to hypoglycemia 
causes the clinical syndrome of hypoglycemia unaware-
ness, i.e., loss of the warning adrenergic and cholinergic 
symptoms that previously allowed the patient to recog-
nize developing hypoglycemia and therefore abort the 
episode by ingesting carbohydrates. Affected patients 
are at a sixfold increased risk of severe iatrogenic hypo-
glycemia during aggressive glycemic therapy of their 
diabetes.
Hypoglycemia-associated autonomic failure
The concept of hypoglycemia-associated autonomic 
failure (HAAF) in diabetes posits that recent anteced-
ent iatrogenic hypoglycemia (or sleep or prior exercise) 
causes both defective glucose counterregulation (by 
reducing the epinephrine response to a given level of 
subsequent hypoglycemia in the setting of absent insulin 
and glucagon responses) and hypoglycemia unawareness 
(by reducing the sympathoadrenal response to a given 
level of subsequent hypoglycemia). These impaired 
responses create a vicious cycle of recurrent iatrogenic 
hypoglycemia (Fig. 20-2). Hypoglycemia unawareness, 
and to some extent the reduced epinephrine compo-
nent of defective glucose counterregulation, is revers-
ible by as little as 2–3 weeks of scrupulous avoidance of 
hypoglycemia in most affected patients.
Based on this pathophysiology, additional risk factors 
for hypoglycemia in diabetes include (1) absolute insu-
lin deficiency that indicates that insulin levels will not 
decrease and glucagon levels will not increase as plasma 
glucose levels fall; (2) a history of severe hypoglycemia 
or of hypoglycemia unawareness, implying recent ante-
cedent hypoglycemia, as well as prior exercise or sleep, 
that indicates that the sympathoadrenal response will be 
attenuated; and (3) lower HbA1C levels or lower glyce-
mic goals that, all other factors being equal, increase the 
probability of recent antecedent hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia risk factor reduction
Several recent multicenter randomized controlled tri-
als investigating the potential benefits of tight glucose 
control in either inpatient or outpatient settings have 
reported a high prevalence of severe hypoglycemia. In 
the NICE-SUGAR study, attempts to control in-hospital 
plasma glucose values toward physiologic levels resulted 
in increased mortality. The ADVANCE, ACCORD, 
and VADT studies also reported a significant incidence 
of severe hypoglycemia in T2DM individuals. Some-
what surprisingly, all three studies found little or no benefit 
of intensive glucose control to reduce macrovascular events 
in T2DM. In fact, the ACCORD study was ended early 
due to increased mortality in the intensive glucose con-
trol arm. Whether iatrogenic hypoglycemia was the cause 
of the increased mortality is not known. In the light of 
the above findings, new recommendations and para-
digms have been formulated. Whereas there is little 
debate regarding the need to reduce hyperglycemia in 
hospitalized patients, the glycemic maintenance goals 
have been modified to fall between 140 and 180 mg/dL. 
Thus, the benefits from insulin therapy and reduced 
hyperglycemia can be obtained while reducing the prev-
alence of hypoglycemia.
Similarly, evidence exists that intensive glucose con-
trol can reduce the prevalence of microvascular disease 
in both T1DM and T2DM. These benefits need to be 
weighed against the increased prevalence of hypogly-
cemia. The level of glucose control (HBA1C) should be 
evaluated for each patient. Multicenter trials have dem-
onstrated that patients with recently diagnosed T1DM 
or T2DM can have better glycemic control with less 
hypoglycemia. In addition, there is still long-term bene­
fit in reducing HBA1C from higher to lower levels, 
albeit still above recommended levels. Perhaps a reason-
able therapeutic goal is the lowest HBA1C that does not 
cause severe hypoglycemia and preserves awareness of 
hypoglycemia.
Pancreatic transplantation (both whole organ and 
islet cells) has been used as a treatment option for recur-
rent severe hypoglycemia. Generally, rates of hypo-
glycemia are reduced following transplantation. This 
appears to be due to more physiologic insulin and glu-
cagon responses during hypoglycemia following whole 
organ transplant and resolution of insulin modulation 
following islet cell transplantation.
The use of continuous glucose monitors appears 
promising as a method of reducing hypoglycemia while 
improving HBA1C. Other interventions to stimulate 
counterregulatory responses such as terbutaline, fluox-
etine, thiazolidinediones, or fructose remain experimental 
and have not been subjected to large-scale clinical trials.
Thus, intensive glycemic therapy (Chap. 19) needs to 
be applied in combination with patient education and 
empowerment; frequent self-monitoring of blood glu-
cose; flexible insulin (and other drug) regimens includ-
ing the use of insulin analogues (both short and longer 
acting); individualized glycemic goals; ongoing profes-
sional guidance and support; and consideration of both 
the conventional risk factors and those indicative of 
compromised glucose counterregulation. Given a history 
of hypoglycemia unawareness, a 2- to 3-week period of 
scrupulous avoidance of hypoglycemia is indicated.
 
CHAPTER 20
Hypoglycemia
313
Hypoglycemia Without Diabetes
There are many causes of hypoglycemia (Table 20-1). 
Because hypoglycemia is common in insulin- or insulin 
secretagogue–treated diabetes, it is often reasonable to 
assume that a clinically suspicious episode was the result 
of hypoglycemia. On the other hand, because hypo-
glycemia is rare in the absence of relevant drug–treated 
diabetes, it is reasonable to conclude that a hypoglycemic 
disorder is present only in patients in whom Whipple’s 
triad can be demonstrated.
Particularly in patients who are ill or medicated, the 
initial diagnostic considerations should focus on medi-
cations, and then critical illnesses, hormone deficiency, 
or non–islet-cell tumor hypoglycemia. In the absence 
of any of these and in a seemingly well individual, the 
focus should shift to the possibilities of endogenous 
hyperinsulinism or accidental, surreptitious, or even 
malicious hypoglycemia.
Drugs
Insulin and insulin secretagogues suppress glucose pro-
duction and stimulate glucose utilization. Ethanol blocks 
gluconeogenesis but not glycogenolysis. Thus, alcohol-
induced hypoglycemia typically occurs after a several-
day ethanol binge during which the person eats little 
food, thereby causing glycogen depletion. Ethanol is 
usually measurable in blood at the time of presentation, 
but its levels correlate poorly with plasma glucose con-
centrations. Because gluconeogenesis becomes the pre-
dominant route of glucose production during prolonged 
hypoglycemia, alcohol can contribute to the progression 
of hypoglycemia in patients with insulin-treated diabetes.
A large number of other drugs have been associated 
with hypoglycemia. These include commonly used 
drugs such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-
tors and angiotensin receptor antagonists, β-adrenergic 
receptor antagonists, quinolone antibiotics, indometha-
cin, quinine, and sulfonamides, among many others.
Critical illness
Among hospitalized patients, serious illnesses such as 
renal, hepatic, or cardiac failure; sepsis; and inanition are 
second only to drugs as causes of hypoglycemia.
Rapid and extensive hepatic destruction (e.g., toxic 
hepatitis) causes fasting hypoglycemia because the liver 
is the major site of endogenous glucose production. 
The mechanism of hypoglycemia in patients with car-
diac failure is unknown. It may involve hepatic conges-
tion and hypoxia. Although the kidneys are a source of 
glucose production, hypoglycemia in patients with renal 
failure is also caused by the reduced clearance of insulin 
and reduced mobilization of gluconeogenic precursors 
in renal failure.
Sepsis is a relatively common cause of hypoglyce-
mia. Increased glucose utilization is induced by cytokine 
production in macrophage-rich tissues such as the liver, 
spleen, and lung. Hypoglycemia develops if glucose 
production fails to keep pace. Cytokine-induced inhibi-
tion of gluconeogenesis in the setting of nutritional gly-
cogen depletion, in combination with hepatic and renal 
hypoperfusion, may also contribute to hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia can be seen with starvation, perhaps 
because of loss of whole-body fat stores and subsequent 
depletion of gluconeogenic precursors (e.g., amino 
acids), necessitating increased glucose utilization.
Hormone deficiencies
Neither cortisol nor growth hormone is critical to the 
prevention of hypoglycemia, at least in adults. None-
theless, hypoglycemia can occur with prolonged fasting 
in patients with primary adrenocortical failure (Addison’s 
disease) or hypopituitarism. Anorexia and weight loss 
are typical features of chronic cortisol deficiency and 
likely result in glycogen depletion. Cortisol deficiency is 
associated with impaired gluconeogenesis and low levels 
of gluconeogenic precursors, suggesting that substrate-
limited gluconeogenesis, in the setting of glycogen deple-
tion, is the cause of hypoglycemia. Growth hormone 
deficiency can cause hypoglycemia in young children. In 
addition to extended fasting, high rates of glucose utiliza-
tion (e.g., during exercise or in pregnancy) or low rates 
of glucose production (e.g., following alcohol ingestion) 
can precipitate hypoglycemia in adults with previously 
unrecognized hypopituitarism.
Hypoglycemia is not a feature of the epinephrine-
deficient state that results from bilateral adrenalectomy, 
when glucocorticoid replacement is adequate, nor does 
it occur during pharmacologic adrenergic blockade 
when other glucoregulatory systems are intact. Com-
bined deficiencies of glucagon and epinephrine play a 
key role in the pathogenesis of iatrogenic hypoglycemia 
in people with insulin-deficient diabetes as discussed 
earlier. Otherwise, deficiencies of these hormones are 
not usually considered in the differential diagnosis of a 
hypoglycemic disorder.
Non–beta-cell tumors
Fasting hypoglycemia, often termed non–islet-cell 
tumor hypoglycemia, occurs occasionally in patients with 
large mesenchymal or epithelial tumors (e.g., hepatomas, 
adrenocortical carcinomas, carcinoids). The glucose kinetic 
patterns resemble those of hyperinsulinism (see next sec-
tion), but insulin secretion is suppressed appropriately 
during hypoglycemia. In most instances, hypoglycemia 
is due to overproduction of an incompletely processed 
form of insulin-like growth factor II (“big IGF-II”) 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
314
that does not complex normally with circulating bind-
ing proteins and thus more readily gains access to tar-
get tissues. The tumors are usually apparent clinically, 
plasma IGF-II to IGF-I ratios are high, and free IGF-II 
levels [and levels of pro-IGF-II (E1-21)] are elevated. 
Curative surgery is seldom possible, but reduction of 
tumor bulk may ameliorate hypoglycemia. Therapy 
with a glucocorticoid, growth hormone, or both has 
also been reported to alleviate hypoglycemia. Hypogly-
cemia attributed to ectopic IGF-I production has been 
reported but is rare.
Endogenous hyperinsulinism
Hypoglycemia due to endogenous hyperinsulinism can 
be caused by (1) a primary beta-cell disorder, typically a 
beta-cell tumor (insulinoma), sometimes multiple insu-
linomas, or a functional beta-cell disorder with beta-cell 
hypertrophy or hyperplasia; (2) an antibody to insulin or 
to the insulin receptor; (3) a beta-cell secretagogue such 
as a sulfonylurea; or (4) perhaps ectopic insulin secre-
tion among other very rare mechanisms. None of these 
causes is common.
The fundamental pathophysiologic feature of endog-
enous hyperinsulinism caused by a primary beta-cell dis-
order or an insulin secretagogue is the failure of insulin 
secretion to fall to very low levels during hypoglycemia. 
This is assessed by measuring plasma insulin, C-peptide 
(the connecting peptide that is cleaved from proinsulin 
to produce insulin), proinsulin, and glucose concen-
trations during hypoglycemia. Insulin, C-peptide, and 
proinsulin levels need not be high relative to normal, 
euglycemic values; they are inappropriately high in the 
setting of a low plasma glucose concentration. Critical 
diagnostic findings are a plasma insulin concentration 
≥3 μU/mL (≥18 pmol/L), a plasma C-peptide concen-
tration ≥0.6 ng/mL (≥0.2 nmol/L), and a plasma proinsu-
lin concentration ≥5.0 pmol/L when the plasma glucose 
concentration is <55 mg/dL (<3 mmol/L) with symp-
toms of hypoglycemia. A low plasma β-hydroxybutyrate 
concentration (≤2.7 mmol/L) and an increment in plasma 
glucose >25 mg/dL (1.4 mmol/L) following intravenous 
glucagon (1 mg) indicate increased insulin (or insulin-like 
growth factor) actions.
The diagnostic strategy is to obtain measurements 
of plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin, and 
β-hydroxybutyrate concentrations—and to screen for 
circulating oral hypoglycemic agents—during an epi-
sode of hypoglycemia and to assess symptoms during 
the episode and seek their resolution following correc-
tion of hypoglycemia by intravenous injection of gluca-
gon (i.e., to document Whipple’s triad). This approach 
is straightforward if the patient is hypoglycemic during 
evaluation. Since endogenous hyperinsulinemic disor-
ders usually, but not invariably, cause fasting hypoglyce-
mia, a diagnostic episode may develop after a relatively 
short outpatient fast. Serial sampling during an up to 
72-h inpatient diagnostic fast or following a mixed meal 
is more problematic. An alternative is to give patients 
a detailed list of the required measurements and ask 
them to present to an emergency room, with the list, 
during a symptomatic episode. Obviously, a normal 
plasma glucose concentration during a symptomatic epi-
sode indicates that the symptoms are not the result of 
hypoglycemia.
An insulinoma, an insulin-secreting pancreatic islet 
beta-cell tumor, is the prototypical cause of endog-
enous hyperinsulinism and therefore should be sought 
in patients with the clinical syndrome. However, insulin-
oma is not the only cause of endogenous hyperinsulinism. 
Some patients with fasting endogenous hyperinsulin-
emic hypoglycemia have diffuse islet involvement with 
beta-cell hypertrophy and sometimes hyperplasia. This 
pattern is commonly referred to as nesidioblastosis, 
although the finding of beta cells budding from ducts 
is not invariably present. Other patients have a similar 
islet pattern but postprandial hypoglycemia, a disor-
der termed noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypogly-
cemia. Post–gastric bypass postprandial hypoglycemia 
also involves diffuse islet involvement and endogenous 
hyperinsulinism. It most often follows Roux en Y 
gastric bypass. Some have suggested that exaggerated 
GLP-1 responses to meals may cause hyperinsulinemia 
and hypoglycemia, but the pathogenesis has not been 
clearly established. If medical treatments such as an 
α-glucosidase inhibitor or octreotide fail, partial pancre-
atectomy may be required. Autoimmune hypoglycemias 
include those caused by an antibody to insulin, which 
gradually disassociates, leading to late postprandial hypo-
glycemia. Alternatively, an insulin receptor antibody 
can function as an agonist. The presence of an insulin 
secretagogue, such as a sulfonylurea or a glinide, results 
in a clinical and biochemical pattern similar to that of an 
insulinoma but can be distinguished by the presence of 
the circulating secretagogue. Finally, very rare phenom-
ena include ectopic insulin secretion, a gain of func-
tion insulin receptor mutation, and exercise-induced 
hyperinsulinemia.
Insulinomas are uncommon—the yearly incidence is 
estimated to be 1 in 250,000—but because more than 
90% are benign, they are a treatable cause of potentially 
fatal hypoglycemia. The median age at presentation is 
50 years in sporadic cases, but it usually presents in the third 
decade when it is a component of multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1 (Chap. 23). More than 99% of insuli-
nomas are within the substance of the pancreas, and they 
are usually small (90% <2.0 cm). Therefore, they come 
to clinical attention because of hypoglycemia rather 
than mass effects. CT or MRI detects approximately 
70–80% of insulinomas. These methods detect metasta-
ses in the roughly 10% of patients with a malignant insu-
linoma. Transabdominal ultrasound will often identify 
 
CHAPTER 20
Hypoglycemia
315
insulinomas, and endoscopic ultrasound has a sensitiv-
ity of about 90%. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy is 
thought to detect insulinomas in about half of patients. 
Selective pancreatic arterial calcium injections, with the 
endpoint of a sharp increase in hepatic venous insu-
lin levels, regionalizes insulinomas with high sensitivity, 
but this invasive procedure is seldom necessary except 
to confirm endogenous hyperinsulinism in the diffuse 
islet disorders. Intraoperative pancreatic ultrasonography 
almost invariably localizes insulinomas that are not read-
ily palpable by the surgeon. Surgical resection of a soli-
tary insulinoma is generally curative. Diazoxide, which 
inhibits insulin secretion, or the somatostatin analogue 
octreotide can be used to treat hypoglycemia in patients 
with unresectable tumors; everolimus, an mTOR (mam-
malian target of rapamycin) inhibitor, is promising.
Accidental, Surreptitious, or 
Malicious Hypoglycemia
Accidental ingestion of an insulin secretagogue (e.g., the 
result of a pharmacy or other medical error) or admin-
istration of insulin can occur. Factitious hypoglycemia, 
caused by surreptitious or even malicious administration 
of insulin or an insulin secretagogue, shares many clinical 
and laboratory features with insulinoma. It is most com-
mon among health care workers, patients with diabe-
tes or their relatives, and people with a history of other 
factitious illnesses. However, it should be considered in 
all patients being evaluated for hypoglycemia of obscure 
cause. Ingestion of an insulin secretagogue causes hypo-
glycemia with increased C-peptide levels, whereas exog-
enous insulin causes hypoglycemia with low C-peptide 
levels, reflecting suppression of insulin secretion.
Analytical error in the measurement of plasma glucose 
concentrations is rare. On the other hand, glucose moni-
tors used to guide treatment of diabetes are not quan-
titative instruments, particularly at low glucose levels, 
and these should not be used for the definitive diagno-
sis of hypoglycemia. Even with a quantitative method, 
low measured glucose concentrations can be artifactual, 
e.g., the result of continued glucose metabolism by the 
formed elements of the blood ex vivo, particularly in 
the presence of leukocytosis, erythrocytosis, or throm-
bocytosis, or if separation of the serum from the formed 
elements is delayed (pseudohypoglycemia).
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Hypoglycemia
In addition to recognition and documentation of hypo-
glycemia, and often urgent treatment, diagnosis of the 
hypoglycemic mechanism is critical for choosing a treat-
ment that prevents, or at least minimizes, recurrent 
hypoglycemia.
Recognition 
and 
Documentation  
Hypoglycemia is suspected in patients with typical 
symptoms; in the presence of confusion, an altered level 
of consciousness, or a seizure; or in a clinical setting in 
which hypoglycemia is known to occur. Blood should 
be drawn, whenever possible, before the administra-
tion of glucose to allow documentation of a low plasma 
glucose concentration. Convincing documentation of 
hypoglycemia requires the fulfillment of Whipple’s triad. 
Thus, the ideal time to measure the plasma glucose level 
is during a symptomatic episode. A normal glucose  
level excludes hypoglycemia as the cause of the symp-
toms. A low glucose level confirms that hypoglycemia is 
the cause of the symptoms, provided the latter resolve 
after the glucose level is raised. When the cause of the 
hypoglycemic episode is obscure, additional measure-
ments, while the glucose level is low and before treatment, 
should include plasma insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin, and 
β-hydroxybutyrate levels, as well as screening for circu-
lating oral hypoglycemic agents, and symptoms should 
be assessed during and after the plasma glucose con-
centration is raised.
When the history suggests prior hypoglycemia, and 
a potential mechanism is not apparent, the diagnos-
tic strategy is to measure these values and assess for 
Whipple’s triad during and after an episode of hypogly-
cemia. On the other hand, while it cannot be ignored, a 
distinctly low plasma glucose concentration measured 
in a patient without corresponding symptoms raises the 
possibility of an artifact (pseudohypoglycemia).
Diagnosis of the Hypoglycemic Mech-
anism  In a patient with documented hypoglyce-
mia, a plausible hypoglycemic mechanism can often be 
deduced from the history, physical examination, and 
available laboratory data (Table 20-1). Drugs, particu-
larly those used to treat diabetes or alcohol, should be 
the first consideration, even in the absence of known 
use of a relevant drug, given the possibility of surrep-
titious, accidental, or malicious drug administration. 
Other considerations include evidence of a relevant 
critical illness, less commonly hormone deficiencies, and 
rarely a non–beta-cell tumor that can be pursued diag-
nostically. Absent one of these mechanisms, in an oth-
erwise seemingly well individual, one should consider 
endogenous hyperinsulinism and proceed with mea-
surements and assessment of symptoms during spon-
taneous hypoglycemia or under conditions that might 
elicit hypoglycemia.
Urgent Treatment  Oral treatment with glu-
cose tablets or glucose-containing fluids, candy, or food 
is appropriate if the patient is able and willing to take 
these. A reasonable initial dose is 20 g of glucose. If the 
patient is unable or unwilling, because of neuroglyco-
penia, to take carbohydrates orally, parenteral therapy 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
316
is necessary. Intravenous glucose (25 g) should be given 
and followed by a glucose infusion guided by serial 
plasma glucose measurements. If intravenous therapy is 
not practical, subcutaneous or intramuscular glucagon 
(1.0 mg in adults) can be used, particularly in patients 
with T1DM. Because it acts by stimulating glycogenoly-
sis, glucagon is ineffective in glycogen-depleted indi-
viduals (e.g., those with alcohol-induced hypoglycemia). 
It also stimulates insulin secretion and is therefore less 
useful in T2DM. These treatments raise plasma glucose 
concentrations only transiently, and patients should 
therefore be urged to eat as soon as is practical to 
replete glycogen stores.
Prevention of Recurrent Hypoglycemia 
Prevention of recurrent hypoglycemia requires an under-
standing of the hypoglycemic mechanism. Offending 
drugs can be discontinued or their doses reduced. Hypo-
glycemia caused by a sulfonylurea can persist for hours,
or even days. Underlying critical illnesses can often be 
treated. Cortisol and growth hormone can be replaced if 
they are deficient. Surgical, radiotherapeutic, or chemo-
therapeutic reduction of a non–islet-cell tumor can alle-
viate hypoglycemia even if the tumor cannot be cured; 
glucocorticoid or growth hormone administration also 
may reduce hypoglycemic episodes in such patients. Sur-
gical resection of an insulinoma is curative; medical ther-
apy with diazoxide or octreotide can be used if resection 
is not possible and in patients with a nontumor beta-cell 
disorder. Partial pancreatectomy may be necessary in the 
latter patients. The treatment of autoimmune hypogly-
cemia (e.g., with a glucocorticoid or immunosuppressive 
drugs) is problematic, but the disorders are sometimes 
self-limited. Failing these treatments, frequent feedings 
and avoidance of fasting may be required. Administra-
tion of uncooked cornstarch at bedtime or even an over-
night intragastric infusion of glucose may be necessary 
in some patients.
 Daniel J. Rader  I   Helen H. Hobbs 
317
 Lipoproteins are complexes of lipids and proteins that 
are essential for the transport of cholesterol, triglycer-
ides, and fat-soluble vitamins. Previously, lipoprotein 
disorders were the purview of specialized lipidologists, 
but the demonstration that lipid-lowering therapy sig-
nifi cantly reduces the clinical complications of athero-
sclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) has brought 
the diagnosis and treatment of these disorders into the 
domain of the internist. The number of individuals 
who are candidates for lipid-lowering therapy has con-
tinued to increase. The development of safe, effective, 
and well-tolerated pharmacologic agents has greatly 
expanded the therapeutic armamentarium available 
to the physician to treat disorders of lipid metabolism. 
Therefore, the appropriate diagnosis and management 
of lipoprotein disorders is of critical importance in the 
practice of medicine. This chapter will review normal 
lipoprotein physiology, the pathophysiology of primary 
(inherited) disorders of lipoprotein metabolism, the dis-
eases and environmental factors that cause secondary 
disorders of lipoprotein metabolism, and the practical 
approaches to their diagnosis and management. 
 Lipoprotein MetaboLisM 
 Lipoprotein CLassiFiCation anD 
CoMposition 
 Lipoproteins are large macromolecular complexes that 
transport hydrophobic lipids (primarily triglycerides, 
cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins) through body fl uids 
(plasma, interstitial fl uid, and lymph) to and from tissues. 
Lipoproteins play an essential role in the absorption of 
dietary cholesterol, long-chain fatty acids, and fat-soluble 
vitamins; the transport of triglycerides, cholesterol, and 
fat-soluble vitamins from the liver to peripheral tissues; 
and the transport of cholesterol from peripheral tissues 
to the liver. 
 CHapter 21 
 Lipoproteins contain a core of hydrophobic lipids 
(triglycerides and cholesteryl esters) surrounded by hydro-
philic lipids (phospholipids, unesterifi ed cholesterol) 
and proteins that interact with body fl uids. The plasma 
lipoproteins are divided into fi ve major classes based 
on their relative density  ( Fig. 21-1 and  Table 21-1 ) : 
chylomicrons, very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 
intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs), low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs), and high-density lipoproteins (HDLs). 
Each lipoprotein class comprises a family of particles that
vary slightly in density, size, and protein composition. The 
density of a lipoprotein is determined by the amount of 
lipid per particle. HDL is the smallest and most dense 
lipoprotein, whereas chylomicrons and VLDLs are the 
largest and least dense lipoprotein particles. Most plasma 
triglyceride is transported in chylomicrons or VLDLs, 
and most plasma cholesterol is carried as cholesteryl 
esters in LDLs and HDLs. 
Density, g/mL
1.20
5
10
Diameter, nm
1.10
1.02
1.06
20
40
60
80
1000
1.006
0.95
HDL
LDL
IDL
VLDL
Chylomicron
remnants
Chylomicron
 Figure 21-1 
the density and size distribution of the major classes of 
lipoprotein particles. Lipoproteins are classifi ed by den-
sity and size, which are inversely related. HDL, high-density 
lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-
density lipoprotein; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein. 
 DISORDERS OF LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
318
Table 21-1
Major Lipoprotein Classes
Apolipoproteins
Lipoprotein
Density,  
g/mLa
Size, nmb
Electrophoretic 
Mobilityc
Major
Other
Other 
Constituents
Chylomicrons
0.930
75–1200
Origin
ApoB-48
A-I, A-IV, C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Retinyl esters
Chylomicron 
remnants
0.930–1.006
30–80
Slow pre-β
ApoB-48
A-I, A-IV, C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Retinyl esters
  VLDL
0.930–1.006
30–80
Pre-β
ApoB-100
A-I, A-II, A-V, C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Vitamin E
  IDL
1.006–1.019
25–35
Slow pre-β
ApoB-100
C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Vitamin E
  LDL
1.019–1.063
18–25
β
ApoB-100
Vitamin E
  HDL
1.063–1.210
5–12
α
ApoA-I
A-II, A-IV, A-V, C-III, E
LCAT, CETP 
paroxonase
  Lp(a)
1.050–1.120
25
Pre-β
ApoB-1 00
Apo(a)
aThe density of the particle is determined by ultracentrifugation.
bThe size of the particle is measured using gel electrophoresis.
cThe electrophoretic mobility of the particle on agarose gel electrophores reflects the size and surface charge of the particle, with b being the 
position of LDL and a being the position of HDL.
Note: All of the lipoprotein classes contain phospholipids, esterified and unesterified cholesterol, and triglycerides to varying degrees.
Abbreviations: CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LCAT, lecithin-
cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotein A; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
Table 21-2 
Major Apolipoproteins
Apolipoprotein
Primary Source
Lipoprotein Association
Function
ApoA-I
Intestine, liver
HDL, chylomicrons
Structural protein for HDL
Activates LCAT
ApoA-II
Liver
HDL, chylomicrons
Structural protein for HDL
ApoA-IV
Intestine
HDL, chylomicrons
Unknown
ApoA-V
Liver
VLDL, chylomicrons
Promotes LPL-mediated triglyceride lipolysis
Apo(a)
Liver
Lp(a)
Unknown
ApoB-48
Intestine
Chylomicrons
Structural protein for chylomicrons
ApoB-100
Liver
VLDL, IDL, LDL, Lp(a)
Structural protein for VLDL, LDL, IDL, Lp(a)
Ligand for binding to LDL receptor
ApoC-I
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Unknown
ApoC-II
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Cofactor for LPL
ApoC-III
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Inhibits lipoprotein binding to receptors
ApoE
Liver
Chylomicron remnants, IDL, HDL
Ligand for binding to LDL receptor
ApoH
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, LDL, HDL
B2 glycoprotein I
ApoJ
Liver
HDL
Unknown
ApoL
Unknown
HDL
Unknown
ApoM
Liver
HDL
Unknown
Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LCAT, lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, low-density 
lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotein A; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
The proteins associated with lipoproteins, called apo-
lipoproteins (Table 21-2), are required for the assembly, 
structure, and function of lipoproteins. Apolipoproteins 
activate enzymes important in lipoprotein metabolism 
and act as ligands for cell surface receptors. ApoA-I, 
which is synthesized in the liver and intestine, is found 
on virtually all HDL particles. ApoA-II is the second 
most abundant HDL apolipoprotein and is on approxi-
mately two-thirds of the HDL particles. ApoB is the 
major structural protein of chylomicrons, VLDLs, IDLs, 
and LDLs; one molecule of apoB, either apoB-48 
(chylomicron) or apoB-100 (VLDL, IDL or LDL), is 
present on each lipoprotein particle. The human liver 
synthesizes apoB-100, and the intestine makes apoB-48, 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
319
which is derived from the same gene by mRNA editing. 
ApoE is present in multiple copies on chylomicrons, 
VLDL, and IDL, and it plays a critical role in the 
metabolism and clearance of triglyceride-rich particles. 
Three apolipoproteins of the C-series (apoC-I, apoC-II, 
and apoC-III) also participate in the metabolism of 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. ApoB is the only major 
apolipoprotein that does not transfer between lipopro-
tein particles. Some of the major apolipoproteins are 
listed in Table 21-2.
Transport of Dietary Lipids 
(Exogenous Pathway)
The exogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism 
permits efficient transport of dietary lipids (Fig. 21-2). 
Dietary triglycerides are hydrolyzed by lipases within 
the intestinal lumen and emulsified with bile acids to 
form micelles. Dietary cholesterol, fatty acids, and fat-
soluble vitamins are absorbed in the proximal small 
intestine. Cholesterol and retinol are esterified (by the 
addition of a fatty acid) in the enterocyte to form cho-
lesteryl esters and retinyl esters, respectively. Longer-
chain fatty acids (>12 carbons) are incorporated into 
triglycerides and packaged with apoB-48, cholesteryl 
esters, retinyl esters, phospholipids, and cholesterol to 
form chylomicrons. Nascent chylomicrons are secreted 
into the intestinal lymph and delivered via the thoracic 
duct directly to the systemic circulation, where they are 
extensively processed by peripheral tissues before reach-
ing the liver. The particles encounter lipoprotein lipase 
(LPL), which is anchored to a glycosylphosphatidylino-
sitol-anchored protein, GPIHBP1, that is attached to 
the endothelial surfaces of capillaries in adipose tissue, 
heart, and skeletal muscle (Fig. 21-2). The triglycer-
ides of chylomicrons are hydrolyzed by LPL, and free 
fatty acids are released. ApoC-II, which is transferred to 
circulating chylomicrons from HDL, acts as a required 
cofactor for LPL in this reaction. The released free fatty 
acids are taken up by adjacent myocytes or adipocytes 
and either oxidized to generate energy or reesterified and 
stored as triglyceride. Some of the released free fatty 
acids bind albumin before entering cells and are trans-
ported to other tissues, especially the liver. The chy-
lomicron particle progressively shrinks in size as the 
hydrophobic core is hydrolyzed and the hydrophilic lip-
ids (cholesterol and phospholipids) and apolipoproteins 
on the particle surface are transferred to HDL, creating 
Small
intestines
Exogenous
Endogenous
Bile acids
+
cholesterol
Peripheral
tissues
Liver
ApoE
ApoB-48
LDLR
ApoC's
Dietary lipids
LDL
Chylomicron
VLDL
IDL
Chylomicron
remnant
Capillaries
LPL
FFA
Muscle
Adipose
ApoB-100
HL
Capillaries
LPL
FFA
Muscle
Adipose
Figure 21-2
The exogenous and endogenous lipoprotein metabolic 
pathways. The exogenous pathway transports dietary lip-
ids to the periphery and the liver. The endogenous pathway 
transports hepatic lipids to the periphery. FFA, free fatty acid; 
HL, hepatic lipase; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; 
LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LDLR, low-density lipoprotein 
receptor; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; VLDL, very low density 
lipoprotein.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
320
chylomicron remnants. Chylomicron remnants are rap-
idly removed from the circulation by the liver through 
a process that requires apoE as a ligand for receptors in 
the liver. Consequently, few, if any, chylomicrons or 
chylomicron remnants are present in the blood after a 
12-hour fast, except in patients with disorders of chylo-
micron metabolism.
Transport of Hepatic Lipids 
(Endogenous Pathway)
The endogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism 
refers to the secretion of apoB-containing lipoproteins 
from the liver and the metabolism of these triglyceride-
rich particles in peripheral tissues (Fig. 21-2). VLDL 
particles resemble chylomicrons in protein composition 
but contain apoB-100 rather than apoB-48 and have a 
higher ratio of cholesterol to triglyceride (∼1 mg of cho-
lesterol for every 5 mg of triglyceride). The triglycerides 
of VLDL are derived predominantly from the esterifica-
tion of long-chain fatty acids in the liver. The packaging 
of hepatic triglycerides with the other major components 
of the nascent VLDL particle (apoB-100, cholesteryl 
esters, phospholipids, and vitamin E) requires the action 
of the enzyme microsomal triglyceride transfer protein 
(MTP). After secretion into the plasma, VLDL acquires 
multiple copies of apoE and apolipoproteins of the 
C series by transfer from HDL. As with chylomicrons, 
the triglycerides of VLDL are hydrolyzed by LPL, espe-
cially in muscle, heart, and adipose tissue. After the 
VLDL remnants dissociate from LPL, they are referred 
to as IDLs, which contain roughly similar amounts of 
cholesterol and triglyceride. The liver removes approxi-
mately 40–60% of IDL by LDL receptor–mediated 
endocytosis via binding to apoE. The remainder of IDL 
is remodeled by hepatic lipase (HL) to form LDL. Dur-
ing this process, most of the triglyceride in the particle 
is hydrolyzed, and all apolipoproteins except apoB-100 
are transferred to other lipoproteins. The cholesterol 
in LDL accounts for more than one-half of the plasma 
cholesterol in most individuals. Approximately 70% of cir-
culating LDL is cleared by LDL receptor–mediated endo-
cytosis in the liver. Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a lipoprotein 
similar to LDL in lipid and protein composition, but 
it contains an additional protein called apolipoprotein(a) 
[apo(a)]. Apo(a) is synthesized in the liver and attached 
to apoB-100 by a disulfide linkage. The major site of 
clearance of Lp(a) is the liver, but the uptake pathway is 
not known.
HDL Metabolism and Reverse 
Cholesterol Transport
All nucleated cells synthesize cholesterol, but only hepa-
tocytes and enterocytes can effectively excrete cho-
lesterol from the body, into either the bile or the gut 
lumen. In the liver, cholesterol is secreted into the bile, 
either directly or after conversion to bile acids. Choles-
terol in peripheral cells is transported from the plasma 
membranes of peripheral cells to the liver and intestine 
by a process termed “reverse cholesterol transport” that 
is facilitated by HDL (Fig. 21-3).
Small
intestines
Liver
LDL
LDLR
SR-BI
Mature HDL
Chylomicrons
Peripheral cells
LCAT
CETP
Nascent
HDL
IDL
ApoA-I
CETP
ApoA-I
Free
cholesterol
Macrophage
VLDL
Figure 21-3
HDL metabolism and reverse cholesterol transport. This 
pathway transports excess cholesterol from the periphery 
back to the liver for excretion in the bile. The liver and the 
intestine produce nascent HDLs. Free cholesterol is acquired 
from macrophages and other peripheral cells and esterified by 
LCAT, forming mature HDLs. HDL cholesterol can be selectively 
taken up by the liver via SR-B1 (scavenger receptor class B1). 
Alternatively, HDL cholesteryl ester can be transferred by 
CETP from HDLs to VLDLs and chylomicrons, which can then 
be taken up by the liver. CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer pro-
tein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density 
lipoprotein; LCAT, lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, 
low-density lipoprotein; LDLR, low-density lipoprotein recep-
tor; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
321
Nascent HDL particles are synthesized by the intes-
tine and the liver. Newly secreted apoA-I rapidly 
acquires phospholipids and unesterified cholesterol from 
its site of synthesis (intestine or liver) via efflux pro-
moted by the membrane protein ATP-binding cassette 
protein A1 (ABCA1). This process results in the for-
mation of discoidal HDL particles, which then recruit 
additional unesterified cholesterol from the periph-
ery. Within the HDL particle, the cholesterol is esteri-
fied by lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), 
a plasma enzyme associated with HDL, and the more 
hydrophobic cholesteryl ester moves to the core of the 
HDL particle. As HDL acquires more cholesteryl ester 
it becomes spherical, and additional apolipoproteins and 
lipids are transferred to the particles from the surfaces of 
chylomicrons and VLDLs during lipolysis.
HDL cholesterol is transported to hepatocytes by both 
an indirect and a direct pathway. HDL cholesteryl esters 
can be transferred to apoB-containing lipoproteins in 
exchange for triglyceride by the cholesteryl ester transfer 
protein (CETP). The cholesteryl esters are then removed 
from the circulation by LDL receptor–mediated endocy-
tosis. HDL cholesterol can also be taken up directly by 
hepatocytes via the scavenger receptor class B1 (SR-B1), 
a cell surface receptor that mediates the selective transfer 
of lipids to cells.
HDL particles undergo extensive remodeling within 
the plasma compartment by a variety of lipid transfer pro-
teins and lipases. The phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP) 
has the net effect of transferring phospholipids from 
other lipoproteins to HDL or among different classes of 
HDL particles. After CETP- and PLTP-mediated lipid 
exchange, the triglyceride-enriched HDL becomes a 
much better substrate for HL, which hydrolyzes the tri-
glycerides and phospholipids to generate smaller HDL 
particles. A related enzyme called endothelial lipase hydro-
lyzes HDL phospholipids, generating smaller HDL par-
ticles that are catabolized faster. Remodeling of HDL 
influences the metabolism, function, and plasma con-
centrations of HDL.
Disorders of Lipoprotein 
Metabolism
Fredrickson and Levy classified hyperlipoproteinemias 
according to the type of lipoprotein particles that accu-
mulate in the blood (Type I to Type V) (Table 21-3). 
Table 21-3 
Fredrickson Classification of Hyperlipoproteinemias
Phenotype
I
IIa
IIb
III
IV
V
Lipoprotein, elevated
Chylomicrons
LDL
LDL and VLDL
Chylomicron and 
VLDL remnants
VLDL
Chylomicrons 
and VLDL
Triglycerides
↑↑↑
N
↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑↑↑
Cholesterol (total)
↑
↑↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
N/↑
↑↑
LDL-cholesterol
↓
↑↑↑
↑↑
↓
↓
↓
HDL-cholesterol
↓↓↓
N/↓
↓
N
↓↓
↓↓↓
Plasma appearance
Lactescent
Clear
Clear
Turbid
Turbid
Lactescent
Xanthomas
Eruptive
Tendon, tuberous
None
Palmar,  
tuberoeruptive
None
Eruptive
Pancreatitis
+ + +
0
0
0
0
+ + +
Coronary  
atherosclerosis
0
+ + +
+ + +
+ + +
+/−
+/−
Peripheral  
atherosclerosis
0
+
+
+ +
+/−
+/−
Molecular defects
LPL and 
ApoC-II
LDL receptor,  
ApoB-100,
PCSK9, LDLRAP, 
ABCG5 and ABCG8
ApoE
ApoA-V
ApoA-V and
GPIHBP1
Genetic nomenclature
FCS
FH, FDB, ADH, ARH, 
sitosterolemia
FCHL
FDBL
FHTG
FHTG
Abbreviations: ADH, autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia; Apo, apolipoprotein; ARH, autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia; FCHL, 
familial combined hyperlipidemia; FCS, familial chylomicronemia syndrome; FDB, familial defective ApoB; FDBL, familial dysbetalipoproteinemia; 
FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; FHTG, familial hypertriglyceridemia; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; LDLRAP, LDL receptor associated protein; GPI-
HBP1, glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored high density lipoprotein binding protein 1; N, normal.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
322
A classification scheme based on the molecular etiology 
and pathophysiology of the lipoprotein disorders com-
plements this system and forms the basis for this chapter. 
The identification and characterization of genes respon-
sible for the genetic forms of hyperlipidemia have pro-
vided important molecular insights into the critical roles 
of structural apolipoproteins, enzymes, and receptors in 
lipid metabolism (Table 21-4).
Primary Disorders of Elevated Apob-
Containing Lipoproteins
A variety of genetic conditions are associated with the 
accumulation in plasma of specific classes of lipopro-
tein particles. In general, these can be divided into those 
causing elevated LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) with nor-
mal triglycerides and those causing elevated triglycerides 
(Table 21-4).
Lipid disorders associated with elevated 
LDL-C and normal triglycerides
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH)
FH is an autosomal codominant disorder character-
ized by elevated plasma levels of LDL-C with normal 
triglycerides, tendon xanthomas, and premature coro-
nary atherosclerosis. FH is caused by a large number 
(>1000) of mutations in the LDL receptor gene. It has a 
higher incidence in certain founder populations, such as 
Afrikaners, Christian Lebanese, and French Canadians. 
The elevated levels of LDL-C in FH are due to an 
increase in the production of LDL from IDL (since a 
portion of IDL is normally cleared by LDL receptor– 
mediated endocytosis) and a delayed removal of LDL 
from the blood. Individuals with two mutated LDL re- 
ceptor alleles (FH homozygotes) have much higher 
LDL-C levels than those with one mutant allele 
(FH heterozygotes).
Table 21-4
Primary Hyperlipoproteinemias Caused by Known Single Gene Mutations
Genetic Disorder
Protein (Gene) 
Defect
Lipoproteins 
Elevated
Clinical Findings
Genetic 
Transmission
Estimated 
Incidence
Lipoprotein lipase  
deficiency
LPL (LPL)
Chylomicrons
Eruptive xanthomas, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
pancreatitis
AR
1/1,000,000
Familial apolipoprotein 
C-II deficiency
ApoC-II 
(APOC2)
Chylomicrons
Eruptive xanthomas, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
pancreatitis
AR
<1/1,000,000
ApoA-V deficiency
ApoA-V 
(APOA5)
Chylomicrons, 
VLDL
Eruptive xanthomas, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
pancreatitis
AD
<1/1,000,000
GPIHBP1 deficiency
GPIHBP1
Chylomicrons
Eruptive xanthomas, pan-
creatitis
AD
<1/1,000,000
Familial hepatic lipase 
deficiency
Hepatic lipase 
(LIPC)
VLDL remnants
Pancreatitis, CHD
AR
<1/1,000,000
Familial dysbetalipo-
proteinemia
ApoE (APOE )
Chylomicron 
and VLDL 
remnants
Palmar and tuberoeruptive 
xanthomas, CHD, PVD
AR
AD
1/10,000
Familial  
hypercholesterolemia
LDL receptor 
(LDLR)
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AD
1/500
Familial defective  
apoB-100
ApoB-100 
(APOB)
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AD
<1/1000
Autosomal  
dominant  
hypercholesterolemia
PCSK9 
(PCSK9)
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AD
<1/1,000,000
Autosomal recessive 
hypercholesterolemia
LDLRAP
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AR
<1/1,000,000
Sitosterolemia
ABCG5 or 
ABCG8
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AR
<1/1,000,000
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ARH, autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia; CHD, coronary heart 
disease; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; PVD, peripheral vascular disease; VLDL, very-low density lipoprotein.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
323
Homozygous FH occurs in approximately 1 in 1 million 
persons worldwide. Patients with homozygous FH can be 
classified into one of two groups based on the amount 
of LDL receptor activity measured in their skin fibro-
blasts: those patients with <2% of normal LDL recep-
tor activity (receptor negative) and those patients with 
2–25% of normal LDL receptor activity (receptor defec-
tive). Most patients with homozygous FH present in 
childhood with cutaneous xanthomas on the hands, 
wrists, elbows, knees, heels, or buttocks. Total choles-
terol levels are usually >500 mg/dL and can be higher 
than 1000 mg/dL. The devastating complication of 
homozygous FH is accelerated atherosclerosis, which 
can result in disability and death in childhood. Athero-
sclerosis often develops first in the aortic root, where 
it can cause aortic valvular or supravalvular stenosis, 
and typically extends into the coronary ostia, which 
become stenotic. Children with homozygous FH often 
develop symptomatic coronary atherosclerosis before 
puberty; symptoms can be atypical, and sudden death is 
not uncommon. Untreated, receptor-negative patients 
with homozygous FH rarely survive beyond the second 
decade; patients with receptor-defective LDL recep-
tor defects have a better prognosis but almost invari-
ably develop clinically apparent atherosclerotic vascular 
disease by age 30, and often much sooner. Carotid and 
femoral disease develops later in life and is usually not 
clinically significant.
A careful family history should be taken, and plasma 
lipid levels should be measured in the parents and other 
first-degree relatives of patients with homozygous FH. 
The disease has >90% penetrance so both parents of 
FH homozygotes usually have hypercholesterolemia. 
The diagnosis of homozygous FH can be confirmed by 
obtaining a skin biopsy and measuring LDL receptor 
activity in cultured skin fibroblasts, or by quantifying 
the number of LDL receptors on the surfaces of lym-
phocytes using cell sorting technology. Molecular assays 
are also available to define the mutations in the LDL 
receptor by DNA sequencing. In selected populations 
where particular mutations predominate (e.g., Afrikan-
ers and French Canadians), the common mutations can 
be screened for directly. Alternatively, the entire coding 
region needs to be sequenced for mutation detection 
because a large number of different LDL receptor muta-
tions can cause disease. Ten to fifteen percent of LDL 
receptor mutations are large deletions or insertions, 
which may be missed by routine DNA sequencing.
Combination therapy with an HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitor and a second drug (cholesterol absorp-
tion inhibitor or bile acid sequestrant) sometimes 
reduces plasma LDL-C in those FH homozygotes who 
have residual LDL receptor activity, but patients with 
homozygous FH invariably require additional lipid-
lowering therapy. Since the liver is quantitatively the 
most important tissue for removing circulating LDLs 
via the LDL receptor, liver transplantation is effec-
tive in decreasing plasma LDL-C levels in this disor-
der. Liver transplantation, however, is associated with 
substantial risks, including the requirement for long-
term immunosuppression. The current treatment of 
choice for homozygous FH is LDL apheresis (a process 
by which the LDL particles are selectively removed 
from the circulation), which can promote regression 
of xanthomas and may slow the progression of athero-
sclerosis. Initiation of LDL apheresis should generally 
be delayed until approximately 5 years of age, except 
when evidence of atherosclerotic vascular disease is 
present.
Heterozygous FH is caused by the inheritance of one 
mutant LDL receptor allele and occurs in approximately 
1 in 500 persons worldwide, making it one of the most 
common single-gene disorders. It is characterized by ele-
vated plasma levels of LDL-C (usually 200–400 mg/dL) 
and normal levels of triglyceride. Patients with hetero-
zygous FH have hypercholesterolemia from birth, and 
disease recognition is usually based on detection of 
hypercholesterolemia on routine screening, the appear-
ance of tendon xanthomas, or the development of 
symptomatic ASCVD. Since the disease is codominant 
in inheritance, one parent and ∼50% of the patient’s sib-
lings usually also have hypercholesterolemia. The fam-
ily history is frequently positive for premature ASCVD 
on one side of the family. Corneal arcus is common, 
and tendon xanthomas involving the dorsum of the 
hands, elbows, knees, and especially the Achilles ten-
dons are present in ∼75% of patients. The age of onset 
of ASCVD is highly variable and depends in part on the 
molecular defect in the LDL receptor gene and also on 
coexisting cardiac risk factors. FH heterozygotes with 
elevated plasma levels of Lp(a) appear to be at greater 
risk for cardiovascular complications. Untreated men 
with heterozygous FH have an ∼50% chance of having 
a myocardial infarction before age 60 years. Although 
the age of onset of atherosclerotic heart disease is later 
in women with FH, coronary heart disease (CHD) is 
significantly more common in women with FH than in 
the general female population.
No definitive diagnostic test for heterozygous FH 
is available. Although FH heterozygotes tend to have 
reduced levels of LDL receptor function in skin fibro-
blasts, significant overlap with the LDL receptor activity 
levels in normal fibroblasts exists. Molecular assays are 
now available to identify mutations in the LDL recep-
tor gene by DNA sequencing, but the clinical utility of 
pinpointing the mutation has not been demonstrated. 
The clinical diagnosis is usually not problematic, but it 
is critical that hypothyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, and 
obstructive liver disease be excluded before initiating 
therapy.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
324
FH patients should be aggressively treated to lower 
plasma levels of LDL-C. Initiation of a low-cholesterol, 
low-fat diet is recommended, but heterozygous FH 
patients require lipid-lowering drug therapy. Statins 
are effective in heterozygous FH, but combination 
drug therapy with the addition of a cholesterol absorp-
tion inhibitor and/or bile acid sequestrant is frequently 
required, and the addition of nicotinic acid is some-
times needed. Heterozygous FH patients who cannot be 
adequately controlled on combination drug therapy are 
candidates for LDL apheresis.
Familial defective ApoB-100 (FDB)
FDB is a dominantly inherited disorder that clinically 
resembles heterozygous FH. The disease is rare in most 
populations except individuals of German descent, where 
the frequency can be as high as 1 in 1000. FDB is char-
acterized by elevated plasma LDL-C levels with normal 
triglycerides, tendon xanthomas, and an increased inci-
dence of premature ASCVD. FDB is caused by muta-
tions in the LDL receptor–binding domain of apoB-100, 
most commonly due to a substitution of glutamine for 
arginine at position 3500. As a consequence of the muta-
tion in apoB-100, LDL binds the LDL receptor with 
reduced affinity, and LDL is removed from the circula-
tion at a reduced rate. Patients with FDB cannot be clin-
ically distinguished from patients with heterozygous FH, 
although patients with FDB tend to have lower plasma 
levels of LDL-C than FH heterozygotes. The apoB-
100 gene mutation can be detected directly, but genetic 
diagnosis is not currently encouraged since the recom-
mended management of FDB and heterozygous FH is 
identical.
Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia due 
to mutations in PCSK9 (ADH-PCSK9 or ADH3)
ADH-PCSK9 is a rare autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by gain-of-function mutations in proprotein 
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9). PCSK9 
is a secreted protein that binds to the LDL receptor, 
resulting in its degradation. Normally, after LDL binds 
to the receptor it is internalized along with the recep-
tor. In the low pH of the endosome, LDL dissociates 
from the receptor and returns to the cell surface. The 
LDL is delivered to the lysosome. When PCSK9 binds 
the receptor, the complex is internalized and the recep-
tor is redirected to the lysosome rather than to the cell 
surface. The missense mutations in PCSK9 that cause 
hypercholesterolemia enhance the activity of PCSK9. 
As a consequence, the number of hepatic LDL recep-
tors is reduced. Patients with ADH-PCSK9 are indistin-
guishable clinically from patients with FH. Interestingly, 
loss-of-function mutations in PCSK9 cause low LDL-C 
levels (see “PCSK9 Deficiency”).
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia 
(ARH)
ARH is a rare disorder (except in Sardinia, Italy) due to 
mutations in a protein (ARH, also called LDLR adaptor 
protein, LDLRAP) involved in LDL receptor–mediated 
endocytosis in the liver. In the absence of LDLRAP, 
LDL binds to the LDL receptor but the lipoprotein-
receptor complex fails to be internalized. ARH, like 
homozygous FH, is characterized by hypercholesterol-
emia, tendon xanthomas, and premature coronary artery 
disease (CAD). The levels of plasma LDL-C tend to be 
intermediate between the levels present in FH homo-
zygotes and FH heterozygotes, and CAD is not usu-
ally symptomatic until at least the third decade. LDL 
receptor function in cultured fibroblasts is normal or 
only modestly reduced in ARH, whereas LDL recep-
tor function in lymphocytes and the liver is negligible. 
Unlike FH homozygotes, the hyperlipidemia responds 
partially to treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibi-
tors, but these patients usually require LDL apheresis to 
lower plasma LDL-C to recommended levels.
Sitosterolemia
Sitosterolemia is another rare autosomal recessive dis-
ease that can result in severe hypercholesterolemia, ten-
don xanthomas, and premature ASCVD. Sitosterolemia 
is caused by mutations in either of two members of 
the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) half transporter fam-
ily, ABCG5 and ABCG8. These genes are expressed 
in enterocytes and hepatocytes. The proteins heterodi-
merize to form a functional complex that pumps plant 
sterols such as sitosterol and campesterol, and animal 
sterols, predominantly cholesterol, into the gut lumen 
and into the bile. In normal individuals, <5% of dietary 
plant sterols are absorbed by the proximal small intes-
tine and delivered to the liver. Absorbed plant sterols 
are preferentially secreted into the bile and are main-
tained at very low levels. In sitosterolemia, the intestinal 
absorption of sterols is increased and biliary excretion of 
the sterols is reduced, resulting in increased plasma and 
tissue levels of both plant sterols and cholesterol.
Incorporation of plant sterols into cell membranes 
results in misshapen red blood cells and megathrombo-
cytes that are visible on blood smear. Episodes of hemoly-
sis are a distinctive clinical feature of this disease compared 
to other genetic forms of hypercholesterolemia.
Sitosterolemia is diagnosed by demonstrating an 
increase in the plasma level of sitosterol using gas chro-
matography. The hypercholesterolemia is unusually 
responsive to reductions in dietary cholesterol con-
tent and should be suspected in individuals who have a 
>40% reduction in plasma cholesterol level on a low-
cholesterol diet. The hypercholesterolemia does not 
respond to HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, whereas bile 
acid sequestrants and cholesterol-absorption inhibitors, 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
325
such as ezetimibe, are effective in reducing plasma sterol 
levels in these patients.
Polygenic hypercholesterolemia
This condition is characterized by hypercholesterolemia 
due to elevated LDL-C with a normal plasma level of 
triglyceride in the absence of secondary causes of hyper-
cholesterolemia. Plasma LDL-C levels are generally not 
as elevated as they are in FH and FDB. Family studies 
are useful to differentiate polygenic hypercholesterol-
emia from the single-gene disorders described earlier; 
one-half of the first-degree relatives of patients with FH 
and FDB are hypercholesterolemic, whereas <10% of 
first-degree relatives of patients with polygenic hyper-
cholesterolemia have hypercholesterolemia. Treatment 
of polygenic hypercholesterolemia is identical to that of 
other forms of hypercholesterolemia.
Elevated plasma levels of lipoprotein(a)
Unlike the other major classes of lipoproteins that have 
a normal distribution in the population, plasma levels 
of Lp(a) have a highly skewed distribution with levels 
varying over a 1000-fold range. Levels are strongly 
influenced by genetic factors, with individuals of African 
and South Asian descent having higher levels than those 
of European descent. Although it has been well docu-
mented that elevated levels of Lp(a) are associated with 
an increase in ASCVD, lowering plasma levels of Lp(a) 
has not been demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular 
risk.
Lipid disorders associated with elevated 
triglycerides
Familial chylomicronemia syndrome (Type I 
hyperlipoproteinemia; lipoprotein lipase and 
ApoC-II Deficiency)
As noted earlier, LPL is required for the hydrolysis of 
triglycerides in chylomicrons and VLDLs, and apoC-II 
is a cofactor for LPL (Fig. 21-2). Genetic deficiency or 
inactivity of either protein results in impaired lipolysis 
and profound elevations in plasma chylomicrons. These 
patients can also have elevated plasma levels of VLDL, 
but chylomicronemia predominates. The fasting plasma 
is turbid, and if left at 4°C (39.2°F) for a few hours, the 
chylomicrons float to the top and form a creamy super-
natant. In these disorders, called familial chylomicronemia 
syndromes, fasting triglyceride levels are almost invari-
ably >1000 mg/dL. Fasting cholesterol levels are also 
elevated but to a lesser degree.
LPL deficiency has autosomal recessive inheritance 
and has a frequency of approximately 1 in 1 million 
in the population. ApoC-II deficiency is also recessive in 
inheritance pattern and is even less common than LPL 
deficiency. Multiple different mutations in the LPL and 
apoC-II genes cause these diseases. Obligate LPL het-
erozygotes have normal or mild-to-moderate eleva-
tions in plasma triglyceride levels, whereas individuals 
heterozygous for mutation in apoC-II do not have 
hypertriglyceridemia.
Both LPL and apoC-II deficiency usually present in 
childhood with recurrent episodes of severe abdominal 
pain due to acute pancreatitis. On funduscopic exami-
nation, the retinal blood vessels are opalescent (lipemia 
retinalis). Eruptive xanthomas, which are small, yellowish- 
white papules, often appear in clusters on the back, but-
tocks, and extensor surfaces of the arms and legs. These 
typically painless skin lesions may become pruritic. 
Hepatosplenomegaly results from the uptake of circu-
lating chylomicrons by reticuloendothelial cells in the 
liver and spleen. For unknown reasons, some patients 
with persistent and pronounced chylomicronemia never 
develop pancreatitis, eruptive xanthomas, or hepato-
splenomegaly. Premature CHD is not generally a fea-
ture of familial chylomicronemia syndromes.
The diagnoses of LPL and apoC-II deficiency are 
established enzymatically in specialized laboratories 
by assaying triglyceride lipolytic activity in posthepa-
rin plasma. Blood is sampled after an IV heparin injec-
tion to release the endothelial-bound LPL. LPL activity 
is profoundly reduced in both LPL and apoC-II defi-
ciency; in patients with apoC-II deficiency, it normal-
izes after the addition of normal plasma (providing a 
source of apoC-II). Molecular sequencing of the genes 
can be used to confirm the diagnosis.
The major therapeutic intervention in familial chy-
lomicronemia syndromes is dietary fat restriction (to as 
little as 15 g/d) with fat-soluble vitamin supplementa-
tion. Consultation with a registered dietician familiar 
with this disorder is essential. Caloric supplementation 
with medium-chain triglycerides, which are absorbed 
directly into the portal circulation, can be useful but 
may be associated with hepatic fibrosis if used for pro-
longed periods. If dietary fat restriction alone is not suc-
cessful in resolving the chylomicronemia, fish oils have 
been effective in some patients. In patients with apoC-II 
deficiency, apoC-II can be provided by infusing fresh-
frozen plasma to resolve the chylomicronemia in the 
acute setting. Management of patients with familial chy-
lomicronemia syndrome is particularly challenging dur-
ing pregnancy when VLDL production is increased and 
may require plasmapheresis to remove the circulating 
chylomicrons.
ApoA-V deficiency
Another apolipoprotein, ApoA-V, circulates at much lower 
concentrations than the other major apolipoproteins. 
Individuals harboring mutations in both ApoA-V alleles 
can present as adults with chylomicronemia. The exact 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
326
mechanism of action of ApoA-V is not known, but it 
appears to be required for the association of VLDL and 
chylomicrons with LPL.
GPIHBP1 deficiency
After LPL is synthesized in adipocytes, myocytes, or 
other cells, it is transported across the vascular endo-
thelium and is attached to a protein on the endothelial 
surface of capillaries called GPIHBP1. Homozygosity 
for mutations that interfere with GPIHBP1 synthesis or 
folding cause severe hypertriglyceridemia. The frequency 
of chylomicronemia due to mutations in GHIHBP1 has 
not been established but appears to be very rare.
Hepatic lipase deficiency
HL is a member of the same gene family as LPL and 
hydrolyzes triglycerides and phospholipids in remnant 
lipoproteins and HDLs. HL deficiency is a very rare 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by elevated 
plasma levels of cholesterol and triglycerides (mixed 
hyperlipidemia) due to the accumulation of circulating 
lipoprotein remnants and either a normal or elevated 
plasma level of HDL-C. The diagnosis is confirmed by 
measuring HL activity in postheparin plasma. Due to the 
small number of patients with HL deficiency, the asso-
ciation of this genetic defect with ASCVD is not clearly 
known, but lipid-lowering therapy is recommended.
Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (Type III 
hyperlipoproteinemia)
Like HL deficiency, familial dysbetalipoproteinemia 
(FDBL) (also known as type III hyperlipoproteinemia or 
familial broad β disease) is characterized by a mixed hyper-
lipidemia due to the accumulation of remnant lipopro-
tein particles. ApoE is present in multiple copies on 
chylomicron and VLDL remnants and mediates their 
removal via hepatic lipoprotein receptors (Fig. 21-2). 
FDBL is due to genetic variations in apoE that interfere 
with its ability to bind lipoprotein receptors. The APOE 
gene is polymorphic in sequence, resulting in the expres-
sion of three common isoforms: apoE3, which is the 
most common; and apoE2 and apoE4, which both dif-
fer from apoE3 by a single amino acid. Although asso-
ciated with slightly higher LDL-C levels and increased 
CHD risk, the apoE4 allele is not associated with FDBL. 
Patients with apoE4 have an increased incidence of late-
onset Alzheimer’s disease. ApoE2 has a lower affinity for 
the LDL receptor; therefore, chylomicron and VLDL 
remnants containing apoE2 are removed from plasma at 
a slower rate. Individuals who are homozygous for the 
E2 allele (the E2/E2 genotype) comprise the most com-
mon subset of patients with FDBL.
Approximately 0.5% of the general population are 
apoE2/E2 homozygotes, but only a small minority 
of these individuals develop FDBL. In most cases, an 
additional, identifiable factor precipitates the develop-
ment of hyperlipoproteinemia. The most common 
precipitating factors are a high-fat diet, diabetes mellitus, 
obesity, hypothyroidism, renal disease, HIV infection, 
estrogen deficiency, alcohol use, and certain drugs. Other 
mutations in apoE can cause a dominant form of FDBL 
where the hyperlipidemia is fully manifest in the het-
erozygous state, but these mutations are rare.
Patients with FDBL usually present in adulthood 
with incidental hyperlipidemia, xanthomas, premature 
coronary disease, or peripheral vascular disease. The dis-
ease seldom presents in women before menopause. Two 
distinctive types of xanthomas, tuberoeruptive and pal-
mar, are seen in FDBL patients. Tuberoeruptive xan-
thomas begin as clusters of small papules on the elbows, 
knees, or buttocks and can grow to the size of small 
grapes. Palmar xanthomas (alternatively called xantho-
mata striata palmaris) are orange-yellow discolorations of 
the creases in the palms and wrists. In FDBL, in contrast 
to other disorders of elevated triglycerides, the plasma 
levels of cholesterol and triglyceride are often elevated 
to a similar degree and the level of HDL-C is usually 
normal rather than being low.
The traditional approaches to diagnosis of this dis-
order are lipoprotein electrophoresis (broad β band) or 
ultracentrifugation (ratio of VLDL-C to total plasma tri-
glyceride >0.30). Protein methods (apoE phenotyping) 
or DNA-based methods (apoE genotyping) can be per-
formed to confirm homozygosity for apoE2. However, 
absence of the apoE2/E2 genotype does not rule out 
the diagnosis of FDBL, since other mutations in apoE 
can cause this condition.
Since FDBL is associated with increased risk of pre-
mature ASCVD, it should be treated aggressively. Subjects 
with FDBL tend to have more peripheral vascular disease 
than is typically seen in FH. Other metabolic conditions 
that can worsen the hyperlipidemia (see as discussed ear-
lier) should be aggressively treated. Patients with FDBL 
are typically very diet responsive and can respond favor-
ably to weight reduction and to low-cholesterol, low-fat 
diets. Alcohol intake should be curtailed. HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors, fibrates, and niacin are all generally 
effective in the treatment of FDBL, and sometimes com-
bination drug therapy is required.
Familial hypertriglyceridemia (FHTG)
FHTG is a relatively common (∼1 in 500) autosomal 
dominant disorder of unknown etiology characterized 
by moderately elevated plasma triglycerides accompa-
nied by more modest elevations in cholesterol. Since 
the major class of lipoproteins elevated in this disorder 
is VLDL, patients with this disorder are often referred 
to as having Type IV hyperlipoproteinemia (Fredrickson 
classification, Table 21-3). The elevated plasma lev-
els of VLDL are due to increased production of VLDL, 
impaired catabolism of VLDL, or a combination of these 
mechanisms. Some patients with FHTG have a more 
severe form of hyperlipidemia in which both VLDLs 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
327
Table 21-5
Secondary Forms of Hyperlipidemia
LDL
HDL
Chylomicrons 
Elevated
Lp(a) 
Elevated
Elevated
Reduced
Elevated
Reduced
VLDL Elevated
IDL Elevated
Hypothyroidism
Severe liver  
disease
Alcohol
Smoking
Obesity
Multiple 
myeloma
Autoimmune 
disease
Renal  
insufficiency
Nephrotic  
syndrome
Malabsorption
Exercise
DM type 2
DM type 2
Malnutrition
Exposure to 
chlorinated 
hydrocarbons
Obesity
Glycogen  
storage  
disease
Monoclonal 
gammopathy
DM type 2
Inflammation
Cholestasis
Gaucher’s  
disease
Malnutrition
Menopause
Acute  
intermittent 
porphyria
Chronic  
infectious  
disease
Drug:  
estrogen
Gaucher’s 
disease
Hepatitis
Alcohol
Autoimmune 
disease
Orchidectomy
Anorexia  
nervosa
Hepatoma
Drugs: 
thiazides, 
cyclosporin, 
tegretol
Hyperthyroidism
Drug: niacin 
toxicity
Drugs:  
anabolic 
steroids, 
beta 
blockers
Renal failure
Sepsis
Stress
Cushing’s  
syndrome
Pregnancy
Acromegaly
Lipodystrophy
Drugs:  
estrogen, beta 
blockers,  
glucocorticoids, 
bile acid  
binding resins, 
retinoic acid
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Acromegaly
Nephrosis
Drugs: growth 
hormone, 
isotretinoin
Abbreviations: DM, diabetes mellitus; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; Lp(a), 
lipoprotein A; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
and chylomicrons are elevated (Type V hyperlipidemia), 
since these two classes of lipoproteins compete for the 
same lipolytic pathway. Increased intake of simple car-
bohydrates, obesity, insulin resistance, alcohol use, and 
estrogen treatment, all of which increase VLDL synthe-
sis, can exacerbate this syndrome. FHTG appears not 
to be associated with increased risk of ASCVD in many 
families.
The diagnosis of FHTG is suggested by the triad of 
elevated levels of plasma triglycerides (250–1000 mg/dL), 
normal or only mildly increased cholesterol levels 
(<250 mg/dL), and reduced plasma levels of HDL-C. 
Plasma LDL-C levels are generally not increased and 
are often reduced due to defective metabolism of the 
triglyceride-rich particles. The identification of other 
first-degree relatives with hypertriglyceridemia is useful 
in making the diagnosis. FDBL and familial combined 
hyperlipidemia (FCHL) should also be ruled out since 
these two conditions are associated with a significantly 
increased risk of ASCVD. The plasma apoB levels are 
lower and the ratio of plasma triglyceride to cholesterol 
is higher in FHTG than in either FDBL or FCHL.
It is important to consider and rule out second-
ary causes of the hypertriglyceridemia (Table  21-5) 
before making the diagnosis of FHTG. Lipid-lowering 
drug therapy can frequently be avoided with appropri-
ate dietary and lifestyle changes. Patients with plasma 
triglyceride levels >500 mg/dL after a trial of diet and 
exercise should be considered for drug therapy to avoid 
the development of chylomicronemia and pancreatitis. 
Fibrate drugs or fish oils (omega 3 fatty acids) are rea-
sonable first-line approaches for FHTG, and niacin can 
also be considered in this condition. For more moderate 
elevations in triglyceride levels (250-500 mg/dL), statins 
are effective at lowering triglyceride levels.
Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL)
FCHL is generally characterized by moderate elevations 
in plasma levels of triglycerides (VLDL) and cholesterol 
(LDL) and reduced plasma levels of HDL-C. Approxi-
mately 20% of patients who develop CHD under age 
60 have FCHL. The disease appears to be autosomal 
dominant with incomplete penetrance, and affected fam-
ily members typically have one of three possible pheno-
types: (1) elevated plasma levels of LDL-C, (2) elevated 
plasma levels of triglycerides due to elevation in VLDL, 
or (3) elevated plasma levels of both LDL-C and triglyc-
eride. A classic feature of FCHL is that the lipoprotein 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
328
profile can switch among these three phenotypes in the 
same individual over time and may depend on factors 
such as diet, exercise, and weight. FCHL can mani-
fest in childhood but is usually not fully expressed until 
adulthood. A cluster of other metabolic risk factors are 
often found in association with this hyperlipidemia, 
including obesity, glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, 
and hypertension (the so-called metabolic syndrome, 
Chap. 18). These patients do not develop xanthomas.
Patients with FCHL almost always have significantly 
elevated plasma levels of apoB. The levels of apoB are 
disproportionately high relative to the plasma LDL-C 
concentration, indicating the presence of small, dense 
LDL particles, which are characteristic of this syn-
drome. Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia, which has been used 
to describe the state of elevated plasma levels of apoB 
with normal plasma LDL-C levels, is probably a form of 
FCHL. Individuals with FCHL generally share the same 
metabolic defect, which is overproduction of VLDL 
by the liver. The molecular etiology of FCHL remains 
poorly understood, and it is likely that defects in several 
different genes can cause the phenotype of FCHL.
The presence of a mixed dyslipidemia (plasma tri-
glyceride levels between 200 and 800 mg/dL and total 
cholesterol levels between 200 and 400 mg/dL, usually 
with HDL-C levels <40 mg/dL in men and <50 mg/
dL in women) and a family history of hyperlipidemia 
and/or premature CHD strongly suggests the diagnosis 
of FCHL.
Individuals with FCHL should be treated aggressively 
due to significantly increased risk of premature CHD. 
Decreased dietary intake of saturated fat and simple 
carbohydrates, aerobic exercise, and weight loss can 
all have beneficial effects on the lipid profile. Patients 
with diabetes should be aggressively treated to maintain 
good glucose control. Most patients with FCHL require 
lipid-lowering drug therapy to reduce lipoprotein lev-
els to the recommended range and reduce the high 
risk of ASCVD. Statins are effective in this condition, 
but many patients will require a second drug (choles-
terol absorption inhibitor, niacin, fibrate, or fish oils) for 
optimal control of lipoprotein levels.
Inherited Causes of Low Levels of 
ApoB-Containing Lipoproteins
Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHB)
Low plasma levels of LDL-C (the “β-lipoprotein”) with 
a genetic or inherited basis are referred to generically 
as familial hypobetalipoproteinemia. Traditionally this term 
has been used to refer to the condition of low total cho-
lesterol and LDL-C due to mutations in apoB, which 
represents the most common inherited form of hypo-
cholesterolemia. Most of the mutations causing FHB 
interfere with the production of apoB, resulting in 
reduced secretion and/or accelerated catabolism of the 
protein. Individuals heterozygous for these mutations 
usually have LDL-C levels <80 mg/dL and may enjoy 
protection from ASCVD, though this has not been rig-
orously demonstrated. Some heterozygotes have ele-
vated levels of hepatic triglycerides.
Mutations in both apoB alleles cause homozygous 
FHB, a disorder resembling abetalipoproteinemia (see 
“Abetalipoproteinemia”), although the neurologic find-
ings tend to be less severe. Patients with homozygous 
hypobetalipoproteinemia can be distinguished from 
individuals with abetalipoproteinemia by measuring the 
levels of LDL-C in the parents, which are low in hypo-
betalipoproteinemia and normal in abetalipoproteinemia.
PCSK9 deficiency
A phenocopy of FHB results from loss-of-function 
mutations in PCSK9. As reviewed previously, PCSK9 
normally promotes the degradation of the LDL receptor. 
Mutations that interfere with the synthesis of PCSK9, 
which are more common in individuals of African 
descent, result in increased LDL receptor activity and 
∼40% reduction in plasma level of LDL-C. A sequence 
variation of higher frequency (R46L) is found predomi-
nantly in individuals of European descent and is associ-
ated with a 15% reduction in LDL-C. Individuals with 
inactivating mutations are protected from developing 
CHD relative to those without these sequence varia-
tions, presumably due to having lower plasma cholesterol 
levels since birth.
Abetalipoproteinemia
The synthesis and secretion of apoB-containing lipopro-
teins in the enterocytes of the proximal small bowel and 
in the hepatocytes of the liver involve a complex series 
of events that coordinate the coupling of various lipids 
with apoB-48 and apoB-100, respectively. Abetalipopro-
teinemia is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by 
loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding micro-
somal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP), a protein 
that transfers lipids to nascent chylomicrons and VLDLs 
in the intestine and liver, respectively. Plasma levels of 
cholesterol and triglyceride are extremely low in this dis-
order, and chylomicrons, VLDLs, LDLs, and apoB are 
undetectable in plasma. The parents of patients with 
abetalipoproteinemia (obligate heterozygotes) have nor-
mal plasma lipid and apoB levels. Abetalipoproteinemia 
usually presents in early childhood with diarrhea and failure 
to thrive due to fat malabsorption. The initial neuro-
logic manifestations are loss of deep-tendon reflexes, fol-
lowed by decreased distal lower extremity vibratory and 
proprioceptive sense, dysmetria, ataxia, and the devel-
opment of a spastic gait, often by the third or fourth 
decade. Patients with abetalipoproteinemia also develop 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
329
a progressive pigmented retinopathy presenting with 
decreased night and color vision, followed by reduc-
tions in daytime visual acuity and ultimately progress-
ing to near-blindness. The presence of spinocerebellar 
degeneration and pigmented retinopathy in this disease 
has resulted in some patients with abetalipoproteinemia 
being misdiagnosed as having Friedreich’s ataxia.
Most clinical manifestations of abetalipoproteinemia 
result from defects in the absorption and transport of 
fat-soluble vitamins. Vitamin E and retinyl esters are 
normally transported from enterocytes to the liver by 
chylomicrons, and vitamin E is dependent on VLDL for 
transport out of the liver and into the circulation. As a 
consequence of the inability of these patients to secrete 
apoB-containing particles, patients with abetalipopro-
teinemia are markedly deficient in vitamin E and are 
also mildly to moderately deficient in vitamins A and K. 
Patients with abetalipoproteinemia should be referred 
to specialized centers for confirmation of the diagnosis 
and appropriate therapy. Treatment consists of a low-
fat, high-caloric, vitamin-enriched diet accompanied by 
large supplemental doses of vitamin E. It is imperative 
that treatment be initiated as soon as possible to help 
forestall development of neurologic sequelae, which can 
progress even with appropriate therapy. New therapies 
for this serious disease are needed.
Genetic Disorders of HDL 
Metabolism
Mutations in genes encoding proteins that play criti-
cal roles in HDL synthesis and catabolism can result in 
both reductions and elevations in plasma levels of HDL-
C. Unlike the genetic forms of hypercholesterolemia, 
which are invariably associated with premature coro-
nary atherosclerosis, genetic forms of hypoalphalipopro-
teinemia (low HDL-C) are not always associated with 
accelerated atherosclerosis.
Inherited Causes of Low Levels  
of HDL-C
Gene deletions in the apoAV-AI-CIII-AIV locus 
and coding mutations in ApoA-I
Complete genetic deficiency of apoA-I due to dele-
tion of the apoA-I gene results in the virtual absence 
of HDL from the plasma. The genes encoding apoA-I, 
apoC-III, apoA-IV, and apoA-V are clustered together 
on chromosome 11, and some patients with no apoA-I 
have genomic deletions that include other genes in 
the cluster. ApoA-I is required for LCAT activity. In the 
absence of LCAT, free cholesterol levels increase in 
both plasma (not HDL) and in tissues. The free cholesterol 
can form deposits in the cornea and in the skin, resulting in 
corneal opacities and planar xanthomas. Premature CHD 
is a common feature of apoA-I deficiency, especially 
when additional genes in the complex are also deleted.
Missense and nonsense mutations in the apoA-I gene 
have been identified in some patients with low plasma 
levels of HDL-C (usually 15–30 mg/dL), but these are 
very rare causes of low HDL-C levels. Patients hetero-
zygous for an Arg173Cys substitution in APOAI (so-
called apoA-IMilano) have very low plasma levels of HDL 
due to impaired LCAT activation and rapid catabolism 
of the mutant apolipoprotein and yet have no increased 
risk of premature CHD. Most other individuals with 
low plasma HDL-C levels due to missense mutations in 
apoA-I do not appear to have premature CHD. A few 
selected missense mutations in apoA-I and apoA-II pro-
mote the formation of amyloid fibrils causing systemic 
amyloidosis.
Tangier disease (ABCA1 deficiency)
Tangier disease is a very rare autosomal codominant 
form of extremely low plasma HDL-C caused by muta-
tions in the gene encoding ABCA1, a cellular trans-
porter that facilitates efflux of unesterified cholesterol 
and phospholipids from cells to apoA-I (Fig.  21-3). 
ABCA1 in the liver and intestine rapidly lipidates the 
apoA-I secreted from these tissues. In the absence of 
ABCA1, the nascent, poorly lipidated apoA-I is imme-
diately cleared from the circulation. Thus, patients with 
Tangier disease have extremely low circulating plasma 
levels of HDL-C (<5 mg/dL) and apoA-I (<5 mg/dL). 
Cholesterol accumulates in the reticuloendothelial sys-
tem of these patients, resulting in hepatosplenomegaly 
and pathognomonic enlarged, grayish yellow or orange 
tonsils. An intermittent peripheral neuropathy (mono-
neuritis multiplex) or a sphingomyelia-like neurologic 
disorder can also be seen in this disorder. Tangier dis-
ease is probably associated with some increased risk of 
premature atherosclerotic disease, although the associa-
tion is not as robust as might be anticipated, given the 
very low levels of HDL-C and apoA-I in these patients. 
Patients with Tangier disease also have low plasma lev-
els of LDL-C, which may attenuate the atherosclerotic 
risk. Obligate heterozygotes for ABCA1 mutations have 
moderately reduced plasma HDL-C levels (15–30 mg/dL) 
but their risk of premature CHD remains uncertain. 
ABCA1 mutations appear to be the cause of low HDL-C 
in a minority of individuals.
LCAT deficiency
This very rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by 
mutations in LCAT, an enzyme synthesized in the liver 
and secreted into the plasma, where it circulates associ-
ated with lipoproteins (Fig. 21-3). As reviewed previ-
ously, the enzyme is activated by apoA-I and mediates 
the esterification of cholesterol to form cholesteryl esters. 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
330
Consequently, in LCAT deficiency the proportion 
of free cholesterol in circulating lipoproteins is greatly 
increased (from ∼25% to >70% of total plasma choles-
terol). Lack of normal cholesterol esterification impairs 
formation of mature HDL particles, resulting in the rapid 
catabolism of circulating apoA-I. Two genetic forms of 
LCAT deficiency have been described in humans: com-
plete deficiency (also called classic LCAT deficiency) and 
partial deficiency (also called fish-eye disease). Progressive 
corneal opacification due to the deposition of free cho-
lesterol in the cornea, very low plasma levels of HDL-C 
(usually <10 mg/dL), and variable hypertriglyceridemia 
are characteristic of both disorders. In partial LCAT defi-
ciency, there are no other known clinical sequelae. In 
contrast, patients with complete LCAT deficiency have 
hemolytic anemia and progressive renal insufficiency 
that eventually leads to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). 
Remarkably, despite the extremely low plasma levels of 
HDL-C and apoA-I, premature ASCVD is not a con-
sistent feature of either LCAT deficiency or fish eye 
disease. The diagnosis can be confirmed in a special-
ized laboratory by assaying plasma LCAT activity or by 
sequencing the LCAT gene.
Primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia
Low plasma levels of HDL-C (the “alpha lipoprotein”) 
is referred to as hypoalphalipoproteinemia. Primary hypoal-
phalipoproteinemia is defined as a plasma HDL-C level 
below the tenth percentile in the setting of relatively 
normal cholesterol and triglyceride levels, no apparent 
secondary causes of low plasma HDL-C, and no clinical 
signs of LCAT deficiency or Tangier disease. This syn-
drome is often referred to as isolated low HDL. A fam-
ily history of low HDL-C facilitates the diagnosis of an 
inherited condition, which usually follows an autosomal 
dominant pattern. The metabolic etiology of this disease 
appears to be primarily accelerated catabolism of HDL 
and its apolipoproteins. Some of these patients may 
have ABCA1 mutations and therefore technically have 
heterozygous Tangier disease. Several kindreds with 
primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia have been described 
in association with an increased incidence of prema-
ture CHD, although this is not an invariant association. 
Association of hypoalphalipoproteinemia with prema-
ture CHD may depend on the specific nature of the 
gene defect or the underlying metabolic defect respon-
sible for the low plasma HDL-C level.
Inherited Causes of High Levels  
of HDL-C
CETP deficiency
Loss-of-function mutations in both alleles of the gene 
encoding CETP cause substantially elevated HDL-C 
levels (usually >150 mg/dL). As noted above, CETP 
facilitates the transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to 
apoB-containing lipoproteins (Fig. 21-3). The absence 
of this transfer results in an increase in the cholesteryl 
ester content of HDL and a reduction in plasma levels of 
LDL-C. The large, cholesterol-rich HDL particles cir-
culating in these patients are cleared at a reduced rate. 
CETP deficiency was first diagnosed in Japanese persons 
and is rare outside of Japan. The relationship of CETP 
deficiency to ASCVD remains unresolved. Heterozy-
gotes for CETP deficiency have only modestly elevated 
HDL-C levels. Based on the phenotype of high HDL-C 
in CETP deficiency, pharmacologic inhibition of CETP 
is under development as a new therapeutic approach to 
both raise HDL-C levels and lower LDL-C levels, but 
whether it will reduce the risk of ASCVD remains to be 
determined.
Familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia
The condition of high plasma levels of HDL-C is 
referred to as hyperalphalipoproteinemia and is defined 
as a plasma HDL-C level above the ninetieth percen-
tile. This trait runs in families, and outside of Japan it is 
unlikely to be due to CETP deficiency. Most, but not 
all, persons with this condition appear to have a reduced 
risk of CHD and increased longevity. Recent evidence 
is consistent with mutations in endothelial lipase con-
tributing to this phenotype in some cases.
Secondary Disorders of Lipoprotein 
Metabolism
Significant changes in plasma levels of lipoproteins are 
seen in a variety of diseases. It is crucial that second-
ary causes of dyslipidemias (Table 21-5) are considered 
prior to initiation of lipid-lowering therapy.
Obesity
(See also Chaps. 16 and 17) Obesity is frequently accom-
panied by dyslipidemia. The increase in adipocyte mass 
and accompanying decreased insulin sensitivity associ-
ated with obesity has multiple effects on lipid metab-
olism. More free fatty acids are delivered from the 
expanded adipose tissue to the liver, where they are 
reesterified in hepatocytes to form triglycerides, which 
are packaged into VLDLs for secretion into the circu-
lation. The increased insulin levels promote fatty acid 
synthesis in the liver. Increased dietary intake of simple 
carbohydrates also drives hepatic production of VLDLs, 
resulting in elevations in VLDL and/or LDL in some 
obese subjects. Plasma levels of HDL-C tend to be low 
in obesity, due in part to reduced lipolysis. Weight loss 
is often associated with reductions in plasma levels of 
circulating apoB-containing lipoproteins and increases 
in the plasma levels of HDL-C.
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
331
Diabetes mellitus
(See also Chap. 19) Patients with type I diabetes mel-
litus generally do not have hyperlipidemia if they remain 
under good glycemic control. Diabetic ketoacidosis is fre-
quently accompanied by hypertriglyceridemia due to an 
increased hepatic influx of free fatty acids from adipose 
tissue. Patients with type II diabetes mellitus are usually 
dyslipidemic, even when under relatively good glyce-
mic control. The high levels of insulin and insulin resis-
tance associated with type II diabetes has multiple effects 
on fat metabolism: (1) a decrease in LPL activity result-
ing in reduced catabolism of chylomicrons and VLDLs, 
(2) an increase in the release of free fatty acid from the 
adipose tissue, (3) an increase in fatty acid synthesis in 
the liver, and (4) an increase in hepatic VLDL produc-
tion. Patients with type II diabetes mellitus have several 
lipid abnormalities, including elevated plasma triglycer-
ides (due to increased VLDL and lipoprotein remnants), 
elevated levels of dense LDL, and decreased plasma lev-
els of HDL-C. In some diabetic patients, especially those 
with a genetic defect in lipid metabolism, the triglycerides 
can be extremely elevated, resulting in the development 
of pancreatitis. Elevated plasma LDL-C levels usually are 
not a feature of diabetes mellitus and suggest the presence 
of an underlying lipoprotein abnormality or may indicate 
the development of diabetic nephropathy.
Lipodystrophy is associated with profound insu-
lin resistance and elevated plasma levels of VLDL and 
chylomicrons that can be especially difficult to con-
trol. Those with congenital generalized lipodystrophy 
have absence of subcutaneous fat associated with muscle 
hypertrophy and hepatic steatosis; some of these patients 
have been treated successfully with leptin. Partial lipo-
dystropy can present with dyslipidemia and the diagnosis 
should be entertained in patients with variations in body 
fat distribution, particularly increased truncal fat accom-
panied by reduced fat in the buttocks and extremities.
Thyroid disease
(See also Chap. 4) Hypothyroidism is associated with 
elevated plasma LDL-C levels due primarily to a reduc-
tion in hepatic LDL receptor function and delayed 
clearance of LDL. Conversely, plasma levels of LDL-C 
are often reduced in the hyperthyroid patient. Hypo-
thyroid patients also frequently have increased levels of 
circulating IDL, and some patients with hypothyroidism 
also have mild hypertriglyceridemia. Because hypothy-
roidism is often subtle and therefore easily overlooked, 
all patients presenting with elevated plasma levels of 
LDL-C, IDL, or triglycerides should be screened for 
hypothyroidism. Thyroid replacement therapy usually 
ameliorates the hypercholesterolemia; if not, the patient 
probably has a primary lipoprotein disorder and may 
require lipid-lowering drug therapy.
Renal disorders
Nephrotic syndrome is often associated with pronounced 
hyperlipoproteinemia, which is usually mixed but can 
manifest as hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyceride-
mia. The hyperlipidemia of nephrotic syndrome appears 
to be due to a combination of increased hepatic produc-
tion and decreased clearance of VLDLs, with increased 
LDL production. Effective treatment of the underly-
ing renal disease normalizes the lipid profile, but most 
patients with chronic nephrotic syndrome require lipid-
lowering drug therapy.
ESRD is often associated with mild hypertriglyc-
eridemia (<300 mg/dL) due to the accumulation of 
VLDLs and remnant lipoproteins in the circulation. 
Triglyceride lipolysis and remnant clearance are both 
reduced in patients with renal failure. Because the risk 
of ASCVD is increased in ESRD subjects with hyper-
lipidemia, they should probably be aggressively treated 
with lipid-lowering agents, even though there is inad-
equate data at present to indicate that this population 
benefits from LDL-lowering therapy.
Patients with renal transplants usually have increased 
lipid levels due to the effect of the drugs required for 
immunosuppression (cyclosporine and glucocorticoids) 
and present a difficult management problem since 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors must be used cau-
tiously in these patients.
Liver disorders
Because the liver is the principal site of formation and 
clearance of lipoproteins, it is not surprising that liver 
diseases can affect plasma lipid levels in a variety of ways. 
Hepatitis due to infection, drugs, or alcohol is often 
associated with increased VLDL synthesis and mild to 
moderate hypertriglyceridemia. Severe hepatitis and liver 
failure are associated with dramatic reductions in plasma 
cholesterol and triglycerides due to reduced lipopro-
tein biosynthetic capacity. Cholestasis is associated with 
hypercholesterolemia, which can be very severe. A 
major pathway by which cholesterol is excreted from 
the body is via secretion into bile, either directly or after 
conversion to bile acids, and cholestasis blocks this criti-
cal excretory pathway. In cholestasis, free cholesterol, 
coupled with phospholipids, is secreted into the plasma 
as a constituent of a lamellar particle called LP-X. The
particles can deposit in skinfolds, producing lesions resem-
bling those seen in patients with FDBL (xanthomata 
strata palmaris). Planar and eruptive xanthomas can also 
be seen in patients with cholestasis.
Alcohol
Regular alcohol consumption has a variable effect on 
plasma lipid levels. The most common effect of alco-
hol is to increase plasma triglyceride levels. Alcohol 
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
332
consumption stimulates hepatic secretion of VLDL, 
possibly by inhibiting the hepatic oxidation of free fatty 
acids, which then promote hepatic triglyceride synthe-
sis and VLDL secretion. The usual lipoprotein pattern 
seen with alcohol consumption is Type IV (increased 
VLDLs), but persons with an underlying primary lipid 
disorder may develop severe hypertriglyceridemia (Type 
V) if they drink alcohol. Regular alcohol use also raises 
plasma levels of HDL-C.
Estrogen
Estrogen administration is associated with increased 
VLDL and HDL synthesis, resulting in elevated plasma 
levels of both triglycerides and HDL-C. This lipoprotein 
pattern is distinctive since the levels of plasma triglyc-
eride and HDL-C are typically inversely related. Plasma 
triglyceride levels should be monitored when birth con-
trol pills or postmenopausal estrogen therapy is initiated 
to ensure that the increase in VLDL production does 
not lead to severe hypertriglyceridemia. Use of low-dose 
preparations of estrogen or the estrogen patch can mini-
mize the effect of exogenous estrogen on lipids.
Lysosomal storage diseases
Cholesteryl ester storage disease (due to deficiency in 
lysosomal acid lipase) and glycogen storage diseases 
such as von Gierke’s disease (caused by mutations in 
glucose-6-phosphatase) are rare causes of secondary 
hyperlipidemias.
Cushing’s syndrome
(See also Chap. 5) Glucocorticoid excess is associated 
with increased VLDL synthesis and hypertriglyceride-
mia. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome can also have 
mild elevations in plasma levels of LDL-C.
Drugs
Many drugs have an impact on lipid metabolism and 
can result in significant alterations in the lipoprotein 
profile (Table 21-5).
Screening
(See also Chap. 18) Guidelines for the screening and man-
agement of lipid disorders have been provided by an 
expert Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) convened by the 
National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) of the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The NCEP 
ATPIII guidelines published in 2001 recommend that 
all adults older than age 20 years should have plasma 
levels of cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL-C, and HDL-C 
measured after a 12-hour overnight fast. In most clinical 
laboratories, the total cholesterol and triglycerides in the 
plasma are measured enzymatically, and then the cho-
lesterol in the supernatant is measured after precipita-
tion of apoB-containing lipoproteins to determine the 
HDL-C. The LDL-C is estimated using the following 
equation:
LDL-C = total cholesterol − (triglycerides/5) − HDL-C.
(The VLDL-C is estimated by dividing the plasma 
triglyceride by 5, reflecting the ratio of cholesterol to 
triglyceride in VLDL particles.) This formula is rea-
sonably accurate if test results are obtained on fast-
ing plasma and if the triglyceride level does not exceed 
∼200 mg/dL; by convention it cannot be used if the 
triglyceride level is >400 mg/dL. The accurate deter-
mination of LDL-C levels in patients with triglyceride 
levels >200 mg/dL requires application of ultracentri-
fugation techniques or other direct assays for LDL-C. 
If the triglyceride level is >200 mg/dL, the guidelines 
recommend that the “non-HDL-C” be calculated by 
simple subtraction of HDL-C from the total cholesterol 
and that this be considered a secondary target of ther-
apy. Further evaluation and treatment is based primarily 
on the plasma LDL-C and non-HDL-C levels as well as 
assessment of overall cardiovascular risk.
Diagnosis
The critical first step in managing a lipid disorder is to 
determine the class or classes of lipoproteins that are 
increased or decreased in the patient. The Fredrickson clas-
sification scheme for hyperlipoproteinemias (Table 21-3), 
though less commonly used now than in the past, can 
be helpful in this regard. Once the hyperlipidemia is 
accurately classified, efforts should be directed to rule 
out any possible secondary causes of the hyperlipidemia 
(Table 21-5). Although many patients with hyperlipid-
emia have a primary or genetic cause of their lipid dis-
order, secondary factors frequently contribute to the 
hyperlipidemia. A fasting glucose should be obtained in 
the initial workup of all subjects with an elevated tri-
glyceride level. Nephrotic syndrome and chronic renal 
insufficiency should be excluded by obtaining urine 
protein and serum creatinine. Liver function tests should 
be performed to rule out hepatitis and cholestasis. Hypo-
thyroidism should be ruled out by measuring serum 
TSH. Patients with hyperlipidemia, especially hypertri-
glyceridemia, who drink alcohol should be encouraged to 
decrease their intake. Sedentary lifestyle, obesity, and smok-
ing are all associated with low HDL-C levels, and patients 
should be counseled about these issues.
Once secondary causes for the elevated lipoprotein 
levels have been ruled out, attempts should be made to 
diagnose the primary lipid disorder since the underlying 
etiology has a significant effect on the risk of developing 
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
333
CHD, on the response to drug therapy, and on the 
management of other family members. Often, determin-
ing the correct diagnosis requires a detailed family med-
ical history and, in some cases, lipid analyses in family 
members.
If the fasting plasma triglyceride level is >1000 mg/
dL, the patient almost always has chylomicronemia 
and either has Type I or Type V hyperlipoproteinemia 
(Table 21-3). The plasma triglyceride-to-cholesterol 
ratio helps distinguish between these two possibilities 
and is higher in Type I than Type V hyperlipoprotein-
emia. If the patient has Type I hyperlipoproteinemia, a 
postheparin lipolytic assay should be performed to deter-
mine if the patient has LPL or apoC-II deficiency. Type 
V is a much more frequent form of chylomicronemia 
in the adult patient. Often treatment of secondary fac-
tors contributing to the hyperlipidemia (diet, obesity, 
glucose intolerance, alcohol ingestion, estrogen therapy) 
will change a Type V into a Type IV pattern, reducing 
the risk of developing acute pancreatitis.
If the levels of LDL-C are very high (greater than 
a ninety-fifth percentile), it is likely the patient has a 
genetic form of hyperlipidemia. The presence of severe 
hypercholesterolemia, tendon xanthomas, and an autoso-
mal dominant pattern of inheritance are consistent with 
the diagnosis of either FH, FDB, or ADH-PCSK9. At 
the present time, there is no compelling reason to per-
form molecular studies to further refine the molecular 
diagnosis, since the treatment of FH and FDB is identi-
cal. Recessive forms of severe hypercholesterolemia are 
rare, and if the patient with severe hypercholesterolemia 
has parents with normal cholesterol levels, sitosterolemia 
should be considered; a clue to the diagnosis of sitos-
terolemia is the greater than expected response of the 
hypercholesterolemia to reductions in dietary cholesterol 
content or to treatment with either a cholesterol absorp-
tion inhibitor (ezetimibe) or to bile acid resins. Patients 
with more moderate hypercholesterolemia that does not 
segregate in families as a monogenic trait are likely to 
have polygenic hypercholesterolemia.
The most common error in the diagnosis and treat-
ment of lipid disorders is in patients with a mixed 
hyperlipidemia without chylomicronemia. Elevations 
in the plasma levels of both cholesterol and triglycerides 
are seen in patients with increased plasma levels of IDL 
(Type III) and of LDL and VLDL (Type IIB) and in 
patients with increased levels of VLDL (Type IV). The 
ratio of triglyceride to cholesterol is higher in Type IV 
than the other two disorders. The plasma levels of apoB 
are highest in Type IIB. A beta quantification to deter-
mine the VLDL-C/triglyceride ratio in plasma (see dis-
cussion of FDBL) or a direct measurement of the plasma 
LDL-C should be performed at least once prior to ini-
tiation of lipid-lowering therapy to determine if the 
hyperlipidemia is due to the accumulation of remnants 
or to an increase in both LDL and VLDL.
Treatment	
Lipoprotein Disorders
Clinical Evidence That Treatment of 
Dyslipidemia Reduces Risk of CHD
Observational Data  Multiple epidemiologic stud-
ies have demonstrated a strong relationship between 
plasma levels of LDL-C and CHD. A direct connection 
between plasma cholesterol levels and the atheroscle-
rotic process was made in humans when aortic fatty 
streaks in young persons were shown to be strongly cor-
related with serum cholesterol levels. The elucidation of 
homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia was proof 
that high plasma levels of LDL-C alone are sufficient to 
cause CAD. Moreover, PCSK9 deficiency proves that hav-
ing a lifelong reduction in plasma level of LDL-C is asso-
ciated with a marked reduction in cardiovascular risk.
Clinical trials: LDL-C Reduction  Early clinical 
trials of cholesterol (mostly LDL-C) reduction utilized 
niacin, bile acid sequestrants, and even the surgical 
approach of partial ileal bypass to reduce serum choles-
terol levels. Although most of these early studies found 
a small but significant reduction in cardiac events, no 
decrease in total mortality was seen. The discovery of 
more potent and well-tolerated cholesterol-lowering 
agents, namely HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), 
ushered in a series of large cholesterol reduction trials 
that unequivocally established the benefit of cholesterol 
reduction. The first of these studies was the Scandina-
vian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S) in which hyper-
cholesterolemic men with CHD who were treated with 
simvastatin had a reduction in major coronary events 
of 44% and a reduction in total mortality of 30%. These 
impressive results were followed by additional studies 
using statins. The consistency of results of these stud- 
ies is remarkable. They demonstrated statins to be effec-
tive in primary as well as secondary prevention, in women 
as well as men, in elderly as well as middle-aged individ-
uals, and in patients with only modestly elevated LDL-C 
levels as well as those with severe hypercholesterol-
emia. In general, these studies demonstrated that a 1% 
reduction in LDL-C level is associated with a reduction in 
coronary events of a similar magnitude, and an ∼40 mg/
dL reduction in LDL-C is associated with an ∼22% reduc-
tion in coronary events.
More recent studies have enrolled subjects with 
average or subaverage plasma LDL-C levels and have 
involved targeting the on-treatment LDL-C to even 
lower levels. For example, the Heart Protection Study 
(HPS) included 20,536 men and women, ages 40–80 years, 
who had either established ASCVD or were at high risk 
for the development of CHD (primarily diabetes); the 
only lipid entry criterion was a total plasma cholesterol 
level of >135 mg/dL. Treatment with simvastatin for an 
average of 5 years resulted in a 24% reduction in major
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
334
coronary events and a highly significant 13% reduction 
in all-cause mortality. Importantly, the relative benefit 
of statin therapy was similar across tertiles of baseline 
LDL-C, and even the large subgroup of individuals with 
an LDL-C <100 mg/dL at baseline experienced signifi-
cant benefit from therapy. This study demonstrated 
that statin therapy is beneficial in high-risk subjects, 
even if the baseline LDL-C level is below the currently 
recommended targeted goal; it also helped to shift the 
emphasis from simply treating elevated cholesterol to 
treating patients at high risk of CHD. Additional large-
scale clinical trials have expanded on these findings 
and confirmed that individuals with other cardiovas-
cular risk factors (hypertension, diabetes) benefit from 
LDL-lowering therapy even when the initial LDL-C level 
is only modestly elevated. The JUPITER trial was a pri-
mary prevention trial in subjects without CHD and with 
LDL-C <130 mg/dL but with an elevated plasma level of 
C-reactive protein (CRP). Treatment with rosuvastatin 
reduced LDL-C by an average of 50% and significantly 
reduced cardiovascular events, further extending the 
indication for statin therapy in primary prevention.
Further studies have compared different statin regi-
mens to show that greater reductions in LDL-C levels 
with treatment are associated with a greater reduc-
tion in major cardiovascular events. Based on several of 
these studies, a white paper was issued by the NCEP in 
2004 establishing an “optional” LDL-C goal of <70 mg/
dL in high-risk patients with CHD and of <100 mg/dL 
in very-high-risk patients without known CHD. These 
optional targets have been widely embraced, and clini-
cal practice is clearly evolving to treating CHD and high-
risk patients more aggressively for LDL reduction.
Clinical Trials: The Triglyceride-HDL Axis 
Abnormalities of the triglyceride high-density lipopro-
tein (TG-HDL) axis are common in patients with CHD, 
although data supporting pharmacologic intervention 
in the TG-HDL axis is less compelling than data support-
ing LDL-C reduction. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates), 
nicotinic acid (niacin), and omega 3 fatty acids (fish 
oils) are the primary agents currently available to lower 
plasma triglyceride levels and increase plasma levels of 
HDL-C. Fibrates have been used as lipid-lowering drugs 
for several decades and are more effective in reducing 
plasma triglyceride levels and relatively less effective in 
increasing plasma HDL-C levels. The results of clinical 
trials using fibrates have been mixed. Some studies such 
as the Helsinki Heart Study (HHS) and the Veteran Affairs 
High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol Intervention Trial 
(VA-HIT) demonstrated a significant reduction in non-
fatal myocardial infarction and coronary death with 
gemfibrozil therapy. However, the Bezafibrate Infarc-
tion Prevention (BIP) trial of bezafibrate versus placebo 
in CHD patients with low HDL-C failed to demonstrate
a statistically significant reduction in coronary events; 
the Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Dia-
betes (FIELD) trial of fenofibrate in patients with type 
2 diabetes failed to show a significant reduction in its 
primary endpoint of nonfatal myocardial infarction and 
coronary death; and the Action to Control Cardiovascu-
lar Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) study of fenofibrate versus 
placebo added to simvastatin in patients with type 2 
diabetes failed to show a significant reduction in its pri-
mary endpoint of major acute cardiovascular events. In 
each of these studies, the subgroup with elevated base-
line triglycerides suggested benefit.
While niacin is the most effective HDL-raising drug 
currently available, it has not been tested for its abil-
ity to reduce cardiovascular risk in subjects with low 
plasma levels of HDL-C. The AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE 
trials are ongoing studies of the effect of niacin added 
to baseline statin therapy in patients with CHD and 
low HDL-C. Finally, while low-dose fish oils have been 
shown to reduce cardiovascular events, higher doses 
that reduce triglyceride levels have not been tested for 
their ability to reduce cardiovascular events. Definitive 
proof that treating the TG-HDL axis reduces cardiovas-
cular events is likely to come from new therapies that 
are more effective at specifically targeting VLDL and/or 
HDL particles.
Clinical Approach to Lipid-Modifying 
Therapy  The major goal of lipid-modifying ther-
apy in most patients with disorders of lipid metabolism 
is to prevent ASCVD and its complications. Management 
of lipid disorders should be based on clinical trial data 
demonstrating that treatment reduces cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality, although reasonable extrapo-
lation of these data to specific subgroups is sometimes 
required. Clearly, elevated plasma levels of LDL-C are 
strongly associated with increased risk of ASCVD, and 
treatment to lower the levels of plasma LDL-C decreases 
the risk of clinical cardiovascular events in both second-
ary and primary prevention. Although the proportional 
benefit accrued from reducing plasma LDL-C appears 
to be similar over the entire range of LDL-C values, the 
absolute risk reduction depends on the baseline level of 
cardiovascular risk. The treatment guidelines developed 
by NCEP ATPIII and the 2004 white paper incorporate 
these principles. As noted earlier, abnormalities in the 
TG-HDL axis (elevated triglyceride, low HDL-C, or both) 
are commonly seen in patients with CHD or who are at 
high risk for developing it, but clinical trial data support-
ing the treatment of these abnormalities is much less 
compelling, and the pharmacologic tools for their man-
agement are more limited. Importantly, the NCEP ATPIII 
guidelines promote the use of the “non-HDL-C” as a sec-
ondary target of therapy in patients with triglyceride lev-
els >200 mg/dL. The goals for non-HDL-C are 30 mg/dL
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
335
higher than the goals for LDL-C. Thus, many patients 
with abnormalities of the TG-HDL axis require additional 
therapy for reduction of non-HDL-C to recommended 
goals.
Nonpharmacologic Treatment
Diet  Dietary modification is an important compo-
nent in the management of dyslipidemia. The physician 
should assess the content of the patient’s diet and pro-
vide suggestions for dietary modifications. In the patient 
with elevated LDL-C, dietary saturated fat and choles-
terol should be restricted. For individuals with hyper-
triglyceridemia, the intake of simple carbohydrates 
should be curtailed. For severe hypertriglyceridemia 
(>1000 mg/dL), restriction of total fat intake is critical. The 
most widely used diet to lower the LDL-C level is the “Step 
I diet” developed by the American Heart Association. 
Most patients have a relatively modest (<10%) decrease 
in plasma levels of LDL-C on a Step I diet in the absence of 
any associated weight loss. Almost all persons experience 
a decrease in plasma HDL-C levels with a reduction in the 
amount of total and saturated fat in their diet.
Foods and Additives  Certain foods and dietary 
additives are associated with modest reductions in 
plasma cholesterol levels. Plant stanol and sterol esters 
are available in a variety of foods, such as spreads, salad 
dressings, and snack bars. Plant sterol and sterol esters 
interfere with cholesterol absorption and reduce plasma 
LDL-C levels by ∼10% when taken three times per day. 
The addition to the diet of psyllium, soy protein, or Chi-
nese red yeast rice (which contains lovastatin) can have 
modest cholesterol-lowering effects. No controlled 
studies have been performed in which several of these 
nonpharmacologic options have been combined to 
address their additive or synergistic effects.
Weight Loss and Exercise  The treatment 
of obesity, if present, can have a favorable impact on 
plasma lipid levels and should be actively encouraged. 
Plasma triglyceride and LDL-C levels tend to fall and 
HDL-C levels tend to increase in obese subjects after 
weight reduction. Regular aerobic exercise can also 
have a positive effect on lipids, in large measure due to 
the associated weight reduction. Aerobic exercise has a 
very modest elevating effect on plasma levels of HDL-C 
in most individuals but also has cardiovascular benefits 
that extend beyond the effects on plasma lipid levels.
Pharmacologic 
Treatment  The deci-
sion to use drug therapy depends on the level of car-
diovascular risk. Drug therapy for hypercholesterolemia 
in patients with established CHD is well supported by 
clinical trial data, as reviewed earlier. Even patients with 
CHD or risk factors who have “average” LDL-C levels 
benefit from treatment. Drug treatment to lower LDL-C
levels in patients with CHD is also highly cost-effective. 
Patients with diabetes mellitus without known CHD 
have similar cardiovascular risk to those without diabe-
tes but with preexisting CHD. The NCEP ATPIII guidelines 
recommended estimating absolute risk of a cardiovascu-
lar event over 10 years using a scoring system based on 
the Framingham Heart Study database. Patients with a 
10-year absolute CHD risk of >20% are considered “CHD 
risk equivalents” to be treated as aggressively as patients 
with existing CHD. Current NCEP ATPIII guidelines call for 
drug therapy to reduce LDL-C to <100 mg/dL in patients 
with established CHD, other ASCVD (aortic aneurysm, 
peripheral vascular disease, or cerebrovascular disease), 
diabetes mellitus, or CHD risk equivalents; and “option-
ally” to reduce LDL-C to <70 mg/dL in high-risk CHD 
patients. Based on these guidelines, virtually all CHD and 
CHD risk-equivalent patients require cholesterol-low-
ering drug therapy. Moderate-risk patients with two or 
more risk factors and a 10-year absolute risk of 10–20% 
should be treated to a goal LDL-C of <130 mg/dL or 
“optionally” to LDL-C <100 mg/dL.
Although it is helpful to consider 10-year absolute risk 
in making clinical decisions about lipid-altering drug ther-
apy, there are situations where 10-year risk is low but 
lifetime risk is very high and therefore treatment is indi-
cated. A typical example would be a young adult with 
heterozygous FH and an LDL-C >220 mg/dL. Despite 
a very low 10-year absolute risk, every such patient 
should be treated with drug therapy to reduce lifetime 
risk. Indeed, all patients with markedly elevated plasma 
levels of LDL-C levels (>190 mg/dL) should be strongly 
considered for drug therapy even if their 10-year abso-
lute CHD risk is not elevated. The decision of whether 
to initiate drug treatment in individuals with plasma 
LDL-C levels between 130 and 190 mg/dL remains con-
troversial and depends on both 10-year and lifetime 
risk. Although it is desirable to avoid drug treatment in 
patients who are unlikely to develop CHD, a high pro-
portion of patients who eventually develop CHD have 
plasma LDL-C levels within this range. The presence of 
other risk factors such as a low plasma level of HDL-C 
(<40 mg/dL) or the diagnosis of the metabolic syn-
drome would argue in favor of drug therapy (Chap. 18). 
Other laboratory tests such as an elevated plasma level 
of apoB, Lp(a), or high-sensitivity C-reactive protein may 
assist in the identification of high-risk individuals who 
should be considered for drug therapy when their LDL-C 
is in a “gray zone.”
Drug treatment is also indicated in patients with tri-
glycerides >500 mg/dL who have been screened and 
treated for secondary causes of hypertriglyceridemia. 
The goal is to reduce fasting plasma triglycerides to 
below 500 mg/dL to prevent the risk of acute pancreati-
tis. When triglycerides are 200–500 mg/dL, the decision
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
336
to use drug therapy depends on the risk of the patient 
developing chylomicronemia and an assessment of 
cardiovascular risk. Most major clinical endpoint trials 
with statins have excluded persons with triglyceride lev-
els >350–450 mg/dL, and there are therefore few data 
regarding the effectiveness of statins in reducing cardio-
vascular risk in persons with hypertriglyceridemia. More 
data are needed regarding the relative effectiveness of 
statins, fibrates, niacin, and fish oils for reducing cardio-
vascular risk in this setting. Combination therapy is often 
required for optimal control of mixed dyslipidemia.
HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors (Statins) 
HMG-CoA reductase is a key enzyme in cholesterol bio-
synthesis, and inhibition of this enzyme decreases cho-
lesterol synthesis. By inhibiting cholesterol biosynthesis, 
statins lead to increased hepatic LDL receptor activity as 
a counterregulatory mechanism and thus accelerated 
clearance of circulating LDL, resulting in a dose-depen-
dent reduction in plasma levels of LDL-C. The magni-
tude of LDL lowering associated with statin treatment 
varies widely among individuals, but once a patient is 
on a statin, the doubling of the statin dose produces 
an ∼6% further reduction in the level of plasma LDL-C.
The statins currently available differ in their LDL-C 
reducing potency (Table 21-6). Currently, there is no 
convincing evidence that any of the different statins 
confer an advantage that is independent of the effect 
on LDL-C. Statins also reduce plasma triglycerides in a 
dose-dependent fashion, which is roughly proportional 
to their LDL-C–lowering effects (if the triglycerides are 
<400 mg/dL). Statins have a modest HDL-raising effect 
(5–10%) that is not generally dose dependent.
Statins are well tolerated and can be taken in tab-
let form once a day. Potential side effects include dys-
pepsia, headaches, fatigue, and muscle or joint pains. 
Severe myopathy and even rhabdomyolysis occur 
rarely with statin treatment. The risk of statin-associated 
myopathy is increased by the presence of older age, 
frailty, renal insufficiency, and coadministration of drugs 
that interfere with the metabolism of statins such as 
erythromycin and related antibiotics, antifungal agents, 
immunosuppressive drugs, and fibric acid derivatives 
(particularly gemfibrozil). Severe myopathy can usually 
be avoided by careful patient selection, avoidance of 
interacting drugs, and instructing the patient to contact 
the physician immediately in the event of unexplained 
muscle pain. In the event of muscle symptoms, the 
plasma creatine kinase (CK) level should be obtained to 
document the myopathy. Serum CK levels need not be 
monitored on a routine basis in patients taking statins, 
as an elevated CK in the absence of symptoms does 
not predict the development of myopathy and does 
not necessarily suggest the need for discontinuing the 
drug.
Another consequence of statin therapy can be eleva-
tion in liver transaminases [alanine (ALT) and aspartate 
(AST)]. They should be checked before starting therapy, 
at 2–3 months, and then annually. Substantial (greater 
than three times the upper limit of normal) elevation 
in transaminases is relatively rare and mild to moderate 
(one to three times normal) elevation in transaminases 
in the absence of symptoms need not mandate discon-
tinuing the medication. Severe clinical hepatitis asso-
ciated with statins is exceedingly rare, and the trend is 
toward less frequent monitoring of transaminases in 
patients taking statins. The statin-associated elevation 
in liver enzymes resolves upon discontinuation of the 
medication.
Statins appear to be remarkably safe. Meta-analyses 
of large randomized controlled clinical trials with statins 
do not suggest an increase in any major noncardiac 
diseases. Statins are the drug class of choice for LDL-C 
reduction and are by far the most widely used class of 
lipid-lowering drugs.
Cholesterol Absorption Inhibitors  Cholesterol 
within the lumen of the small intestine is derived from 
the diet (about one-third) and the bile (about two-thirds) 
and is actively absorbed by the enterocyte through a 
process that involves the protein NPC1L1. Ezetimibe 
(Table 21-6) is a cholesterol absorption inhibitor that 
binds directly to and inhibits NPC1L1 and blocks the 
intestinal absorption of cholesterol. Ezetimibe (10 mg) 
inhibits cholesterol absorption by almost 60%, resulting 
in a reduction in delivery of dietary sterols in the liver 
and an increase in hepatic LDL receptor expression. The 
mean reduction in plasma LDL-C on ezetimibe (10 mg) 
is 18%, and the effect is additive when used in combina-
tion with a statin. Effects on triglyceride and HDL-C levels 
are negligible, and no cardiovascular outcome data have 
been reported. When used in combination with a statin, 
monitoring of liver transaminases is recommended. The 
only role for ezetimibe in monotherapy is in patients 
who do not tolerate statins; the drug is often added to a 
statin in patients who require further LDL-C reduction.
Bile Acid Sequestrants (Resins)  Bile acid 
sequestrants bind bile acids in the intestine and pro-
mote their excretion rather than reabsorption in the 
ileum. To maintain the bile acid pool size, the liver 
diverts cholesterol to bile acid synthesis. The decreased 
hepatic intracellular cholesterol content results in 
upregulation of the LDL receptor and enhanced LDL 
clearance from the plasma. Bile acid sequestrants, 
including cholestyramine, colestipol, and colesevelam 
(Table 21-6), primarily reduce plasma LDL-C levels but 
can cause an increase in plasma triglycerides. There-
fore, patients with hypertriglyceridemia should not be 
treated with bile acid–binding resins. Cholestyramine
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
337
and colestipol are insoluble resins that must be sus-
pended in liquids. Colesevelam is available as tablets 
but generally requires up to six to seven tablets per 
day for effective LDL-C lowering. Most side effects 
of resins are limited to the gastrointestinal tract and 
include bloating and constipation. Since bile acid 
sequestrants are not systemically absorbed, they are 
very safe and are the cholesterol-lowering drug of choice 
in children and in women of childbearing age who 
are lactating, pregnant, or could become pregnant. 
They are effective in combination with statins as well 
as in combination with ezetimibe and are particu-
larly useful with one or both of these drugs for diffi-
cult-to-treat patients or those with statin intolerance.
Nicotinic Acid (Niacin)  Nicotinic acid, or niacin, 
is a B-complex vitamin that has been used as a lipid-
modifying agent for more than five decades. Niacin 
reduces the flux of nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs) 
to the liver, which is thought to be the mechanism for 
reduced hepatic triglyceride synthesis and VLDL secre-
tion. Recently, a nicotinic acid receptor (GPR109A) was 
discovered that suppresses release of NEFA by adipose 
tissue, thus mediating the effect of niacin on NEFA sup-
pression. Niacin reduces plasma triglyceride and LDL-C 
levels and raises the plasma concentration of HDL-C 
(Table 21-6), but it appears that these effects may not 
be mediated solely by GPR109A. Niacin is also the only 
currently available lipid-lowering drug that significantly 
Table 21-6 
Summary of the Major Drugs Used for the Treatment of Hyperlipidemia
Drug
Major 
Indications
Starting Dose
Maximal Dose
Mechanism
Common Side  
Effects
HMG-CoA  
reductase  
inhibitors (statins)
Elevated LDL-C
↓ Cholesterol syn-
thesis, ↑ hepatic 
LDL receptors, ↓ 
VLDL production
Myalgias, arthralgias, 
elevated transami-
nases, dyspepsia
  Lovastatin
20 mg daily
80 mg daily
  Pravastatin
40 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Simvastatin
20 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Fluvastatin
20 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Atorvastatin
10 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Rosuvastatin
10 mg qhs
40 mg qhs
Cholesterol  
absorption  
inhibitors
↓ Intestinal choles-
terol absorption
Elevated  
transaminases
  Ezetimibe
Elevated LDL-C
10 mg daily
10 mg daily
LDL receptors
Bile acid seques-
trants
Elevated LDL-C
↑ Bile acid excre-
tion and ↑ LDL 
receptors
Bloating, constipation, 
elevated triglycerides
  Cholestyramine
4 g daily
32 g daily
  Colestipol
5 g daily
40 g daily
  Colesevelam
3750 mg daily
4375 mg daily
Nicotinic acid
Elevated LDL-C, 
low HDL-C, 
elevated TG
↓ VLDL production
Cutaneous flushing,  
GI upset, elevated 
glucose, uric acid, and 
liver function tests
  Immediate release
100 mg tid
1 g tid
  Sustained release
250 mg bid
1.5 g bid
  Extended release
500 mg qhs
2 g qhs
Fibric acid  
derivatives
Elevated TG,  
elevated  
remnants
↑ LPL, ↓ VLDL syn-
thesis
Dyspepsia, myalgia, 
gallstones, elevated 
transaminases
  Gemfibrozil
600 mg bid
600 mg bid
  Fenofibrate
145 mg qd
145 mg qd
Omega 3 fatty 
acids
Elevated TG
3 g daily
6 g daily
↑ TG catabolism
Dyspepsia, diarrhea, 
fishy odor to breath
Abbreviations: GI, gastrointestinal; HDL-C, HDL-cholesterol; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LDL-C, LDL-cholesterol; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; TG, 
triglyceride; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
SECTION III
Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Lipoprotein Metabolism
338
reduces plasma levels of Lp(a) (up to 40%). If properly 
prescribed and monitored, niacin is a safe and effective 
lipid-lowering agent.
The most frequent side effect of niacin is cutaneous 
flushing, which is mediated by activating GPR109A in 
the skin, leading to local generation of prostaglandin D2 
(PGD2) and prostaglandin E2. Flushing can be reduced 
by formulations that slow the absorption and by taking 
aspirin prior to dosing. A product is available in Europe 
that blocks the receptor for PGD2 and attenuates flush-
ing. There is rapid tachyphylaxis to the flushing. Niacin 
therapy is generally started at lower doses and gradu-
ally titrated up to higher doses. Immediate-release crys-
talline niacin is generally administered three times per 
day; over-the-counter sustained-release niacin is taken 
twice a day; and a prescription form of extended-release 
niacin is taken once a day. Mild elevations in transami-
nases occur in up to 15% of patients treated with any 
form of niacin, and on occasion these elevations may 
require stopping the medication. Niacin potentiates the 
effect of warfarin, and these two drugs should be pre-
scribed together with caution. Acanthosis nigricans, a 
dark-colored, coarse skin lesion, and maculopathy are 
infrequent side effects of niacin. Niacin is contraindi-
cated in patients with peptic ulcer disease and can exac-
erbate the symptoms of esophageal reflux. It can also 
raise plasma levels of uric acid and precipitate gouty 
attacks in susceptible patients.
Niacin can raise fasting plasma glucose levels. A study 
in type 2 diabetics found only a slight increase in fasting 
glucose and no significant change in HbA1c level with 
niacin treatment. Low-dose niacin can be used effec-
tively to reduce plasma triglyceride levels and increase 
HDL-C without adversely impacting glycemic control. 
Thus, niacin can be used in diabetic patients, but every 
effort should be made to optimize the diabetes manage-
ment before initiating niacin. Glucose should be care-
fully monitored in nondiabetic patients with impaired 
fasting glucose after initiation of niacin therapy.
Successful therapy with niacin requires careful edu-
cation and motivation on the part of the patient. Its 
advantages are its low cost and long-term safety. It is the 
most effective drug currently available for raising HDL-C 
levels. It is particularly useful in patients with combined 
hyperlipidemia and low plasma levels of HDL-C and is 
effective in combination with statins. Outcome data 
are somewhat limited with niacin, but two clinical tri-
als assessing the benefits of adding niacin to a statin in 
high-risk patients with low HDL-C are currently ongoing.
Fibric Acid Derivatives (Fibrates)  Fibric acid 
derivatives are agonists of PPARa, a nuclear receptor 
involved in the regulation of lipid metabolism. Fibrates 
stimulate LPL activity (enhancing triglyceride hydroly-
sis), reduce apoC-III synthesis (enhancing lipoprotein 
remnant clearance), promote beta-oxidation of fatty 
acids, and may reduce VLDL triglyceride production. 
Fibrates are the most effective drugs available for reduc-
ing triglyceride levels and also raise HDL-C levels mod-
estly (Table 21-6). They have variable effects on LDL-C 
and in hypertriglyceridemic patients can sometimes be 
associated with increases in plasma LDL-C levels.
Fibrates are generally very well tolerated. The most 
common side effect is dyspepsia. Myopathy and hepa-
titis occur rarely in the absence of other lipid-lowering 
agents. Fibrates promote cholesterol secretion into bile 
and are associated with an increased risk of gallstones. 
Fibrates can raise creatinine and should be used with 
caution in patients with chronic kidney disease. Impor-
tantly, fibrates can potentiate the effect of warfarin and 
certain oral hypoglycemic agents, so the anticoagula-
tion status and plasma glucose levels should be closely 
monitored in patients on these agents.
Fibrates are useful and are a reasonable consider-
ation for first-line therapy in patients with severe hyper-
triglyceridemia (>500 mg/dL) to prevent pancreatitis. 
Their role in patients with moderate hypertriglyceride-
mia (200–500 mg/dL) is to promote reduction in non-
HDL-C levels, but outcome data regarding their effects 
on coronary events in this setting remains mixed. In 
patients with a triglyceride level <500 mg/dL, the role 
of fibrates is primarily in combination with statins in 
selected patients with mixed dyslipidemia. In this set-
ting, the risk of myopathy can be minimized with appro-
priate patient and drug selection and must be carefully 
weighed against the clinical benefit of the therapy.
Omega 3 Fatty Acids (Fish Oils)  N-3 poly-
unsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFAs) are present in high 
concentration in fish and in flaxseeds. The most widely 
used n-3 PUFAs for the treatment of hyperlipidemias 
are the two active molecules in fish oil: eicosapentae-
noic acid (EPA) and decohexanoic acid (DHA). N-3 PUFAs 
have been concentrated into tablets and in doses of 
3–4 g/d are effective at lowering fasting triglyceride lev-
els. Fish oils can cause an increase in plasma LDL-C lev-
els in some patients. Fish oil supplements can be used 
in combination with fibrates, niacin, or statins to treat 
hypertriglyceridemia. In general, fish oils are well toler-
ated and appear to be safe, at least at doses up to 3–4 g. 
Although fish oil administration is associated with a pro-
longation in the bleeding time, no increase in bleeding 
has been seen in clinical trials. A lower dose of omega 
3 (about 1 g) has been associated with reduction in car-
diovascular events in CHD patients and is used by some 
clinicians for this purpose.
Combination Drug Therapy  Combination drug 
therapy is frequently used for (1) patients unable to reach 
LDL-C and non-HDL-C goals on statin monotherapy,
 
CHAPTER 21
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
339
(2) patients with combined elevated LDL-C and abnor-
malities of the TG-HDL axis, and (3) patients with severe 
hypertriglyceridemia who do not achieve non-HDL-C 
goal on a fibrate or on fish oils alone. When LDL-C and 
non-HDL-C goals are not achieved on statin mono-
therapy, a cholesterol absorption inhibitor or bile acid 
sequestrant can be added to the drug regimen. Combi-
nation of niacin with a statin is an attractive option for 
high-risk patients who do not attain their target LDL-C 
level on statin monotherapy and have a low HDL-C level. 
Conversely, in high-risk patients on statin therapy who 
have an elevated plasma triglyceride level, addition of a 
fibrate or fish oils is a reasonable consideration.
Severely hypertriglyceridemic patients treated first 
with a fibrate often fail to reach LDL-C and non-HDL-
C goals and are therefore candidates for addition of 
a statin. Coadministration of statins and fibrates has 
obvious appeal in patients with combined hyperlipid-
emia, but no clinical trial has assessed the effectiveness 
of a statin-fibrate combination compared with either 
a statin or a fibrate alone in reducing cardiovascular 
events. The long-term safety of the statin-fibrate com-
bination is not known. Since coadministration of statins 
and fibrates is associated with an increased incidence of 
severe myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, patients treated 
with this combination must be carefully counseled and 
monitored. This combination of drugs should be used 
cautiously in patients with underlying renal or hepatic 
insufficiency; in the elderly, frail, and chronically ill; and 
in those on multiple medications.
Other 
Approaches  Occasionally, patients 
cannot tolerate any of the existing lipid-lowering drugs 
at doses required for adequate control of their lipid 
levels. A larger group of patients, most of whom have 
genetic lipid disorders, remain significantly hypercho-
lesterolemic despite combination drug therapy. These 
patients are at high risk for the development or pro-
gression of CHD and clinical CHD events. The preferred 
option for management of patients with severe refrac-
tory hypercholesterolemia is LDL apheresis. In this pro-
cess, the patient’s plasma is passed over a column that 
selectively removes the LDL, and the LDL-depleted 
plasma is returned to the patient. Patients on maxi-
mally tolerated combination drug therapy who have 
CHD and a plasma LDL-C level >200 mg/dL or no CHD 
and a plasma LDL-C level >300 mg/dL are candidates for 
every-other-week LDL apheresis and should be referred 
to a specialized lipid center.
Management 
of 
Low 
HDL-C  Severely 
reduced plasma levels of HDL-C (<20 mg/dL) accompanied
by triglycerides <400 mg/dL usually indicate the pres-
ence of a genetic disorder such as a mutation in apoA-I, 
LCAT deficiency, or Tangier disease. HDL-C levels <20 mg/dL 
are common in the setting of severe hypertriglyceride-
mia, in which case the primary focus should be on the 
management of the triglycerides. HDL-C levels <20 mg/dL 
also occur in individuals using anabolic steroids. Sec-
ondary causes of more moderate reductions in plasma 
HDL (20–40 mg/dL) should be considered (Table 21-5). 
Smoking should be discontinued, obese persons should 
be encouraged to lose weight, sedentary persons should 
be encouraged to exercise, and diabetes should be opti-
mally controlled. When possible, medications associated 
with reduced plasma levels of HDL-C should be discon-
tinued. The presence of an isolated low plasma level 
of HDL-C in a patient with a borderline plasma level of 
LDL-C should prompt consideration of LDL-lowering 
drug therapy in high-risk individuals. Statins increase 
plasma levels of HDL-C only modestly (∼5–10%). Fibrates 
also have only a modest effect on plasma HDL-C levels 
(increasing levels ∼5–15%), except in patients with coex-
isting hypertriglyceridemia, where the effect on HDL levels 
can be greater. Niacin is the most effective HDL-C–raising 
therapeutic agent available and can increase plasma 
HDL-C by up to ∼30%, although some patients fail to 
achieve clinically important increases in HDL-C levels 
from niacin therapy.
The issue of whether pharmacologic intervention 
should be used to specifically raise HDL-C levels has 
not been adequately addressed in clinical trials. In per-
sons with established CHD and low HDL-C levels whose 
plasma LDL-C levels are at or below the goal, it may be 
reasonable to initiate therapy (with a fibrate or niacin) 
directed specifically at reducing plasma triglyceride 
levels and raising the level of plasma HDL-C. More data 
are required before broad recommendations are made 
to use drug therapy to specifically raise HDL-C lev-
els to prevent cardiovascular events. New HDL-raising 
approaches are under development that may help to 
address this important issue.
Management of Elevated Levels of Lp(a) 
High levels of Lp(a) are associated with increased risk of 
ASCVD. Genetic studies suggest that this association is 
causal, but there is no evidence that reducing plasma 
Lp(a) levels reduces cardiovascular risk. Until such stud-
ies are performed, the major therapeutic approach to 
patients with high plasma levels of Lp(a) and estab-
lished CAD is to aggressively lower plasma levels of LDL-
C. Niacin is the only drug currently available that lowers 
Lp(a), and might be considered as an addition to a statin 
in a very-high-risk patient with elevated Lp(a).
This page intentionally left blank 
Disorders Affecting 
Multiple Endocrine 
Systems
SECTION IV
 robert t. Jensen 
342
 GeneraL FeaTures 
oF GasTroinTesTinaL 
neuroendoCrine Tumors 
 Gastrointestinal (GI) neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are 
tumors derived from the diffuse neuroendocrine system 
of the GI tract; that system is composed of amine- and 
acid-producing cells with different hormonal profi les, 
depending on the site of origin. The tumors histori-
cally are divided into carcinoid tumors and pancreatic 
endocrine tumors (PETs), although recent pathologic 
classifi cations have proposed that they all be classifi ed as 
gastrointestinal NETs. In this chapter the term  carcinoid 
tumor is retained because it is widely used. These tumors 
originally were classifi ed as APUDomas (for  a mine  p re-
cursor  u ptake and  d ecarboxylation), as were pheochromo-
cytomas, melanomas, and medullary thyroid carcinomas, 
because they share certain cytochemical features as well 
as various pathologic, biologic, and molecular features 
( Table 22-1 ). It was originally proposed that APUDo-
mas had a similar embryonic origin from neural crest
cells, but it is now known that the peptide-secreting cells 
are not of neuroectodermal origin. Nevertheless, the 
concept of APUDomas is useful because the tumors 
from the cells have important similarities as well as some 
differences ( Table 22-1 ). In this section, the areas of 
similarity between PETs and carcinoids will be discussed 
together, and areas in which there are important differ-
ences will be discussed separately. 
 CLassiFiCaTion/PaTHoLoGy/Tumor 
BioLoGy oF neTs 
 NETs generally are composed of monotonous sheets 
of small, round cells with uniform nuclei, and mitoses 
are uncommon. They can be identifi ed tentatively on 
 ENDOCRINE TUMORS OF THE 
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND PANCREAS 
 CHaPTer 22 
routine histology; however, these tumors are now rec-
ognized principally by their histologic staining patterns 
due to shared cellular proteins. Historically, silver stain-
ing was used, and tumors were classifi ed as showing an 
argentaffi n reaction if they took up and reduced silver, 
or as being argyrophilic if they did not reduce it. More 
recently immunocytochemical localization of chromo-
granins (A, B, C), neuron-specifi c enolase, and synap-
tophysin, which are all neuroendocrine cell markers, 
is used ( Table 22-1 ). Chromogranin A is currently the 
most widely used. 
 Ultrastructurally, these tumors possess electron-dense 
neurosecretory granules and frequently contain small, clear 
vesicles that correspond to synaptic vesicles of neurons. 
NETs synthesize numerous peptides, growth factors, and 
bioactive amines that may be ectopically secreted, giving 
rise to a specifi c clinical syndrome ( Table 22-2 ). The 
diagnosis of the specifi c syndrome requires the clinical 
features of the disease ( Table 22-2 ) and cannot be made 
from the immunocytochemistry results alone. The pres-
ence or absence of a specifi c clinical syndrome also can-
not be predicted from the immunocytochemistry alone 
( Table 22-1 ). Furthermore, pathologists cannot distin-
guish between benign and malignant NETs unless metas-
tases or invasion is present. 
 Carcinoid tumors frequently are classifi ed according
to their anatomic area of origin (i.e., foregut, midgut, 
hindgut) because tumors with similar areas of origin share 
functional manifestations, histochemistry, and secretory
products ( Table 22-3 ). Foregut tumors generally have
a low serotonin (5-HT) content; are argentaffi n negative
but argyrophilic; occasionally secrete adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) or 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), 
causing an atypical carcinoid syndrome ( Fig. 22-1 ); 
are often multihormonal; and may metastasize to 
bone. They uncommonly produce a clinical syndrome 
due to the secreted products. Midgut carcinoids are 
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
343
argentaffin positive, have a high serotonin content, 
most frequently cause the typical carcinoid syndrome 
when they metastasize (Table 22-3, Fig. 22-1), release 
serotonin and tachykinins (substance P, neuropeptide K, 
substance K), rarely secrete 5-HTP or ACTH, and less 
commonly metastasize to bone. Hindgut carcinoids (rectum, 
transverse and descending colon) are argentaffin negative, 
are often argyrophilic, rarely contain serotonin or cause 
the carcinoid syndrome (Fig. 22-1, Table 22-3), rarely 
secrete 5-HTP or ACTH, contain numerous peptides, 
and may metastasize to bone.
Pancreatic endocrine tumors can be classified into nine 
well-established specific functional syndromes (Table 22-2), 
five possible specific functional syndromes (PETs secret-
ing calcitonin, renin, luteinizing hormone, erythropoi-
etin, or insulin-like growth factor II) (Table 22-2), and 
nonfunctional PETs (pancreatic polypeptide-secreting 
tumors; PPomas). Other functional hormonal syndromes 
due to nonpancreatic tumors (usually intraabdomi-
nal in location) have been described only rarely and are 
not included in Table 22-2. They include secretion of 
glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2) that causes intestinal 
villus hypertrophy (enteroglucagonomas), secretion of 
GLP-1 that causes hypoglycemia and delayed transit, 
and intestinal and ovarian tumors secreting peptide tyro-
sine tyrosine (PYY) that result in altered motility and 
constipation. Each of the functional syndromes listed 
in Table 22-2 is associated with symptoms due to the 
specific hormone released. In contrast, nonfunctional 
PETs release no products that cause a specific clini-
cal syndrome. “Nonfunctional” is a misnomer in the 
strict sense because those tumors frequently ectopically 
secrete a number of peptides [pancreatic polypeptide 
(PP), chromogranin A, ghrelin, neurotensin, α subunits 
of human chorionic gonadotropin, neuron-specific eno-
lase]; however, they cause no specific clinical syndrome. 
The symptoms caused by nonfunctional PETs are 
entirely due to the tumor per se.
Carcinoid tumors can occur in almost any GI tissue 
(Table 22-3); however, at present most (70%) have their 
origin in one of three sites: bronchus, jejunoileum, or 
colon/rectum. In the past, carcinoid tumors most fre-
quently were reported in the appendix (i.e., 40%); how-
ever, the bronchus/lung, rectum, and small intestine are 
Table 22-1
General Characteristics of Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors [Carcinoids, Pancreatic 
Endocrine Tumors (PETs)]
A.	 Share general neuroendocrine cell markers (identification used for diagnosis)
	
1.	Chromogranins (A, B, C) are acidic monomeric soluble proteins found in the large secretory granules. Chromogranin A 
is the most widely used.
	
2.	Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is the γ-γ dimer of the enzyme enolase and is a cytosolic marker of neuroendocrine 
differentiation.
	
3.	Synaptophysin is an integral membrane glycoprotein of 38,000 molecular weight found in small vesicles of neurons and 
neuroendocrine tumors.
B.	 Pathologic similarities
	
1.	All are APUDomas showing amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation.
	
2.	Ultrastructurally they have dense-core secretory granules (>80 nm).
	
3.	Histologically, they generally appear similar with few mitoses and uniform nuclei.
	
4.	Frequently synthesize multiple peptides/amines, which can be detected immunocytochemically but may not be secreted.
	
5.	Presence or absence of clinical syndrome or type cannot be predicted by immunocytochemical studies.
	
6.	Histologic classifications increasingly predictive of biologic behavior. Only invasion or metastases establish malignancy.
C.	 Similarities of biologic behavior
	
1.	Generally slow growing, but a proportion are aggressive.
	
2.	Secrete biologically active peptides/amines, which can cause clinical symptoms.
	
3.	Generally have high densities of somatostatin receptors, which are used for both localization and treatment.
D.	 Similarities/differences in molecular abnormalities
	
1.	Similarities
	
	
a.	 Uncommon—alterations in common oncogenes (ras, jun, fos, etc.).
	
	
b.	 Uncommon—alterations in common tumor-suppressor genes (p53, retinoblastoma).
	
	
c.	 Alterations at MEN 1 locus (11q13) and p16INK4a (9p21) occur in a proportion (10–45%).
	
	
d.	 Methylation of various genes occurs in 40–87% (ras-associated domain family I, p14, p16, O6 methyl guanosine 
methyltransferases, retinoic acid receptor β)
	
2.	Differences
	
	
a.	 PETs—loss of 1p (21%), 3p (8–47%), 3q (8–41%), 11q (21–62%), 6q (18–68%). Gains at 17q (10–55%),  
7q (16–68%), 4q (33%).
	
	
b.	 Carcinoids—loss of 18q (38–67%) > 18p (33–43%) > 9p, 16q21 (21–23%). Gains at 17q, 19p (57%), 4q (33%), 14q (20%).
Abbreviation: MEN 1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
344
Table 22-2
Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumor Syndrome
Name
Biologically 
Active 
Peptide(s) 
Secreted
Incidence 
(New Cases/106 
Population/
Year)
Tumor  
Location
Malignant, 
%
Associated 
with MEN 
1, %
Main Symptoms/
Signs
I. Established Specific Functional Syndrome
A. Carcinoid tumor
Carcinoid  
syndrome
Serotonin, 
possibly 
tachykinins, 
motilin, pros-
taglandins
0.5–2
Midgut (75–87%)
Foregut (2–33%)
Hindgut (1–8%)
Unknown 
(2–15%)
95–100
Rare
Diarrhea (32–84%)
Flushing (63–75%)
Pain (10–34%)
Asthma (4–18%)
Heart disease  
(11–41%)
B. Pancreatic endocrine tumor
Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome
Gastrin
0.5–1.5
Duodenum (70%)
Pancreas (25%)
Other sites (5%)
60–90
20–25
Pain (79–100%)
Diarrhea (30–75%)
Esophageal  
symptoms  
(31–56%)
Insulinoma
Insulin
1–2
Pancreas (>99%)
<10
4–5
Hypoglycemic 
symptoms 
(100%)
VIPoma (Verner-
Morrison  
syndrome,  
pancreatic  
cholera, WDHA)
Vasoactive 
intestinal  
peptide
0.05–0.2
Pancreas (90%, 
adult)
Other (10%, 
neural, adrenal, 
periganglionic)
40–70
6
Diarrhea  
(90–100%)
Hypokalemia  
(80–100%)
Dehydration (83%)
Glucagonoma
Glucagon
0.01–0.1
Pancreas (100%)
50–80
1–20
Rash (67–90%)
Glucose intoler-
ance (38–87%)
Weight loss  
(66–96%)
Somatostati-
noma
Somatostatin
Rare
Pancreas (55%)
Duodenum/ 
jejunum (44%)
>70
45
Diabetes mellitus 
(63–90%)
Cholelithiases 
(65–90%)
Diarrhea (35–90%)
GRFoma
Growth  
hormone– 
releasing  
hormone
Unknown
Pancreas (30%)
Lung (54%)
Jejunum (7%)
Other (13%)
>60
16
Acromegaly 
(100%)
ACTHoma
ACTH
Rare
Pancreas (4–16%, 
all ectopic 
Cushing’s)
>95
Rare
Cushing’s syn-
drome (100%)
PET causing  
carcinoid  
syndrome
Serotonin, 
?tachykinins
Rare (43 cases)
Pancreas (<1%, 
all carcinoids)
60–88
Rare
Same as carcinoid 
syndrome above
PET causing 
hypercalcemia
PTHrP
Others 
unknown
Rare
Pancreas  
(rare cause of 
hypercalcemia)
84
Rare
Abdominal pain  
due to hepatic 
metastases
II. Possible Specific Functional Syndrome
PET secreting 
calcitonin
Calcitonin
Rare
Pancreas  
(rare cause of 
hypercalcitone-
mia)
>80
16
Diarrhea (50%)
PET secreting 
renin
Renin
Rare
Pancreas
Unknown
No
Hypertension
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
345
Carcinoid tumor cell
Tryptophan
Tryptophan hydroxylase
Aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase
Monoamine oxidase
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
Secretion
Excretion
Excretion
Hydroxytryptophan
(5-HTP)
Serotonin
(5-HT)
5-HT stored in
secretory granules
5-HT in blood
Typical
Typical
Atypical
5-Hydroxyindolacetic acid
(5-HIAA)
5-HIAA filtered
by kidney
5-HIAA in urine
Normal or slightly
higher 5-HT in urine
5-HTP
5-HT filtered
by kidney
Platelet
 Kidney
5-HT uptake
and storage
Table 22-2
Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumor Syndrome (CONTINUED)
Name
Biologically 
Active 
Peptide(s) 
Secreted
Incidence 
(New Cases/106 
Population/
Year)
Tumor  
Location
Malignant, 
%
Associated 
with MEN 
1, %
Main Symptoms/
Signs
II. Possible Specific Functional Syndrome (continued)
PET secreting 
luteinizing  
hormone
Luteinizing  
hormone
Rare
Pancreas
Unknown
No
Anovulation,  
virilization (female); 
reduced libido 
(male)
PET secreting 
erythropoietin
Erythropoietin
Rare
Pancreas
100
No
Polycythemia
PET secreting 
IF-II
Insulin-like 
growth growth 
factor II
Rare
Pancreas
Unknown
No
Hypoglycemia
III. No Functional Syndrome
PPoma/nonfunc-
tional
None
1–2
Pancreas (100%)
>60
18–44
Weight loss (30–90%)
Abdominal mass 
(10–30%)
Pain (30–95%)
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; GRFoma, growth hormone-releasing factor secreting pancreatic endocrine tumor; IF-II, 
insulin-like growth factor 2; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; PET, pancreatic endocrine tumor; PPoma, tumor secreting pancreatic polypep-
tide; PTHrP, parathyroid hormone–related peptide; VIPoma, tumor secreting vasoactive intestinal peptide; WDHA, watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, 
and achlorhydria syndrome.
Table 22-3 
Carcinoid Tumor Location, Frequency 
of Metastases, and Association With the 
Carcinoid Syndrome
Location 
(% of 
Total)
Incidence 
of 
Metastases
Incidence 
of 
Carcinoid 
Syndrome
Foregut
Esophagus
Stomach
Duodenum
Pancreas
Gallbladder
Bronchus, lung, trachea
<0.1
4.6
2.0
0.7
0.3
27.9
—
10
—
71.9
17.8
5.7
—
9.5
3.4
20
5
13
Midgut
Jejunum
Ileum
Meckel’s diverticulum
Appendix
Colon
Liver
Ovary
Testis
1.8
14.9
0.5
4.8
8.6
0.4
1.0
<0.1
58.4
—
38.8
51
32
2
32
—
9
9
13
<1
5
—
50
50
Hindgut
Rectum
13.6
3.9
—
Source: Location is from the PAN-SEER data (1973–1999), and inci-
dence of metastases is from the SEER data (1992–1999), reported 
by IM Modlin et al: Cancer 97:934, 2003. Incidence of carcinoid syn-
drome is from 4349 cases studied from 1950 to 1971, reported by 
JD Godwin: Cancer 36:560, 1975.
Figure 22-1
Synthesis, secretion, and metabolism of serotonin (5-HT) 
in patients with typical and atypical carcinoid syndromes.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
346
now the most common sites. Overall, the GI tract is 
the most common site for these tumors, accounting for 
64%, with the respiratory tract a distant second at 28%. 
Both race and sex can affect the frequency as well as 
the distribution of carcinoid tumors. African Americans 
have a high incidence of carcinoids, and rectal carcinoids 
are the most common. Females have a lower incidence 
of small-intestinal and pancreatic carcinoids.
The term pancreatic endocrine tumor, although widely 
used and therefore retained here, is also a misnomer, 
strictly speaking, because these tumors can occur either 
almost entirely in the pancreas (insulinomas, gluca-
gonomas, nonfunctional PETs, PETs causing hyper-
calcemia) or at both pancreatic and extrapancreatic sites 
[gastrinomas, VIPomas (vasoactive intestinal peptide), 
somatostatinomas, GRFomas (growth hormone–releasing 
factor)]. PETs are also called islet cell tumors; how-
ever, the use of this term is discouraged because it is not 
established that they originate from the islets and many 
can occur at extrapancreatic sites.
A number of new classification systems have been 
proposed for both carcinoids and PETs. In the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification it has been 
proposed that these tumors all be classified as GI neu-
roendocrine tumors (including carcinoids and PETs), 
Table 22-4 
Prognostic Factors in Neuroendocrine Tumors
I.	Both carcinoid tumors and PETs
  Presence of liver metastases ( p < .001)
  Extent of liver metastases (p < .001)
  Presence of lymph node metastases (p < .001)
  Depth of invasion ( p < .001)
  Rapid rate of tumor growth
  Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels ( p = .003)
  Primary tumor site ( p < .001)
  Primary tumor size ( p < .005)
  Various histologic features
    Tumor differentiation ( p < .001)
High growth indices (high K i–67 index, PCNA expression)
High mitotic counts ( p < .001)
Necrosis present
Presence of cytokeratin 19 ( p < .02)
Vascular or perineural invasion
Vessel density (low microvessel density, increased lym-
phatic density)
High CD10 metalloproteinase expression (in series with all 
grades of NETs)
Flow cytometric features (i.e., aneuploidy)
High VEGF expression (in low-grade or well-differentiated 
NETs only)
WHO, TNM, and grading classification
Presence of a pancreatic NET rather than GI NET associated 
with poorer prognosis ( p = .0001)
Older age ( p < .01)    
 II.	 Carcinoid tumors
Presence of carcinoid syndrome
Laboratory results [urinary 5-HIAA levels ( p < .01), 
plasma neuropeptide K ( p < .05), serum chromo-
granin A ( p < .01)]
Presence of a second malignancy
Male sex (p < .001)
Mode of discovery (incidental > symptomatic)
Molecular findings [TGF-α expression ( p < .05), chr 
16q LOH or gain chr 4p ( p < .05)]
WHO, TNM, and grading classification
Molecular findings [gain in chr 14, loss of 3p13 (ileal 
carcinoid), upregulation of Hoxc6]
III.	 PETs
Ha-ras oncogene or p53 overexpression
Female gender
MEN 1 syndrome absent
Presence of nonfunctional tumor (some studies, not all)
WHO, TNM, and grading classification
Laboratory findings (increased chromogranin A in 
some studies; gastrinomas—increased gastrin level)
Molecular findings [increased HER2/neu expression 
( p = .032); chr 1q, 3p, 3q, or 6q LOH ( p = .0004); 
EGF receptor overexpression ( p = .034); gains in 
chr 7q, 17q, 17p, 20q; alterations in the VHL gene 
(deletion, methylation)]
Abbreviations: 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; chr, chromosome; EGF, epidermal growth factor; Ki-67, proliferation-associated nuclear 
antigen recognized by Ki-67 monoclonal antibody; LOH, loss of heterozygosity; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; NET, neuroendocrine 
tumor; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; PET, pancreatic endocrine tumor; TGF-a, transforming growth factor a; TNM, tumor, node, 
metastasis; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; WHO, World Health Organization.
which divides them into three general categories: (1a) 
well-differentiated NETs, (1b) well-differentiated neuro-
endocrine carcinomas that have low-grade malignancy, 
and (2) poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas 
that are usually small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas of 
high-grade malignancy. The term carcinoid is synony-
mous with well-differentiated NETs (1a). This classification 
is further divided on the basis of tumor location and 
biology. In addition, for the first time a standard TNM 
(tumor, node, metastasis) classification and grading sys-
tem has been proposed for GI neuroendocrine tumors. 
The new WHO classification and the TNM classifica-
tion and grading system were proposed to facilitate the 
comparison and evaluation of clinical, pathologic, and 
prognostic features and results of treatment in GI NETs 
from different studies. These classification systems may 
provide important prognostic information that can guide 
treatment (Table 22-4).
The exact incidence of carcinoid tumors or PETs var-
ies according to whether only symptomatic tumors or all 
tumors are considered. The incidence of clinically sig-
nificant carcinoids is 7–13 cases/million population per 
year, whereas any malignant carcinoids at autopsy are 
reported in 21–84 cases/million population per year. 
The incidence of GI NETs is approximately 25–50 cases 
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
347
per million in the United States, which makes them less 
common than adenocarcinomas of the GI tract. How-
ever, their incidence has increased sixfold in the last 30 
years. Clinically significant PETs have a prevalence of 10 
cases/million population, with insulinomas, gastrinomas, 
and nonfunctional PETs having an incidence of 0.5–2 
cases/million population per year (Table 22-2). VIPo-
mas are two to eight times less common, glucagonomas 
are 17 to 30 times less common, and somatostatinomas 
are the least common. In autopsy studies 0.5–1.5% of all 
cases have a PET; however, in less than 1 in 1000 cases 
was a functional tumor thought to occur.
Both carcinoid tumors and PETs commonly show 
malignant behavior (Tables 22-2 and 22-3). With PETs, 
except for insulinomas in which <10% are malignant, 
50–100% in different series are malignant. With carci-
noid tumors the percentage showing malignant behav-
ior varies in different locations. For the three most 
common sites of occurrence, the incidence of metas-
tases varies greatly from jejunoileum (58%) > lung/
bronchus (6%) > rectum (4%) (Table 22-3). With both 
carcinoid tumors and PETs, a number of factors, sum-
marized in Table 22-4, are important prognostic fac-
tors in determining survival and the aggressiveness of 
the tumor. Patients with PETs (excluding insulinomas) 
generally have a poorer prognosis than do patients with 
GI NETs (carcinoids). The presence of liver metastases 
is the single most important prognostic factor in single 
and multivariate analyses for both carcinoid tumors 
and PETs. Particularly important in the development 
of liver metastases is the size of the primary tumor. For 
example, with small-intestinal carcinoids, which are the 
most common cause of the carcinoid syndrome due to 
metastatic disease in the liver (Table 22-2), metasta-
ses occur in 15–25% if the tumor diameter is <1 cm, 
58–80% if it is 1–2 cm in diameter, and >75% if it is >2 
cm in diameter. Similar data exist for gastrinomas and 
other PETs in which the size of the primary tumor is 
an independent predictor of the development of liver 
metastases. The presence of lymph node metastases; the 
depth of invasion; the rapid rate of growth; various his-
tologic features [differentiation, mitotic rates, growth 
indices, vessel density, vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor (VEGF), and CD10 metalloproteinase expression]; 
necrosis; presence of cytokeratin; elevated serum alka-
line phosphatase levels; older age; advanced stages in 
WHO, TNM, or grading classification systems; and 
flow cytometric results such as the presence of aneu-
ploidy are all important prognostic factors for the devel-
opment of metastatic disease (Table 22-4). For patients 
with carcinoid tumors, additional associations with a 
worse prognosis include the development of the carci-
noid syndrome (especially the development of carcinoid 
heart disease), male sex, the presence of a symptomatic 
tumor or greater increases in a number of tumor mark-
ers [5-hydroxyindolacetic acid (5-HIAA), neuropep-
tide K, chromogranin A], and the presence of various 
molecular features. With PETs or gastrinomas, which 
have been the best studied PET long-term, a worse 
prognosis is associated with female sex, overexpression 
of the Ha-ras oncogene or p53, the absence of multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), higher levels of 
various tumor markers (i.e., chromogranin A, gastrin), 
and various molecular features (Table 22-4).
A number of diseases due to various genetic disor-
ders are associated with an increased incidence of neu-
roendocrine tumors (Table 22-5). Each one is caused 
by a loss of a possible tumor-suppressor gene. The most 
important is MEN 1, which is an autosomal dominant 
disorder due to a defect in a 10-exon gene on 11q13, 
Table 22-5
Genetic Syndromes Associated With an Increased Incidence of Neuroendocrine Tumors (NETs) 
[Carcinoids or Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors (PETs)]
Syndrome
Location of Gene Mutation and  
Gene Product
NETs Seen/Frequency
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 1 (MEN 1)
11q13 (encodes 610-amino-acid protein, 
menin)
80–100% develop PETs (microscopic), 
20–80% (clinical): (nonfunctional >  
gastrinoma > insulinoma)
Carcinoids: gastric (13–30%), bronchial/
thymic (8%)
von Hippel–Lindau disease
3q25 (encodes 213-amino-acid protein)
12–17% develop PETs (almost always  
nonfunctional)
von Recklinghausen’s disease 
[neurofibromatosis 1 (NF-1)]
17q11.2 (encodes 2485-amino-acid  
protein, neurofibromin)
0–10% develop PETs, primarily duodenal 
somatostatinomas (usually nonfunctional)
Rarely insulinoma, gastrinoma
Tuberous sclerosis
9q34 (TSCI) encodes 1164-amino-acid pro-
tein, hamartin) 16p13 (TSC2) (encodes 
1807-amino-acid protein, tuberin)
Uncommonly develop PETs [nonfunctional 
and functional (insulinoma, gastrinoma)]
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
348
which encodes for a 610-amino-acid nuclear pro-
tein, menin (Chap. 23). Patients with MEN 1 develop 
hyperparathyroidism due to parathyroid hyperplasia in 
95–100% of cases, PETs in 80–100%, pituitary adeno-
mas in 54–80%, adrenal adenomas in 27–36%, bronchial 
carcinoids in 8%, thymic carcinoids in 8%, gastric carci-
noids in 13–30% of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syn-
drome, skin tumors [angiofibromas (88%), collagenomas 
(72%)], central nervous system (CNS) tumors [meningi-
omas (<8%)], and smooth-muscle tumors [leiomyomas, 
leiomyosarcomas (1–7%)]. Among patients with MEN 
1, 80–100% develop nonfunctional PETs (most are 
microscopic with 0–13% large/symptomatic); functional 
PETs occur in 20–80% in different series with a mean 
of 54% developing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 18% 
insulinomas, 3% glucagonomas, 3% VIPomas, and <1% 
GRFomas or somatostatinomas. MEN 1 is present in 
20–25% of all patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
4% of patients with insulinomas, and a low percentage 
(<5%) of patients with the other PETs.
Three phacomatoses associated with neuroendo-
crine tumors are von Hippel–Lindau disease (VHL), 
von Recklinghausen’s disease [neurofibromatosis type 
1 (NF-1)], and tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville’s disease) 
(Table 22-5). VHL is an autosomal dominant disorder 
due to defects on chromosome 3p25, which encodes 
for a 213-amino-acid protein that interacts with the 
elongin family of proteins as a transcriptional regulator 
(Chaps. 6, 23). In addition to cerebellar hemangioblas-
tomas, renal cancer, and pheochromocytomas, 10–17% 
develop a PET. Most are nonfunctional, although insu-
linomas and VIPomas have been reported. Patients 
with NF-1 (von Recklinghausen’s disease) have defects 
in a gene on chromosome 17q11.2 that encodes for a 
2845-amino-acid protein, neurofibromin, which func-
tions in normal cells as a suppressor of the ras signaling 
cascade. Up to 10% of these patients develop an upper 
GI carcinoid tumor, characteristically in the periampullary 
region (54%). Many are classified as somatostatinomas 
because they contain somatostatin immunocytochemi-
cally; however, they uncommonly secrete somatosta-
tin and rarely produce a clinical somatostatinoma 
syndrome. NF-1 has rarely been associated with insuli-
nomas and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. NF-1 accounts 
for 48% of all duodenal somatostastinomas and 23% of 
all ampullary carcinoid tumors. Tuberous sclerosis is 
caused by mutations that alter either the 1164-amino-
acid protein hamartin (TSC1) or the 1807-amino-acid 
protein tuberin (TSC2). Both hamartin and tuberin 
interact in a pathway related to phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinases and mTor signaling cascades. A few cases 
including nonfunctional and functional PETs (insulino-
mas and gastrinomas) have been reported in these patients 
(Table 22-5).
In contrast to most common nonendocrine tumors, 
such as carcinoma of the breast, colon, lung, or stomach, 
in neither PETs nor carcinoid tumors have alterations in 
common oncogenes (ras, myc, fos, src, jun) or common 
tumor-suppressor genes (p53, retinoblastoma susceptibil-
ity gene) been found to be generally important in their 
molecular pathogenesis (Table 22-1). Alterations that 
may be important in their pathogenesis include changes 
in the MEN 1 gene, p16/MTS1 tumor-suppressor gene, 
and DPC 4/Smad 4 gene; amplification of the HER-
2/neu protooncogene; alterations in transcription fac-
tors [Hoxc6 (GI carcinoids)], growth factors, and their 
receptor expression; methylation of a number of genes 
that probably results in their inactivation; and deletions 
of unknown tumor-suppressor genes as well as gains 
in other unknown genes (Table 22-1). Comparative 
genomic hybridization, genome-wide allelotyping stud-
ies, and genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism 
analyses have shown that chromosomal losses and gains 
are common in PETs and carcinoids, but they differ 
between these two NETs and some have prognostic sig-
nificance (Table 22-4). Mutations in the MEN 1 gene 
are probably particularly important. There is loss of het-
erozygosity at the MEN 1 locus on chromosome 11q13 
in 93% of sporadic PETs (i.e., in patients without MEN 
1) and in 26–75% of sporadic carcinoid tumors. Muta-
tions in the MEN 1 gene are reported in 31–34% of 
sporadic gastrinomas. The presence of a number of these 
molecular alterations (PET or carcinoid) correlates with 
tumor growth, tumor size, and disease extent or inva-
siveness and may have prognostic significance.
Carcinoid Tumors and Carcinoid 
Syndrome
Characteristics of the Most 
Common GI Carcinoid Tumors
Appendiceal carcinoids
Appendiceal carcinoids occur in 1 in every 200–300 
appendectomies, usually in the appendiceal tip. Most 
(i.e., >90%) are <1 cm in diameter without metastases in 
older studies, but more recently 2–35% have had metas-
tases (Table 22-3). In the SEER data of 1570 appendiceal 
carcinoids, 62% were localized, 27% had regional metas-
tases, and 8% had distant metastases. Approximately 50% 
between 1 and 2 cm metastasized to lymph nodes. Their 
percentage of the total number of carcinoids decreased 
from 43.9% (1950–1969) to 2.4% (1992–1999).
Small-intestinal carcinoids
Small-intestinal carcinoids account for approximately 
one-third of all small-bowel tumors in various surgi-
cal series. These are frequently multiple; 70–80% are 
present in the ileum, and 70% within 6 cm (24 in.) of 
the ileocecal valve. Forty percent are <1 cm in diam-
eter, 32% are 1–2 cm, and 29% are >2 cm. Between 
35 and 70% are associated with metastases (Table 22-3). 
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
349
They characteristically cause a marked fibrotic reaction, 
which can lead to intestinal obstruction. Distant metas-
tases occur to liver in 36–60%, to bone in 3%, and to 
lung in 4%. As discussed previously, tumor size is an 
important variable in the frequency of metastases. How-
ever, even a proportion of small carcinoid tumors of the 
small intestine (<1 cm) have metastases in 15–25% of 
cases, whereas the proportion increases to 58–100% for 
tumors 1–2 cm in diameter. Carcinoids also occur in 
the duodenum, with 31% having metastases. No duo-
denal tumor <1 cm in two series metastasized, whereas 
33% of those >2 cm had metastases. Small-intestinal 
carcinoids are the most common cause (60–87%) of the 
carcinoid syndrome and are discussed in a later section 
(Table 22-6).
Rectal carcinoids
Rectal carcinoids represent 1–2% of all rectal tumors. 
They are found in approximately 1 in every 2500 proc-
toscopies. Nearly all occur between 4 and 13 cm above 
the dentate line. Most are small, with 66–80% being <1 cm 
in diameter, and rarely metastasize (5%). Tumors between 
1 and 2 cm can metastasize in 5–30%, and those >2 cm, 
which are uncommon, in >70%.
Bronchial carcinoids
Bronchial carcinoids account for 1–2% of primary lung 
tumors. The frequency of bronchial carcinoids has increased 
more than fivefold over the last 30 years. A number 
Table 22-6
Clinical Characteristics in Patients With 
Carcinoid Syndrome
At 
Presentation
During 
Course of 
Disease
Symptoms/signs
Diarrhea
Flushing
Pain
Asthma/wheezing
Pellagra
None
Carcinoid heart disease 
present
32–73%
23–65%
10%
4–8%
2%
12%
11%
68–84%
63–74%
34%
3–18%
5%
22%
14–41%
Demographics
Male
Age
Mean
Range
46–59%
46–61%
57 yrs
25–79 yrs
52–54 yrs
9–91 yrs
Tumor location
  Foregut
  Midgut
  Hindgut
  Unknown
5–9%
78–87%
1–5%
2–11%
2–33%
60–87%
1–8%
2–15%
of different classifications of bronchial carcinoid tumors 
have been proposed. In some studies, lung NETs are 
classified into four categories: typical carcinoid [also 
called bronchial carcinoid tumor, Kulchitsky cell 
carcinoma I (KCC-I)], atypical carcinoid [also called well- 
differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (KC-II)], inter-
mediate small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and small 
cell neuroendocarcinoma (KC-III). Another proposed 
classification includes three categories of lung NETs: 
benign or low-grade malignant (typical carcinoid), low-
grade malignant (atypical carcinoid), and high-grade 
malignant (poorly differentiated carcinoma of the large 
cell or small cell type). The WHO classification includes 
four general categories: typical carcinoid, atypical car-
cinoid, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and small 
cell carcinoma. These different categories of lung NETs 
have different prognoses, varying from excellent for 
typical carcinoid to poor for small cell neuroendocrine 
carcinomas. The occurrence of large cell and small cell 
lung carcinoids, but not typical or atypical lung carci-
noids, is related to tobacco use.
Gastric carcinoids
Gastric carcinoids account for 3 of every 1000 gastric 
neoplasms. Three different subtypes of gastric carci-
noids are proposed to occur. Each originates from gas-
tric enterochromaffin-like cells (ECL cells), one of the 
six types of gastric neuroendocrine cells, in the gastric 
mucosa. Two subtypes are associated with hypergastrin-
emic states, either chronic atrophic gastritis (type I) (80% 
of all gastric carcinoids) or Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
which is almost always a part of the MEN 1 syndrome 
(type II) (6% of all cases). These tumors generally pur-
sue a benign course, with type 1 uncommonly (<10%) 
associated with metastases, whereas type II tumors are 
slightly more aggressive with 10–30% associated with 
metastases. They are usually multiple and small and infil-
trate only to the submucosa. The third subtype of gastric 
carcinoid (type III) (sporadic) occurs without hypergas-
trinemia (14–25% of all gastric carcinoids) and has an 
aggressive course, with 54–66% developing metastases. 
Sporadic carcinoids are usually single, large tumors; 50% 
have atypical histology, and they can be a cause of the 
carcinoid syndrome. Gastric carcinoids as a percentage of 
all carcinoids are increasing in frequency [1.96% (1969–
1971), 3.6% (1973–1991), 5.8% (1991–1999)].
Carcinoid Tumors without the 
Carcinoid Syndrome
The age of patients at diagnosis ranges from 10 to 93 years, 
with a mean age of 63 years for the small intestine and 
66 years for the rectum. The presentation is diverse and 
is related to the site of origin and the extent of malig-
nant spread. In the appendix, carcinoid tumors usu-
ally are found incidentally during surgery for suspected 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
350
appendicitis. Small-intestinal carcinoids in the jeju-
noileum present with periodic abdominal pain (51%), 
intestinal obstruction with ileus/invagination (31%), an 
abdominal tumor (17%), or GI bleeding (11%). Because 
of the vagueness of the symptoms, the diagnosis usu-
ally is delayed approximately 2 years from onset of the 
symptoms, with a range up to 20 years. Duodenal, gas-
tric, and rectal carcinoids are most frequently found by 
chance at endoscopy. The most common symptoms of 
rectal carcinoids are melena/bleeding (39%), constipa-
tion (17%), and diarrhea (12%). Bronchial carcinoids fre-
quently are discovered as a lesion on a chest radiograph, 
and 31% of the patients are asymptomatic. Thymic car-
cinoids present as anterior mediastinal masses, usually on 
chest radiograph or CT scan. Ovarian and testicular car-
cinoids usually present as masses discovered on physical 
examination or ultrasound. Metastatic carcinoid tumor 
in the liver frequently presents as hepatomegaly in a 
patient who may have minimal symptoms and nearly 
normal liver function test results.
Carcinoid Tumors with Systemic 
Symptoms Due to Secreted Products
Carcinoid tumors immunocytochemically can contain 
numerous GI peptides: gastrin, insulin, somatostatin, 
motilin, neurotensin, tachykinins (substance K, sub-
stance P, neuropeptide K), glucagon, gastrin-releasing 
peptide, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), pancreatic 
polypeptide (PP), ghrelin, other biologically active pep-
tides (ACTH, calcitonin, growth hormone), prostaglan-
dins, and bioactive amines (serotonin). These substances 
may or may not be released in sufficient amounts to 
cause symptoms. In various studies of patients with car-
cinoid tumors, elevated serum levels of PP were found 
in 43%, motilin in 14%, gastrin in 15%, and VIP in 6%. 
Foregut carcinoids are more likely to produce various 
GI peptides than are midgut carcinoids. Ectopic ACTH 
production causing Cushing’s syndrome is seen increas-
ingly with foregut carcinoids (respiratory tract primar-
ily) and in some series has been the most common cause 
of the ectopic ACTH syndrome, accounting for 64% of 
all cases. Acromegaly due to growth hormone–releasing 
factor release occurs with foregut carcinoids, as does the 
somatostatinoma syndrome, but rarely occurs with duo-
denal carcinoids. The most common systemic syndrome 
with carcinoid tumors is the carcinoid syndrome, which 
is discussed in detail in the next section.
Carcinoid Syndrome
Clinical features
The cardinal features from a number of series at pre-
sentation as well as during the disease course are shown 
in Table 22-6. Flushing and diarrhea are the two most 
common symptoms, occurring in up to 73% initially and 
in up to 89% during the course of the disease. The char-
acteristic flush is of sudden onset; it is a deep red or vio-
laceous erythema of the upper body, especially the neck 
and face, often associated with a feeling of warmth and 
occasionally associated with pruritus, lacrimation, diar-
rhea, or facial edema. Flushes may be precipitated by 
stress; alcohol; exercise; certain foods, such as cheese; or 
certain agents, such as catecholamines, pentagastrin, and 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Flushing episodes may be 
brief, lasting 2 to 5 min, especially initially, or may last 
hours, especially later in the disease course. Flushing usu-
ally is associated with metastastic midgut carcinoids but 
can also occur with foregut carcinoids. With bronchial 
carcinoids the flushes frequently are prolonged for hours 
to days, reddish in color, and associated with salivation, 
lacrimation, diaphoresis, diarrhea, and hypotension. The 
flush associated with gastric carcinoids can also be red-
dish in color, but with a patchy distribution over the face 
and neck, although the classic flush seen with midgut 
carcinoids can also be seen with gastric carcinoids. It may 
be provoked by food and have accompanying pruritus.
Diarrhea is present in 32–73% initially and 68–84% at 
some time in the disease course. Diarrhea usually occurs 
with flushing (85% of cases). The diarrhea usually is 
described as watery, with 60% of patients having <1 L/d 
of diarrhea. Steatorrhea is present in 67%, and in 46% it 
is greater than 15 g/d (normal <7 g). Abdominal pain 
may be present with the diarrhea or independently in 
10–34% of cases.
Cardiac manifestations occur in 11–20% initially of 
patients with carcinoid syndrome and in 17–56% (mean 
40%) at some time in the disease course. The cardiac 
disease is due to the formation of fibrotic plaques (com-
posed of smooth-muscle cells, myofibroblasts, and elas-
tic tissue) involving the endocardium, primarily on the 
right side, although lesions on the left side also occur 
occasionally, especially if a patent foramen ovale exists. 
The dense fibrous deposits are most commonly on the 
ventricular aspect of the tricuspid valve and less com-
monly on the pulmonary valve cusps. They can result 
in constriction of the valves, and pulmonic stenosis is 
usually predominant, whereas the tricuspid valve is often 
fixed open, resulting in regurgitation predominating. 
Overall, in patients with carcinoid heart disease, 97% 
have tricuspid insufficiency, 59% tricuspid stenosis, 50% 
pulmonary insufficiency, 25% pulmonary stenosis, and 
11% (0–25%) left-side lesions. Up to 80% of patients 
with cardiac lesions develop heart failure. Lesions on 
the left side are much less extensive, occur in 30% at 
autopsy, and most frequently affect the mitral valve.
Other clinical manifestations include wheezing or 
asthma-like symptoms (8–18%) and pellagra-like skin 
lesions (2–25%). A variety of noncardiac problems due 
to increased fibrous tissue have been reported, includ-
ing retroperitoneal fibrosis causing urethral obstruction, 
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
351
Peyronie’s disease of the penis, intraabdominal fibrosis, 
and occlusion of the mesenteric arteries or veins.
Pathobiology
Carcinoid syndrome occurred in 8% of 8876 patients 
with carcinoid tumors, with a rate of 1.4–18.4% in dif-
ferent studies. It occurs only when sufficient concen-
trations of products secreted by the tumor reach the 
systemic circulation. In 91% of cases this occurs after dis-
tant metastases to the liver. Rarely, primary gut carcinoids 
with nodal metastases with extensive retroperitoneal inva-
sion, pancreatic carcinoids with retroperitoneal lymph 
nodes, or carcinoids of the lung or ovary with direct 
access to the systemic circulation can cause the carci-
noid syndrome without hepatic metastases. All carcinoid 
tumors do not have the same propensity to metastasize 
and cause the carcinoid syndrome (Table 22-3). Midgut 
carcinoids account for 60–67% of cases of carcinoid syn-
drome, foregut tumors for 2–33%, hindgut for 1–8%, 
and an unknown primary location for 2–15%.
One of the main secretory products of carcinoid 
tumors involved in the carcinoid syndrome is serotonin 
[5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] (Fig. 22-1), which is syn-
thesized from tryptophan. Up to 50% of dietary tryp-
tophan can be used in this synthetic pathway by tumor 
cells, and this can result in inadequate supplies for con-
version to niacin; hence, some patients (2.5%) develop 
pellagra-like lesions. Serotonin has numerous biologic 
effects, including stimulating intestinal secretion with 
inhibition of absorption, stimulating increases in intes-
tinal motility, and stimulating fibrogenesis. In various 
studies 56–88% of all carcinoid tumors were associ-
ated with serotonin overproduction; however, 12–26% 
of the patients did not have the carcinoid syndrome. 
In one study platelet serotonin was elevated in 96% 
of patients with midgut carcinoids, 43% with foregut 
tumors, and 0% with hindgut tumors. In 90–100% of 
patients with the carcinoid syndrome there is evidence 
of serotonin overproduction. Serotonin is thought to be 
predominantly responsible for the diarrhea because of 
its effects on gut motility and intestinal secretion, pri-
marily through 5-HT3 and, to a lesser degree, 5-HT4 
receptors. Serotonin receptor antagonists (especially 
5-HT3 antagonists) relieve the diarrhea in many, but 
not all, patients. Additional studies suggest that pros-
taglandin E2 (PGE2) and tachykinins may be important 
mediators of the diarrhea in some patients. In one study, 
plasma tachykinin levels correlated with symptoms of 
both flushing and diarrhea. Serotonin does not appear 
to be involved in the flushing because serotonin recep-
tor antagonists do not relieve flushing. In patients with 
gastric carcinoids the characteristic red, patchy pruritic 
flush probably is due to histamine release because H1 and 
H2 receptor antagonists can prevent it. Numerous stud-
ies have shown that tachykinins are stored in carcinoid 
tumors and released during flushing. However, some 
studies have demonstrated that octreotide can relieve the 
flushing induced by pentagastrin in these patients with-
out altering the stimulated increase in plasma substance 
P, suggesting that other mediators must be involved 
in the flushing. A correlation between plasma tachyki-
nin levels, but not substance P levels, and flushing has 
been reported. Both histamine and serotonin may be 
responsible for the wheezing as well as the fibrotic reac-
tions involving the heart, causing Peyronie’s disease and 
intraabdominal fibrosis. The exact mechanism of the 
heart disease has remained unclear, although increas-
ing evidence supports a central role for serotonin. The 
valvular heart disease caused by the appetite-suppressant 
drug dexfenfluramine is histologically indistinguishable 
from that observed in carcinoid disease. Furthermore, 
ergot-containing dopamine receptor agonists used for 
Parkinson’s disease (pergolide, cabergoline) cause valvu-
lar heart disease that closely resembles that seen in the 
carcinoid syndrome. Metabolites of fenfluramine, as well 
as the dopamine receptor agonists, have high affinity for 
serotonin receptor subtype 5-HT2B receptors, whose 
activation is known to cause fibroblast mitogenesis. 
Serotonin receptor subtypes 5-HT1B,1D,2A,2B normally 
are expressed in human heart valve interstitial cells. High 
levels of 5-HT2B receptors are known to occur in heart 
valves and occur in cardiac fibroblasts and cardiomyo-
cytes. Studies of cultured interstitial cells from human 
cardiac valves have demonstrated that these valvulopathic 
drugs induce mitogenesis by activating 5-HT2B receptors 
and stimulating upregulation of transforming growth fac-
tor β and collagen biosynthesis. These observations sup-
port the conclusion that serotonin overproduction by 
carcinoid tumors is important in mediating the valvular 
changes, possibly by activating 5-HT2B receptors in the 
endocardium. Both the magnitude of serotonin overpro-
duction and prior chemotherapy are important predic-
tors of progression of the heart disease. Atrial natriuretic 
peptide (ANP) overproduction also has been reported in 
patients with cardiac disease, but its role in the patho-
genesis is unknown. However, high plasma levels of 
ANP have a worse prognosis. Plasma connective tissue 
growth factor levels are elevated in many fibrotic con-
ditions; elevated levels occur in patients with carcinoid 
heart disease and correlate with the presence of right-
ventricular dysfunction and the extent of valvular regur-
gitation in patients with carcinoid tumors.
Patients may develop either a typical or, rarely, an 
atypical carcinoid syndrome. In patients with the typi-
cal form, which characteristically is caused by a mid-
gut carcinoid tumor, the conversion of tryptophan 
to 5-HTP is the rate-limiting step (Fig. 22-1). Once 
5-HTP is formed, it is rapidly converted to 5-HT and 
stored in secretory granules of the tumor or in platelets. 
A small amount remains in plasma and is converted to 
5-HIAA, which appears in large amounts in the urine. 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
352
These patients have an expanded serotonin pool size, 
increased blood and platelet serotonin, and increased 
urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid (5-HIAA). Some 
carcinoid tumors cause an atypical carcinoid syndrome 
that is thought to be due to a deficiency in the enzyme 
dopa decarboxylase; thus, 5-HTP cannot be converted 
to 5-HT (serotonin), and 5-HTP is secreted into the 
bloodstream (Fig. 22-1). In these patients, plasma sero-
tonin levels are normal but urinary levels may be 
increased because some 5-HTP is converted to 5-HT 
in the kidney. Characteristically, urinary 5-HTP and 
5-HT are increased, but urinary 5-HIAA levels are only 
slightly elevated. Foregut carcinoids are the most likely 
to cause an atypical carcinoid syndrome.
One of the most immediate life-threatening compli-
cations of the carcinoid syndrome is the development of 
a carcinoid crisis. This is more common in patients who 
have intense symptoms or have greatly increased uri-
nary 5-HIAA levels (i.e., >200 mg/d). The crises may 
occur spontaneously or be provoked by stress, anesthe-
sia, chemotherapy, or a biopsy. Patients develop intense 
flushing, diarrhea, abdominal pain, cardiac abnormalities 
including tachycardia, hypertension, or hypotension. If 
not adequately treated, this can be a terminal event.
Diagnosis of the Carcinoid 
Syndrome and Carcinoid Tumors
The diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome relies on measure-
ment of urinary or plasma serotonin or its metabolites in 
the urine. The measurement of 5-HIAA is used most fre-
quently. False-positive elevations may occur if the patient 
is eating serotonin-rich foods such as bananas, pineapples, 
walnuts, pecans, avocados, or hickory nuts or is taking 
certain medications (cough syrup containing guaifenesin, 
acetaminophen, salicylates, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
or l-dopa). The normal range in daily urinary 5-HIAA 
excretion is 2–8 mg/d. Serotonin overproduction was 
noted in 92% of patients with carcinoid syndrome in one 
study, and in another study, 5-HIAA had 73% sensitivity 
and 100% specificity for carcinoid syndrome.
Most physicians use only the urinary 5-HIAA excre-
tion rate; however, plasma and platelet serotonin levels, 
if available, may provide additional information. Platelet 
serotonin levels are more sensitive than urinary 5-HIAA 
but are not generally available. Because patients with 
foregut carcinoids may produce an atypical carcinoid 
syndrome, if this syndrome is suspected and the uri-
nary 5-HIAA is minimally elevated or normal, other 
urinary metabolites of tryptophan, such as 5-HTP and 
5-HT, should be measured (Fig. 22-1).
Flushing occurs in a number of other diseases, includ-
ing systemic mastocytosis, chronic myeloid leukemia 
with increased histamine release, menopause, reactions 
to alcohol or glutamate, side effects of chlorpropamide, 
calcium channel blockers, and nicotinic acid. None of 
these conditions cause increased urinary 5-HIAA.
The diagnosis of carcinoid tumor can be suggested 
by the carcinoid syndrome, recurrent abdominal symp-
toms in a healthy-appearing individual, or the discov-
ery of hepatomegaly or hepatic metastases associated 
with minimal symptoms. Ileal carcinoids, which make 
up 25% of all clinically detected carcinoids, should be 
suspected in patients with bowel obstruction, abdominal 
pain, flushing, or diarrhea.
Serum chromogranin A levels are elevated in 
56–100% of patients with carcinoid tumors, and the 
level correlates with tumor bulk. Serum chromogranin 
A levels are not specific for carcinoid tumors because 
they are also elevated in patients with PETs and other 
neuroendocrine tumors. Plasma neuron-specific enolase 
levels are also used as a marker of carcinoid tumors but 
are less sensitive than chromogranin A, being increased 
in only 17–47% of patients.
Treatment	
Carcinoid Syndrome and Nonmetastatic 
Carcinoid Tumors
Carcinoid 
Syndrome  Treatment includes 
avoiding conditions that precipitate flushing, dietary 
supplementation with nicotinamide, treatment of heart 
failure with diuretics, treatment of wheezing with oral 
bronchodilators, and control of the diarrhea with antidi-
arrheal agents such as loperamide and diphenoxylate. If 
patients still have symptoms, serotonin receptor antag-
onists or somatostatin analogues (Fig. 22-2) are the 
drugs of choice.
There are 14 subclasses of serotonin receptors, and 
antagonists for many are not available. The 5-HT1 and 
5-HT2 receptor antagonists methylsergide, cyprohep-
tadine, and ketanserin have all been used to control 
the diarrhea but usually do not decrease flushing. The 
use of methylsergide is limited because it can cause or 
enhance retroperitoneal fibrosis. Ketanserin diminishes 
diarrhea in 30–100% of patients. 5-HT3 receptor antag-
onists (ondansetron, tropisetron, alosetron) can con-
trol diarrhea and nausea in up to 100% of patients and 
occasionally ameliorate the flushing. A combination of 
histamine H1 and H2 receptor antagonists (i.e., diphen-
hydramine and cimetidine or ranitidine) may control 
flushing in patients with foregut carcinoids.
Synthetic analogues of somatostatin (octreotide, lan-
reotide) are now the most widely used agents to con-
trol the symptoms of patients with carcinoid syndrome  
(Fig. 22-2). These drugs are effective at relieving symp-
toms and decreasing urinary 5-HIAA levels in patients 
with this syndrome. Octreotide-LAR and lanreotide-SR/
autogel (Somatuline) control symptoms in 74 and 68%, 
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
353
respectively, of patients with carcinoid syndrome and 
show a biochemical response in 51 and 39%, respec-
tively. Patients with mild to moderate symptoms usu-
ally are treated initially with octreotide 100 μg SC 
every 8 h and begun on long-acting monthly depot 
forms (octreotide-LAR or lanreotide-autogel). Forty 
percent of patients escape control after a median time 
of 4 months, and the depot dosage may have to be 
increased as well as supplemented with the shorter-
acting formulation, SC octreotide.
Carcinoid heart disease is associated with a 
decreased mean survival (3.8 years), and therefore 
it should be sought for and carefully assessed in all 
patients with carcinoid syndrome. Transthoracic echo-
cardiography remains a key element in establishing the 
diagnosis of carcinoid heart disease and determining
the extent and type of cardiac abnormalities. Treatment 
with diuretics and somatostatin analogues can reduce 
the negative hemodynamic effects and secondary heart 
failure. It remains unclear whether long-term treatment 
with these drugs will decrease the progression of car-
cinoid heart disease. Balloon valvuloplasty for stenotic 
valves or cardiac valve surgery may be required.
In patients with carcinoid crises, somatostatin ana-
logues are effective at both treating the condition and 
preventing their development during known precipitat-
ing events such as surgery, anesthesia, chemotherapy, 
and stress. It is recommended that octreotide 150–250 μg 
SC every 6 to 8 h be used 24–48 h before anesthesia and 
then continued throughout the procedure.
Currently, sustained-release preparations of both 
octreotide [octreotide-LAR (long-acting release), 10, 
20, 30 mg] and lanreotide [lanreotide-PR (prolonged 
release, lanreotide-autogel), 60, 90, 120 mg] are avail-
able and widely used because their use greatly facilitates 
long-term treatment. Octreotide-LAR (30 mg/month) 
gives a plasma level ≥1 ng/mL for 25 days, whereas 
this requires three to six injections a day of the non- 
sustained-release form. Lanreotide autogel (Somatuline) 
is given every 4–6 weeks.
Short-term side effects occur in up to one-half of 
patients. Pain at the injection site and side effects 
related to the GI tract (59% discomfort, 15% nausea, 
diarrhea) are the most common. They are usually short-
lived and do not interrupt treatment. Important long-term 
side effects include gallstone formation, steatorrhea, and 
deterioration in glucose tolerance. The overall incidence 
of gallstones/biliary sludge in one study was 52%, with 
7% having symptomatic disease that required surgical 
treatment.
Interferon α is reported to be effective in controlling 
symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome either alone or 
combined with hepatic artery embolization. With in- 
terferon α alone the response rate is 42%, and with 
interferon α with hepatic artery embolization, diarrhea 
was controlled for 1 year in 43% and flushing was con-
trolled in 86%.
Hepatic artery embolization alone or with chemo-
therapy (chemoembolization) has been used to control 
the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. Embolization 
alone is reported to control symptoms in up to 76% of 
patients, and chemoembolization (5-fluorouracil, doxo-
rubicin, cisplatin, mitomycin) in 60–75% of patients. 
Hepatic artery embolization can have major side effects, 
including nausea, vomiting, pain, and fever. In two stud-
ies 5–7% of patients died from complications of hepatic 
artery occlusion.
Other drugs have been used successfully in small 
numbers of patients to control the symptoms of car-
cinoid syndrome. Parachlorophenylanine can inhibit
Native
somatostatin
Lanreotide
Octreotide
111In-[DTPA-D-Phe1, Tyr3]-octreotide =
111In-pentetreotide; Octreoscan-111
90Y-[DOTA0-D-Phe1,
Tyr3]-octreotide
177Lu-[DOTA0-D-Phe1,
Tyr3]-octreotate
ALA GLY
LYS
LYS
LYS
ASN PHE
SER THR
THR
THR
TYR
THR
PHE
VAL
PHE
TRP
CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
S
S
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
D-
βNAL
D-
PHE
D-
PHE
D-
TRP
LYS
PHE
THR
D-
TRP
LYS
TYR
THR
D-
TRP
LYS
TYR
THR
D-
TRP
LYS
TYR
THR
D-
TRP
HOOC-CH2
HOOC-CH2
CH2-CO
CH2-COOH
CH2-COOH
COOH
HOOC
NH
HOOC
N–(CH2)2–N–(CH2)2–N
D-
PHE
D-
PHE
THR
-ol
THR
-ol
THR
-ol
N
N
O
N
N
90Y
111In
COOH
HOOC
NH
HOOC
N
N
O
N
N
177Lu
Figure 22-2 
Structure of somatostatin and synthetic analogues used 
for diagnostic or therapeutic indications.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
354
tryptophan hydroxylase and therefore the conversion 
of tryptophan to 5-HTP. However, its severe side effects, 
including psychiatric disturbances, make it intolerable 
for long-term use. α-Methyldopa inhibits the conversion 
of 5-HTP to 5-HT, but its effects are only partial.
Peptide radioreceptor therapy (using radiotherapy 
with radiolabeled somatostatin analogues), the use 
of radiolabeled microspheres, and other methods for 
treatment of advanced metastatic disease may facili-
tate control of the carcinoid syndrome and are dis-
cussed in a later section dealing with treatment of 
advanced disease.
Carcinoid 
Tumors 
(Nonmetastatic)  
Surgery is the only potentially curative therapy. Because 
with most carcinoids the probability of metastatic 
disease increases with increasing size, the extent of sur-
gical resection is determined accordingly. With appen-
diceal carcinoids <1 cm, simple appendectomy was 
curative in 103 patients followed for up to 35 years. 
With rectal carcinoids <1 cm, local resection is curative. 
With small-intestinal carcinoids <1 cm, there is not com-
plete agreement. Because 15–69% of small-intestinal 
carcinoids this size have metastases in different stud-
ies, some recommend a wide resection with en bloc 
resection of the adjacent lymph-bearing mesentery. 
If the carcinoid tumor is >2 cm for rectal, appendiceal, 
or small-intestinal carcinomas, a full cancer operation 
should be done. This includes a right hemicolectomy 
for appendiceal carcinoid, an abdominoperineal resec-
tion or low anterior resection for rectal carcinoids, and 
an en bloc resection of adjacent lymph nodes for small-
intestinal carcinoids. For carcinoids 1–2 cm in diam-
eter for appendiceal tumors, a simple appendectomy is 
proposed by some, whereas others favor a formal right 
hemicolectomy. For rectal carcinoids 1–2 cm, it is recom-
mended that a wide local full-thickness excision be per-
formed.
With type I or II gastric carcinoids, which are usually 
<1 cm, endoscopic removal is recommended. In type I 
or II gastric carcinoids, if the tumor is >2 cm or if there 
is local invasion, some recommend total gastrectomy, 
whereas others recommend antrectomy in type I to 
reduce the hypergastrinemia, which led to regression of 
the carcinoids in a number of studies. For types I and II 
gastric carcinoids of 1–2 cm, there is no agreement, with 
some recommending endoscopic treatment followed 
by chronic somatostatin treatment and careful follow-
up and others recommending surgical treatment. With 
type III gastric carcinoids >2 cm, excision and regional 
lymph node clearance are recommended. Most tumors 
<1 cm are treated endoscopically.
Resection of isolated or limited hepatic metastases 
may be beneficial and will be discussed in a later section 
on treatment of advanced disease.
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Functional PETs usually present clinically with symp-
toms due to the hormone-excess state. Only late in 
the course of the disease does the tumor per se cause 
prominent symptoms such as abdominal pain. In con-
trast, all the symptoms due to nonfunctional PETs 
are due to the tumor per se. The overall result of this 
is that some functional PETs may present with severe 
symptoms with a small or undetectable primary tumor, 
whereas nonfunctional tumors usually present late in the 
disease course with large tumors, which are frequently 
metastatic. The mean delay between onset of continu-
ous symptoms and diagnosis of a functional PET syn-
drome is 4–7 years. Therefore, the diagnoses frequently 
are missed for extended periods.
Treatment	
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumor
Treatment of PETs requires two different strategies. First, 
treatment must be directed at the hormone-excess 
state such as the gastric acid hypersecretion in gastri-
nomas or the hypoglycemia in insulinomas. Ectopic 
hormone secretion usually causes the presenting symp-
toms and can cause life-threatening complications. Sec-
ond, with all the tumors except insulinomas, >50% are 
malignant (Table 22-2); therefore, treatment must also 
be directed against the tumor per se. Because in many 
patients these tumors are not surgically curable due to 
the presence of advanced disease at diagnosis, surgi-
cal resection for cure, which addresses both treatment 
aspects, is often not possible.
Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome)
A gastrinoma is a neuroendocrine tumor that secretes 
gastrin; the resultant hypergastrinemia causes gastric acid 
hypersecretion (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome [ZES]). The 
chronic hypergastrinemia results in marked gastric acid 
hypersecretion and growth of the gastric mucosa with 
increased numbers of parietal cells and proliferation of 
gastric ECL cells. The gastric acid hypersecretion char-
acteristically causes peptic ulcer disease, often refrac-
tory and severe, as well as diarrhea. The most common 
presenting symptoms are abdominal pain (70–100%), 
diarrhea (37–73%), and gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease (GERD) (30–35%); 10–20% have diarrhea only. 
Although peptic ulcers may occur in unusual locations, 
most patients have a typical duodenal ulcer. Important 
observations that should suggest this diagnosis include 
peptic ulcer disease (PUD) with diarrhea; PUD in an 
unusual location or with multiple ulcers; PUD that is 
refractory to treatment or persistent; PUD associated with 
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
355
prominent gastric folds; PUD associated with findings 
suggestive of MEN 1 (endocrinopathy, family history 
of ulcer or endocrinopathy, nephrolithiases); and PUD 
without Helicobacter pylori present. H. pylori is present in 
>90% of idiopathic peptic ulcers but is present in <50% 
of patients with gastrinomas. Chronic unexplained diar-
rhea also should suggest gastrinoma.
Approximately 20–25% of patients with ZES have 
MEN 1, and in most cases hyperparathyroidism is pres-
ent before the gastrinoma. These patients are treated 
differently from those without MEN 1; therefore, MEN 
1 should be sought in all patients by family history and 
by measuring plasma ionized calcium and prolactin lev-
els and plasma hormone levels (parathormone, growth 
hormone).
Most gastrinomas (50–70%) are present in the duo-
denum, followed by the pancreas (20–40%) and other 
intraabdominal sites (mesentery, lymph nodes, bili-
ary tract, liver, stomach, ovary). Rarely, the tumor may 
involve extraabdominal sites. In MEN 1 the gastrinomas 
are also usually in the duodenum (70–90%), followed by 
the pancreas (10–30%), and are almost always multiple. 
About 60–90% of gastrinomas are malignant (Table 22-2) 
with metastatic spread to lymph nodes and liver. Distant 
metastases to bone occur in 12–30% of patients with 
liver metastases.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ZES requires the demonstration of 
inappropriate fasting hypergastrinemia, usually by dem-
onstrating hypergastrinemia occurring with an increased 
basal gastric acid output (BAO) (hyperchlorhydria). 
More than 98% of patients with gastrinomas have fast-
ing hypergastrinemia, although in 40–60% the level may 
be elevated less than tenfold. Therefore, when the diag-
nosis is suspected, a fasting gastrin should be determined 
first. It is important to remember that potent gastric 
acid suppressant drugs such as proton pump inhibitors 
(omeprazole, esomeprazole, pantoprazole, lansoprazole, 
rabeprazole) can suppress acid secretion sufficiently to 
cause hypergastrinemia; because of their prolonged dura-
tion of action, these drugs have to be discontinued for 
a week before the gastrin determination. Withdrawal 
of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) should be performed 
carefully and is best done in consultation with GI 
units with experience in this area. The widespread use 
of PPIs can confound the diagnosis of ZES by raising 
a false-positive diagnosis by causing hypergastrinemia 
in a patient being treated with idiopathic peptic dis-
ease (without ZES) and lead to a false-negative diag-
nosis because at routine doses used to treat patients 
with idiopathic peptic disease, PPIs control symptoms 
in most ZES patients and thus mask the diagnosis. If 
ZES is suspected and the gastrin level is elevated, it is 
important to show that it is increased when gastric pH 
is ≤2.0 because physiologically hypergastrinemia sec-
ondary to achlorhydria (atrophic gastritis, pernicious 
anemia) is one of the most common causes of hyper-
gastrinemia. Nearly all gastrinoma patients have a fast-
ing pH ≤2 when off antisecretory drugs. If the fasting 
gastrin is >1000 pg/mL (increased tenfold) and the pH 
is ≤2.0, which occurs in 40–60% of patients with gastri-
noma, the diagnosis of ZES is established after the pos-
sibility of retained antrum syndrome has been ruled out 
by history. In patients with hypergastrinemia with fast-
ing gastrins <1000 pg/mL and gastric pH ≤2.0, other 
conditions, such as H. pylori infections, antral G-cell 
hyperplasia/hyperfunction, gastric outlet obstruction, and, 
rarely, renal failure can masquerade as ZES. To establish 
the diagnosis in this group, a determination of BAO and 
a secretin provocative test should be done. In patients 
with ZES without previous gastric acid–reducing surgery, 
the BAO is usually (>90%) elevated (i.e., >15 meq/h). 
The secretin provocative test is usually positive, with 
the criterion of a >120-pg/mL increase over the basal 
level having the highest sensitivity (94%) and specificity 
(100%).
Treatment	
Gastrinomas
Gastric acid hypersecretion in patients with gastrinomas 
can be controlled in almost every case by oral gastric 
antisecretory drugs. Because of their long duration of 
action and potency, which allows dosing once or twice 
a day, the PPIs (H+,K+-ATPase inhibitors) are the drugs 
of choice. Histamine H2-receptor antagonists are also 
effective, although more frequent dosing (q 4–8 h) and 
high doses are required. In patients with MEN 1 with 
hyperparathyroidism, correction of the hyperparathy-
roidism increases the sensitivity to gastric antisecretory 
drugs and decreases the basal acid output. Long-term 
treatment with PPIs (>15 years) has proved to be safe 
and effective, without development of tachyphylaxis. 
Although patients with ZES, especially those with MEN 
1, more frequently develop gastric carcinoids, no data 
suggest that the long-term use of PPIs increases this risk 
in these patients. With long-term PPI use in ZES patients, 
vitamin B12 deficiency can develop; thus, vitamin B12 lev-
els should be assessed during follow-up.
With the increased ability to control acid hyperse-
cretion, more than 50% of patients who are not cured 
(>60% of patients) will die from tumor-related causes. 
At presentation, careful imaging studies are essential 
to localize the extent of the tumor. A third of patients 
present with hepatic metastases, and in <15% of those 
patients the disease is limited, so that surgical resection 
may be possible. Surgical short-term cure is possible in 
60% of all patients without MEN 1 or liver metastases 
(40% of all patients) and in 30% of patients long term.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
356
In patients with MEN 1, long-term surgical cure is rare 
because the tumors are multiple, frequently with lymph 
node metastases. Therefore, all patients with gastrino-
mas without MEN 1 or a medical condition that limits 
life expectancy should undergo surgery by a surgeon 
experienced in the treatment of these disorders.
Insulinomas
An insulinoma is an endocrine tumor of the pancreas 
that is thought to be derived from beta cells that ectopi-
cally secrete insulin, which results in hypoglycemia. The 
average age of occurrence is 40–50 years old. The most 
common clinical symptoms are due to the effect of the 
hypoglycemia on the CNS (neuroglycemic symptoms) 
and include confusion, headache, disorientation, visual 
difficulties, irrational behavior, and even coma. Also, 
most patients have symptoms due to excess catechol-
amine release secondary to the hypoglycemia, including 
sweating, tremor, and palpitations. Characteristically, 
these attacks are associated with fasting.
Insulinomas are generally small (>90% are <2 cm) and 
usually not multiple (90%); only 5–15% are malignant, 
and they almost invariably occur only in the pancreas, 
distributed equally in the pancreatic head, body, and tail.
Insulinomas should be suspected in all patients with 
hypoglycemia, especially when there is a history sug-
gesting that attacks are provoked by fasting, or with a 
family history of MEN 1. Insulin is synthesized as pro-
insulin, which consists of a 21-amino-acid α chain and
a 30-amino-acid β chain connected by a 33-amino-acid 
connecting peptide (C peptide). In insulinomas, in addi-
tion to elevated plasma insulin levels, elevated plasma 
proinsulin levels are found, and C-peptide levels can be 
elevated.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of insulinoma requires the demonstration 
of an elevated plasma insulin level at the time of hypo-
glycemia. A number of other conditions may cause fast-
ing hypoglycemia, such as the inadvertent or surreptitious 
use of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents, severe liver 
disease, alcoholism, poor nutrition, and other extrapan-
creatic tumors. Furthermore, postprandial hypoglycemia 
can be caused by a number of conditions that con-
fuse the diagnosis of insulinoma. Particularly important 
here is the increased occurrence of hypoglycemia after 
gastric bypass surgery for obesity, which is now widely 
performed. The most reliable test to diagnose insulin-
oma is a fast up to 72 h with serum glucose, C-peptide, 
proinsulin, and insulin measurements every 4–8 h. If at 
any point the patient becomes symptomatic or glucose 
levels are persistently <2.2 mmol/L (40 mg/dL), the test 
should be terminated and repeat samples for the above 
studies should be obtained before glucose is given. Some 
70–80% of patients will develop hypoglycemia dur-
ing the first 24 h, and 98% by 48 h. In nonobese nor-
mal subjects, serum insulin levels should decrease to 
<43 pmol/L (<6 μU/mL) when blood glucose decreases 
to <2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL) and the ratio of insulin 
to glucose is <0.3 (in mg/dL). In addition to having an 
insulin level >6 μU/mL when blood glucose is <40 mg/dL, 
some investigators also require an elevated C-peptide and 
serum proinsulin level, an insulin/glucose ratio >0.3, 
and a decreased plasma β-hydroxybutyrate level for the 
diagnosis of insulinomas. Surreptitious use of insulin or 
hypoglycemic agents may be difficult to distinguish from 
insulinomas. The combination of proinsulin levels (nor-
mal in exogenous insulin/hypoglycemic agent users), 
C-peptide levels (low in exogenous insulin users), anti-
bodies to insulin (positive in exogenous insulin users), and 
measurement of sulfonylurea levels in serum or plasma 
will allow the correct diagnosis to be made. The diagnosis 
of insulinoma has been complicated by the introduction 
of specific insulin assays that do not also interact with 
proinsulin, as do many of the older radioimmunoassays 
(RIAs), and therefore give lower plasma insulin levels. The 
increased use of these specific insulin assays has resulted 
in increased numbers of patients with insulinomas having 
lower plasma insulin values than the 6 μU/mL levels pro-
posed to be characteristic of insulinomas by RIA. In these 
patients the assessment of proinsulin and C-peptide lev-
els at the time of hypoglycemia is particularly helpful for 
establishing the correct diagnosis. An elevated proinsulin 
level when the fasting glucose level is <45 mg/dL is sen-
sitive and specific.
Treatment	
Insulinomas
Only 5–15% of insulinomas are malignant; therefore, after 
appropriate imaging (see later in the chapter), surgery 
should be performed. In different studies, 75–100% of 
patients are cured by surgery. Before surgery, the hypo-
glycemia can be controlled by frequent small meals 
and the use of diazoxide (150–800 mg/d). Diazoxide is a 
benzothiadiazide whose hyperglycemic effect is attrib-
uted to inhibition of insulin release. Its side effects are 
sodium retention and GI symptoms such as nausea. 
Approximately 50–60% of patients respond to diazoxide. 
Other agents effective in some patients to control the 
hypoglycemia include verapamil and diphenylhydantoin. 
Long-acting somatostatin analogues such as octreotide 
and lanreotide are acutely effective in 40% of patients. 
However, octreotide must be used with care because it 
inhibits growth hormone secretion and can alter plasma 
glucagon levels; therefore, in some patients it can 
worsen the hypoglycemia.
For the 5–15% of patients with malignant insulinomas, 
these drugs or somatostatin analogues are used initially.
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
357
In a small number of patients with insulinomas, some 
with malignant tumors, mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTor) inhibitors (everolimus, rapamycin) are reported 
to control the hypoglycemia. If they are not effective, 
various antitumor treatments such as hepatic arterial 
embolization, chemoembolization, chemotherapy, and 
peptide receptor radiotherapy have been used (see 
“Specific Antitumor Treatments”).
Insulinomas, which are usually benign (>90%) and 
intrapancreatic in location, are increasingly resected 
using a laparoscopic approach, which has lower morbid-
ity rates. This approach requires that the insulinoma be 
localized on preoperative imaging studies.
Glucagonomas
A glucagonoma is an endocrine tumor of the pancreas 
that secretes excessive amounts of glucagon, which 
causes a distinct syndrome characterized by dermatitis, 
glucose intolerance or diabetes, and weight loss. Gluca-
gonomas principally occur between 45 and 70 years of 
age. The tumor is clinically heralded by a characteris-
tic dermatitis (migratory necrolytic erythema) (67–90%), 
accompanied by glucose intolerance (40–90%), weight 
loss (66–96%), anemia (33–85%), diarrhea (15–29%), 
and thromboembolism (11–24%). The characteristic 
rash usually starts as an annular erythema at intertrigi-
nous and periorificial sites, especially in the groin or 
buttock. It subsequently becomes raised, and bullae 
form; when the bullae rupture, eroded areas form. The 
lesions can wax and wane. The development of a simi-
lar rash in patients receiving glucagon therapy suggests 
that the rash is a direct effect of the hyperglucagonemia. 
A characteristic laboratory finding is hypoaminoacide-
mia, which occurs in 26–100% of patients.
Glucagonomas are generally large tumors at diagno-
sis (5–10 cm). Some 50–80% occur in the pancreatic 
tail. From 50 to 82% have evidence of metastatic spread 
at presentation, usually to the liver. Glucagonomas are 
rarely extrapancreatic and usually occur singly.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating an increased 
plasma glucagon level. Characteristically, plasma gluca-
gon levels exceed 1000 pg/mL (normal is <150 pg/mL) 
in 90%; 7% are between 500 and 1000 pg/mL, and 3% 
are <500 pg/mL. A trend toward lower levels at diag-
nosis has been noted in the last decade. A plasma glu-
cagon level >1000 pg/mL is considered diagnostic of 
glucagonoma. Other diseases causing increased plasma 
glucagon levels include renal insufficiency, acute pan-
creatitis, hypercorticism, hepatic insufficiency, severe 
stress, and prolonged fasting or familial hyperglucagone-
mia, as well as danazol treatment. With the exception of 
cirrhosis, these disorders do not increase plasma gluca-
gon >500 pg/mL.
Necrolytic migratory erythema is not pathognomonic 
for glucagonoma and occurs in myeloproliferative dis-
orders, hepatitis B infection, malnutrition, short-bowel 
syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, and malabsorp-
tion disorders.
Treatment	
Glucagonomas
In 50–80% of patients, hepatic metastases are present, 
and so curative surgical resection is not possible. Surgi-
cal debulking in patients with advanced disease or other 
antitumor treatments may be beneficial (see “Specific 
Antitumor Treatments”). Long-acting somatostatin ana-
logues such as octreotide and lanreotide improve the 
skin rash in 75% of patients and may improve the weight 
loss, pain, and diarrhea but usually do not improve the 
glucose intolerance.
Somatostatinoma Syndrome
The somatostatinoma syndrome is due to an NET that 
secretes excessive amounts of somatostatin, which causes 
a distinct syndrome characterized by diabetes mellitus, 
gallbladder disease, diarrhea, and steatorrhea. There 
is no general distinction in the literature between a 
tumor that contains somatostatin-like immunoreactiv-
ity (somatostatinoma) and does (11–45%) or does not 
(55–90%) produce a clinical syndrome (somatostatin-
oma syndrome) by secreting somatostatin. In a review 
of 173 cases of somatostatinomas, only 11% were asso-
ciated with the somatostatinoma syndrome. The mean 
age is 51 years. Somatostatinomas occur primarily in 
the pancreas and small intestine, and the frequency of 
the symptoms and occurrence of the somatostatin-
oma syndrome differ in each. Each of the usual symp-
toms is more common in pancreatic than in intestinal 
somatostatinomas: diabetes mellitus (95% vs. 21%), gall-
bladder disease (94% vs. 43%), diarrhea (92% vs. 38%), 
steatorrhea (83% vs. 12%), hypochlorhydria (86% vs. 
12%), and weight loss (90% vs. 69%). The somatostati-
noma syndrome occurs in 30–90% of pancreatic and 
0–5% of small-intestinal somatostatinomas. In various 
series 43% of all duodenal NETs contain somatostatin; 
however, the somatostatinoma syndrome is rarely pres-
ent (<2%). Somatostatinomas occur in the pancreas in 
56–74% of cases, with the primary location being the 
pancreatic head. The tumors are usually solitary (90%) 
and large (mean size 4.5 cm). Liver metastases are com-
mon, being present in 69–84% of patients. Somatostati-
nomas are rare in patients with MEN 1, occurring in 
only 0.65%.
Somatostatin is a tetradecapeptide that is widely dis-
tributed in the CNS and GI tract, where it functions 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
358
as a neurotransmitter or has paracrine and autocrine 
actions. It is a potent inhibitor of many processes, 
including release of almost all hormones, acid secretion, 
intestinal and pancreatic secretion, and intestinal absorp-
tion. Most of the clinical manifestations are directly 
related to these inhibitory actions.
Diagnosis
In most cases somatostatinomas have been found by acci-
dent either at the time of cholecystectomy or during 
endoscopy. The presence of psammoma bodies in a duo-
denal tumor should particularly raise suspicion. Duodenal 
somatostatin-containing tumors are increasingly associ-
ated with von Recklinghausen’s disease. Most of these 
tumors (>98%) do not cause the somatostatinoma syn-
drome. The diagnosis of the somatostatinoma syndrome 
requires the demonstration of elevated plasma somatostatin 
levels.
Treatment	
Somatostatinomas
Pancreatic tumors are frequently (70–92%) metastatic 
at presentation, whereas 30–69% of small-intestinal 
somatostatinomas have metastases. Surgery is the treat-
ment of choice for those without widespread hepatic 
metastases. Symptoms in patients with the somatostatin-
oma syndrome are also improved by octreotide treatment.
VIPomas
VIPomas are endocrine tumors that secrete excessive 
amounts of vasoactive intestinal peptide, which causes 
a distinct syndrome characterized by large-volume diar-
rhea, hypokalemia, and dehydration. This syndrome 
is also called Verner-Morrison syndrome, pancreatic 
cholera, and WDHA syndrome for watery diarrhea, 
hypokalemia, and achlorhydria, which some patients 
develop. The mean age of patients with this syndrome 
is 49 years; however, it can occur in children, and when 
it does, it is usually caused by a ganglioneuroma or 
ganglioneuroblastoma.
The principal symptoms are large-volume diarrhea 
(100%) severe enough to cause hypokalemia (80–100%), 
dehydration (83%), hypochlorhydria (54–76%), and 
flushing (20%). The diarrhea is secretory in nature, per-
sisting during fasting, and is almost always >1 L/d and 
in 70% is >3 L/d. In a number of studies, the diarrhea 
was intermittent initially in up to half the patients. Most 
patients do not have accompanying steatorrhea (16%), 
and the increased stool volume is due to increased 
excretion of sodium and potassium, which, with the 
anions, accounts for the osmolality of the stool. Patients 
frequently have hyperglycemia (25–50%) and hypercal-
cemia (25–50%).
VIP is a 28-amino-acid peptide that is an important 
neurotransmitter, ubiquitously present in the CNS and 
GI tract. Its known actions include stimulation of small-
intestinal chloride secretion as well as effects on smooth 
muscle contractility, inhibition of acid secretion, and 
vasodilatory effects, which explain most features of the 
clinical syndrome.
In adults 80–90% of VIPomas are pancreatic in loca-
tion, with the rest due to VIP-secreting pheochromocy-
tomas, intestinal carcinoids, and rarely ganglioneuromas. 
These tumors are usually solitary, 50–75% are in the 
pancreatic tail, and 37–68% have hepatic metastases at 
diagnosis. In children <10 years old, the syndrome is 
usually due to ganglioneuromas or ganglioblastomas and 
is less often malignant (10%).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis requires the demonstration of an ele-
vated plasma VIP level and the presence of large-vol-
ume diarrhea. A stool volume <700 mL/d is proposed 
to exclude the diagnosis of VIPoma. When the patient 
fasts, a number of diseases can be excluded that can 
cause marked diarrhea. Other diseases that can produce 
a secretory large-volume diarrhea include gastrinomas, 
chronic laxative abuse, carcinoid syndrome, systemic 
mastocytosis, rarely medullary thyroid cancer, diabetic 
diarrhea, sprue, and AIDS. Among these conditions, 
only VIPomas caused a marked increase in plasma VIP. 
Chronic surreptitious use of laxatives/diuretics can be 
particularly difficult to detect clinically. Hence, in a 
patient with unexplained chronic diarrhea, screens for 
laxatives should be performed; they will detect many, 
but not all, laxative abusers.
Treatment	
Vasoactive Intestinal Peptidomas
The most important initial treatment in these patients 
is to correct their dehydration, hypokalemia, and elec-
trolyte losses with fluid and electrolyte replacement. 
These patients may require 5 L/d of fluid and >22 meq/d 
of potassium. Because 37–68% of adults with VIPomas 
have metastatic disease in the liver at presentation, a sig-
nificant number of patients cannot be cured surgically. In 
these patients long-acting somatostatin analogues such 
as octreotide and lanreotide are the drugs of choice.
Octreotide/lanreotide will control the diarrhea short 
and long term in 75–100% of patients. In nonresponsive 
patients the combination of glucocorticoids and octreo-
tide/lanreotide has proved helpful in a small number 
of patients. Other drugs reported to be helpful in small 
numbers of patients include prednisone (60–100 mg/d), 
clonidine, indomethacin, phenothiazines, loperamide, 
lidamidine, lithium, propranolol, and metoclopramide.
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
359
Treatment of advanced disease with embolization, che-
moembolization, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, radio-
frequency ablation, and peptide receptor radiotherapy 
may be helpful (see later in the chapter).
Nonfunctional Pancreatic 
Endocrine Tumors (NF-PETs)
NF-PETs are endocrine tumors that originate in the 
pancreas and secrete no products, or their products do 
not cause a specific clinical syndrome. The symptoms are 
due entirely to the tumor per se. NF-PETs secrete chro-
mogranin A (90–100%), chromogranin B (90–100%), 
PP (58%), α-HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) 
(40%), and β-HCG (20%). Because the symptoms are 
due to the tumor mass, patients with NF-PETs usually 
present late in the disease course with invasive tumors 
and hepatic metastases (64–92%) and the tumors are 
usually large (72% >5 cm). NF-PETs are usually soli-
tary except in patients with MEN 1, in which case they 
are multiple. They occur primarily in the pancreatic 
head. Even though these tumors do not cause a func-
tional syndrome, immunocytochemical studies show that 
they synthesize numerous peptides and cannot be distin-
guished from functional tumors by immunocytochemis-
try. In MEN 1, 80–100% of patients have microscopic 
NF-PETs, but they become large or symptomatic in only 
a minority (0–13%) of cases. In VHL 12–17% develop 
NF-PETs, and in 4% they are ≥3 cm in diameter.
The most common symptoms are abdominal pain 
(30–80%), jaundice (20–35%), and weight loss, fatigue, 
or bleeding; 10–30% are found incidentally. The aver-
age time from the beginning of symptoms to diagnosis 
is 5 years.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is established by histologic confirmation 
in a patient without either the clinical symptoms or the 
elevated plasma hormone levels of one of the established 
syndromes. The principal difficulty in diagnosis is to dis-
tinguish an NF-PET from a nonendocrine pancreatic 
tumor, which is more common. Even though chromo-
granin A levels are elevated in almost every patient, this is 
not specific for this disease as it can be found in functional 
PETs, carcinoids, and other neuroendocrine disorders. 
Plasma pancreatic polypeptide is increased in 22–71% 
of patients and should strongly suggest the diagnosis in a 
patient with a pancreatic mass because it is usually normal 
in patients with pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Elevated 
plasma PP is not diagnostic of this tumor because it is ele-
vated in a number of other conditions, such as chronic 
renal failure, old age, inflammatory conditions, and diabe-
tes. A positive somatostatin receptor scan in a patient with 
a pancreatic mass should suggest the presence of PET/
NF-PET rather than a nonendocrine tumor.
Treatment	
Nonfunctional Pancreatic Endocrine 
Tumors
Overall survival in patients with sporadic NF-PET is 
30–63% at 5 years, with a median survival of 6 years. 
Unfortunately, surgical curative resection can be con-
sidered only in a minority of these patients because 
64–92% present with metastatic disease. Treatment 
needs to be directed against the tumor per se using the 
various modalities discussed below for advanced dis-
ease. The treatment of NF-PETs in either MEN 1 patients 
or patients with VHL is controversial. Most recommend 
surgical resection for any tumor >2–3 cm in diameter; 
however, there is no consensus on smaller NF-PETs, 
with most recommending careful surveillance of these 
patients.
GRFomas
GRFomas are endocrine tumors that secrete excessive 
amounts of growth hormone–releasing factor (GRF) 
that cause acromegaly. GRF is a 44-amino-acid peptide, 
and 25–44% of PETs have GRF immunoreactivity, 
although it is uncommonly secreted. GRFomas are lung 
tumors in 47–54% of cases, PETs in 29–30%, and small-
intestinal carcinoids in 8–10%; up to 12% occur at other 
sites. Patients have a mean age of 38 years, and the 
symptoms usually are due to either acromegaly or the tu- 
mor per se. The acromegaly caused by GRFomas is 
indistinguishable from classic acromegaly. The pancre-
atic tumors are usually large (>6 cm), and liver metas-
tases are present in 39%. They should be suspected in 
any patient with acromegaly and an abdominal tumor, 
a patient with MEN 1 with acromegaly, or a patient 
without a pituitary adenoma with acromegaly or associ-
ated with hyperprolactinemia, which occurs in 70% of 
GRFomas. GRFomas are an uncommon cause of acro-
megaly. GRFomas occur in <1% of MEN 1 patients. 
The diagnosis is established by performing plasma assays 
for GRF and growth hormone. Most GRFomas have 
a plasma GRF level >300 pg/mL (normal <5 pg/mL 
men, <10 pg/mL women). Patients with GRFomas 
also have increased plasma levels of insulin-like growth 
factor type I (IGF-I) similar to those in classic acromegaly. 
Surgery is the treatment of choice if diffuse metastases 
are not present. Long-acting somatostatin analogues 
such as octreotide and lanreotide are the agents of choice, 
with 75–100% of patients responding.
Other Rare Pancreatic Endocrine 
Tumor Syndromes
Cushing’s syndrome (ACTHoma) due to a PET occurs 
in 4–16% of all ectopic Cushing’s syndrome cases. It 
occurs in 5% of cases of sporadic gastrinomas, almost 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
360
invariably in patients with hepatic metastases, and is 
an independent poor prognostic factor. Paraneoplas-
tic hypercalcemia due to PETs releasing parathyroid 
hormone–related peptide (PTHrP), a PTH-like mate-
rial, or unknown factor, is rarely reported. The tumors 
are usually large, and liver metastases are usually pres-
ent. Most (88%) appear to be due to release of PTHrP. 
PETs occasionally can cause the carcinoid syndrome. 
PETs secreting calcitonin have been proposed as a spe-
cific clinical syndrome. One-half of the patients have 
diarrhea, which disappears with resection of the tumor. 
The proposal that this could be a discrete syndrome 
is supported by the finding that 25–42% of patients 
with medullary thyroid cancer with hypercalcitonemia 
develop diarrhea, probably secondary to a motility dis-
order. This is classified in Table 22-2 as a possible spe-
cific disorder because so few cases have been described. 
Similarly classified with only a few cases described are 
a renin-producing PET in a patient presenting with 
hypertension; PETs secreting luteinizing hormone, 
resulting in masculinization or decreased libido; a PET-
secreting erythropoietin resulting in polycythemia; and 
PETs secreting insulin-like growth factor II causing 
hypoglycemia (Table 22-2). Ghrelin is a 28-amino-acid 
peptide with a number of metabolic functions. Even 
though it is detectable immunohistochemically in most 
PETs, no specific syndrome is associated with release of 
ghrelin by the PET.
Tumor Localization
Localization of the primary tumor and knowledge of 
the extent of the disease are essential to the proper man-
agement of all carcinoids and PETs. Without proper 
localization studies it is not possible to determine 
whether the patient is a candidate for curative resection 
or cytoreductive surgery or requires antitumor treat-
ment, or to predict the patient’s prognosis reliably.
Numerous tumor localization methods are used in 
both types of NETs, including conventional imag-
ing studies (computed tomographic scanning, magnetic 
resonance imaging, transabdominal ultrasound, selective 
angiography), somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), 
and positron emission tomographic scanning. In PETs, 
endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and functional localiza-
tion by measuring venous hormonal gradients are also 
reported to be useful. Bronchial carcinoids are usually 
detected by standard chest radiography and assessed by 
CT. Rectal, duodenal, colonic, and gastric carcinoids 
are usually detected by GI endoscopy.
PETs, as well as carcinoid tumors, frequently overex-
press high-affinity somatostatin receptors in both their 
primary tumors and their metastases. Of the five types 
of somatostatin receptors (sst1–5), radiolabeled octreo-
tide binds with high affinity to sst2 and sst5, has a lower 
affinity for sst3, and has a very low affinity for sst1 and 
sst4. Between 90 and 100% of carcinoid tumors and 
PETs possess sst2, and many also have the other four 
sst subtypes. Interaction with these receptors can be 
used to localize NETs by using [111In-DTPA-d-Phe1]
octreotide and radionuclide scanning (SRS) as well as 
for treatment of the hormone-excess state with octreo-
tide or lanreotide, as discussed earlier. Because of its 
sensitivity and ability to localize tumor throughout the 
body, SRS is the initial imaging modality of choice for 
localizing both the primary and metastatic NETs. SRS 
localizes tumor in 73–89% of patients with carcinoids 
and in 56–100% of patients with PETs, except insulino-
mas. Insulinomas are usually small and have low densi-
ties of sst receptors, resulting in SRS being positive in 
only 12–50% of patients with insulinomas. Figure 22-3 
shows an example of the increased sensitivity of SRS in 
a patient with a carcinoid tumor. The CT scan showed 
a single liver metastasis, whereas the SRS demon-
strated three metastases in the liver in multiple locations. 
Figure 22-3
Ability of CT scanning (top) or somatostatin receptor 
scintigraphy (SRS) (bottom) to localize metastatic carci-
noid in the liver.
 
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
361
Occasional false-positive responses with SRS can occur 
(12% in one study) because numerous other normal 
tissues as well as diseases can have high densities of sst 
receptors, including granulomas (sarcoid, tuberculosis, 
etc.), thyroid diseases (goiter, thyroiditis), and acti-
vated lymphocytes (lymphomas, wound infections). For 
PETs in the pancreas, EUS is highly sensitive, localiz-
ing 77–100% of insulinomas, which occur almost exclu-
sively within the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound is less 
sensitive for extrapancreatic tumors. It is increasingly 
used in patients with MEN 1 and to a lesser extent VHL 
to detect small PETs not seen with other modalities or 
for serial PET assessments to determine size changes or 
rapid growth in patients in whom surgery is deferred. 
EUS with cytologic evaluation also is used frequently to 
distinguish an NF-PET from a pancreatic adenocarci-
noma or another nonendocrine pancreatic tumor.
Insulinomas overexpress receptors for GLP-1; a 
radiolabeled GLP-1 analogue can detect occult insuli-
nomas not localized by other imaging modalities. Func-
tional localization by measuring hormonal gradients is 
now uncommonly used with gastrinomas (after intraar-
terial secretin injections) but is still frequently used in 
insulinoma patients in whom other imaging studies are 
negative (assessing hepatic vein insulin concentrations 
post-intraarterial calcium injections). The intraarterial 
calcium test may also allow differentiation of the cause 
of the hypoglycemia and indicate whether it is due to 
an insulinoma or a nesidioblastosis. The latter entity is 
becoming increasingly important because hypoglyce-
mia after gastric bypass surgery for obesity is increasing 
in frequency, and it is primarily due to nesidioblastosis, 
although it can occasionally be due to an insulinoma.
If liver metastases are identified by SRS, to plan 
the proper treatment either a CT or an MRI is rec-
ommended to assess the size and exact location of the 
metastases because SRS does not provide information 
on tumor size. Functional localization measuring hor-
mone gradients after intraarterial calcium injections in 
insulinomas (insulin) or gastrin gradients after secretin 
injections in gastrinoma is a sensitive method, being 
positive in 80–100% of patients. However, this method 
provides only regional localization and therefore is 
reserved for cases in which the other imaging modalities 
are negative.
Two newer imaging modalities (positron emission 
tomography and use of hybrid scanners such as CT and 
SRS) may have increased sensitivity. Positron emission 
tomographic scanning with 18F-fluoro-DOPA in patients 
with carcinoids or with 11C-5-HTP or 68gallium-labeled 
somatostatin analogues in patients with PETs or carci-
noids has greater sensitivity than conventional imaging 
studies or SRS and probably will be used increasingly 
in the future. Positron emission tomographic scanning 
for GI NETs is not currently approved in the United 
States.
Treatment	
Advanced Disease (Diffuse Metastatic 
Disease)
The single most important prognostic factor for sur-
vival is the presence of liver metastases (Fig. 22-4). For 
patients with foregut carcinoids without hepatic metas-
tases, the 5-year survival in one study was 95%, and with 
distant metastases, it was 20% (Fig. 22-4, bottom). With 
gastrinomas the 5-year survival without liver metastases 
is 98%; with limited metastases in one hepatic lobe, it is 
78%; and with diffuse metastases, 16% (Fig. 22-4, top). In 
a large study of 156 patients (67 PETs, the rest carcinoids) 
the overall 5-year survival rate was 77%; it was 96% with-
out liver metastases, 73% with liver metastases, and 50% 
with distant disease. Therefore, treatment for advanced 
metastatic disease is an important challenge. A num-
ber of different modalities  are reported to be effective, 
including cytoreductive surgery [surgically or by radio 
frequency ablation (RFA)], treatment with chemotherapy, 
00
10
10
20
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
5
15
25
 Years since diagnosis of ZES
A
0
0
10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
5
15
 Time, years
B
Probability of survival, %
No liver metastases (n = 158)
Diffuse liver metastases
(n = 27)
Local disease
(n = 25)
Distant
metastases
(n = 46)
Single liver
lobe metastases
(n = 14)
p < .028
p = .0004
p = .0001
Figure 22-4 
Effect of the presence and extent of liver metastases on 
survival in patients with gastrinomas (A) or carcinoid tumors 
(B). ZES, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. (Top panel is drawn 
from data from 199 patients with gastrinomas modified from 
F Yu et al: J Clin Oncol 17:615, 1999. Bottom panel is drawn 
from data from 71 patients with foregut carcinoid tumors 
from EW McDermott et al: Br J Surg 81:1007, 1994.)
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
362
somatostatin analogues, interferon α, hepatic emboliza-
tion alone or with chemotherapy (chemoembolization), 
radiotherapy with radiolabeled beads/microspheres, 
peptide radio-receptor therapy, and liver transplantation.
Specific Antitumor Treatments  Cyto-
reductive surgery, unfortunately, is possible in only 
9–22% of patients who present with limited hepatic 
metastases. Although no randomized studies have 
proved that it extends life, results from a number of 
studies suggest that it probably increases survival; 
therefore, it is recommended, if possible. Radio fre-
quency thermal ablation can be applied to GI NET liver 
metastases if they are limited in number (usually <5) 
and size (usually <3.5 cm in diameter). Response rates 
are >80%, the morbidity rate is low, and this procedure 
may be particularly helpful in patients with functional 
PETs that are difficult to control medically.
Chemotherapy for metastatic carcinoid tumors has gen-
erally been disappointing, with response rates of 0–40% 
with various two- and three-drug combinations. Chemo-
therapy for PETs has been more successful, with tumor 
shrinkage reported in 30–70% of patients. The current regi-
men of choice is streptozotocin and doxorubicin. In poorly 
differentiated PETs, chemotherapy with cisplatin, etopo-
side, or their derivatives is the recommended treatment, 
with response rates of 40–70%; however, responses are 
generally short-lived. Some newer combinations of che-
motherapeutic agents show promise in small numbers of 
patients, including temozolomide (TMZ) alone, especially 
in PETs, which frequently have O6-methylguanine DNA 
methyltransferase deficiency, which increases their TMZ 
sensitivity (34% response rate), and TMZ plus capecitabine 
(response rate 59–71%, retrospective studies).
Long-acting somatostatin analogues such as octreo-
tide, lanreotide, and interferon α rarely decrease tumor 
size (i.e., 0–17%); however, these drugs have tumori-
static effects, stopping additional growth in 26–95% of 
patients with NETs. A randomized, double-blind study 
in patients with metastatic midgut carcinoids demon-
strated a marked lengthening of time to progression 
(14.3 vs. 6 months, p = .000072) from the use of octreo-
tide-LAR. This improvement was seen in patients with 
limited liver involvement. Whether this change will result 
in extended survival has not been proved. Somatosta-
tin analogues can induce apoptosis in carcinoid tumors, 
and interferon α can decrease Bcl-2 protein expression, 
which probably contributes to its antiproliferative effects.
Hepatic embolization and chemoembolization (with 
dacarbazine, cisplatin, doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, or 
streptozotocin) have been reported to decrease tumor 
bulk and help control the symptoms of the hormone-
excess state. These modalities generally are reserved 
for liver-directed therapy in cases in which treatment 
with somatostatin analogues, interferon (carcinoids), 
or chemotherapy (PETs) fails. Embolization, when com-
bined with treatment with octreotide and interferon α, 
significantly reduces tumor progression (p = .008) com-
pared with treatment with embolization and octreotide 
alone in patients with advanced midgut carcinoids.
Radiotherapy with radiolabeled somatostatin ana-
logues that are internalized by the tumors is being inves-
tigated. Three different radionuclides are being used. 
High doses of [111In-DTPA-d-Phe1]octreotide, which 
emits γ-rays, internal conversion, and Auger electrons; 
yttrium-90, which emits high-energy β-particles cou-
pled by a DOTA chelating group to octreotide or octreo-
tate; and 177lutetium-coupled analogues, which emit 
both, are all in clinical studies. 111Indium-, 90yttrium-, and 
177lutetium-labeled compounds caused tumor stabiliza-
tion in 41–81%, 44–88%, and 23–40%, respectively, and a 
decrease in tumor size in 8–30%, 6–37%, and 38%, respec-
tively, of patients with advanced metastatic NETs. Use of 
177Lu-labeled analogues to treat 504 patients with malig-
nant NETs produced a reduction of tumor size of >50% in 
30% of patients (2% complete) and tumor stabilization  
in 51%. An effect on survival has not been established. These 
results suggest that this novel therapy may be helpful, espe-
cially in patients with widespread metastatic disease.
Selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) using 90yttrium 
glass or resin microspheres is being evaluated in patients 
with unresectable NET liver metastases. The treatment 
requires careful evaluation for vascular shunting before 
treatment and generally is reserved for patients with-
out extrahepatic metastatic disease and with adequate 
hepatic reserve. The 90Y-microspheres are delivered to the 
liver by intraarterial injection from percutaneous placed 
catheters. In four studies involving metastatic NETs, the 
response rate varied from 50 to 61% (partial or complete), 
tumor stabilization occurred in 22–41%, and overall sur-
vival varied from 25 to 70 months. In the largest study 
(148 patients), no radiation-induced liver failure occurred 
and the most common side effect was fatigue (6.5%).
The use of liver transplantation has been abandoned 
for treatment of most metastatic tumors to the liver. 
However, for metastatic NETs, it is still a consideration. In 
a review of 103 cases of malignant NETs (48 PETs, 43 car-
cinoids) the 2- and 5-year survival rates were 60% and 
47%, respectively. However, recurrence-free survival was 
low (<24%). For younger patients with metastatic NETs 
limited to the liver, liver transplantation may be justified.
Newer approaches show some promise in the treat-
ment of advanced GI NETs. They include the use of 
growth factor inhibitors or inhibitors of their receptors 
(using tyrosine kinase inhibitors, monoclonal antibod-
ies), inhibitors of mTor signaling (everolimus, temsiro-
limus), angiogenesis inhibitors, and VEGF or vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors. A number of these agents, particularly 
sunitinib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor), various mTor inhibi-
tors, and bevacizumub (monoclonal antibody against 
VEGF), show impressive activity. Additional value may 
result from selected combinations of agents.
 Camilo Jimenez Vasquez  I   Robert F. Gagel 
363
 neoplAStIc dISorderS AffectIng 
multIple endocrIne orgAnS 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome is defi ned as a dis-
order with neoplasms in two or more different hormonal 
tissues in several members of a family. Several distinct 
genetic disorders predispose to endocrine gland neopla-
sia and cause hormone excess syndromes  ( Table 23-1 ) . 
DNA-based genetic testing is available for these disor-
ders, but effective management requires an understand-
ing of endocrine neoplasia and the range of clinical fea-
tures that may be manifested in an individual patient. 
 DISORDERS AFFECTING MULTIPLE 
ENDOCRINE SYSTEMS 
 cHApter 23 
 MultiplE ENdocriNE NEoplAsiA (MEN) 
typE 1 
 MEN 1, or Wermer’s syndrome, is inherited as an auto-
somal dominant trait. This syndrome is characterized 
by neoplasia of the parathyroid glands, enteropancreatic 
tumors, anterior pituitary adenomas, and other neuroen-
docrine tumors with variable penetrance ( Table 23-1 ). 
Although rare, MEN 1 is the most common multiple 
endocrine neoplasia syndrome, with an estimated prev-
alence of 2–20 per 100,000 in the general population. 
It is caused by inactivating mutations of the tumor-
suppressor gene  MEN1 located at chromosome 11q13. 
Table 23-1
 disEAsE AssociAtioNs iN thE MultiplE ENdocriNE NEoplAsiA (MEN) syNdroMEs 
MEN 1
MEN 2
MiXEd syNdroMEs
 Parathyroid hyperplasia or adenoma 
 Islet cell hyperplasia, adenoma, or 
carcinoma 
 Pituitary hyperplasia or adenoma 
 Other, less common manifestations: 
foregut carcinoid, pheochromocy-
toma, subcutaneous or visceral 
lipomas 
MEN 2A 
 MTC 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Parathyroid hyperplasia or adenoma 
MEN 2A with cutaneous lichen 
amyloidosis 
MEN 2A with hirschsprung disease 
Familial Mtc 
MEN 2B 
 MTC 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Mucosal and gastrointestinal 
neuromas 
 Marfanoid features 
Von hippel – lindau syndrome 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Islet cell tumor 
 Renal cell carcinoma 
 Hemangioblastoma of central 
nervous system 
 Retinal angiomas 
Neuroﬁ bromatosis with features of 
MEN 1 or 2 
carney complex 
 Myxomas of heart, skin, and breast 
 Spotty cutaneous pigmentation 
 Testicular, adrenal, and GH-producing 
pituitary tumors 
 Peripheral nerve schwannomas 
Familial growth hormone or 
prolactin-producing pituitary tumors
 Abbreviations: GH, growth hormone; MTC, medullary thyroid carcinoma.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
364
The MEN1 gene codes for a nuclear protein called 
Menin. Menin interacts with JunD, suppressing JunD-
dependent transcriptional activation. It is unclear how 
this accounts for Menin growth regulatory activity, 
since JunD is associated with inhibition of cell growth. 
Each child born to an affected parent has a 50% prob-
ability of inheriting the gene. The variable penetrance 
of the several neoplastic components can make the dif-
ferential diagnosis and treatment challenging.
Clinical manifestations
Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most common mani-
festation of MEN 1, with an estimated penetrance of 
95–100%. Hypercalcemia may develop during the teen-
age years, and most individuals are affected by age 40 
(Fig. 23-1). Hyperparathyroidism is the earliest mani-
festation of the syndrome in most MEN 1 patients. The 
neoplastic changes in hyperparathyroidism provide a spe-
cific example of one of the cardinal features of endo-
crine tumors in MEN 1: multicentricity. The neoplastic 
changes inevitably affect multiple parathyroid glands, 
making surgical cure difficult. Screening for hyperpara-
thyroidism involves measurement of either an albumin-
adjusted or an ionized serum calcium level. The diagnosis 
is established by demonstrating elevated levels of serum 
calcium and intact parathyroid hormone. Manifesta-
tions of hyperparathyroidism in MEN 1 do not differ 
substantially from those in sporadic hyperparathyroidism 
and include calcium-containing kidney stones, kidney 
failure, nephrocalcinosis, bone abnormalities (i.e., osteo-
porosis, osteitis fibrosa cystica), and gastrointestinal and 
musculoskeletal complaints. Management is challeng-
ing because of early onset, significant recurrence rates, 
and the multiplicity of parathyroid gland involvement. 
Differentiation of hyperparathyroidism of MEN 1 from 
other forms of familial primary hyperparathyroidism 
usually is based on family history, histologic features 
of resected parathyroid tissue, the presence of a MEN1 
mutation, and, sometimes, long-term observation to 
determine whether other manifestations of MEN 1 
develop. Parathyroid hyperplasia is the most common 
cause of hyperparathyroidism in MEN 1, although sin-
gle and multiple adenomas have been described. Hyper-
plasia of one or more parathyroid glands is common in 
younger patients; adenomas usually are found in older 
patients or those with long-standing disease.
Enteropancreatic tumors are the second most common 
manifestation of MEN 1, with an estimated penetrance 
of 50%. They tend to occur in parallel with hyperpara-
thyroidism (Fig. 23-1); 30% are malignant. Most of 
these tumors secrete peptide hormones that cause spe-
cific clinical syndromes. Those syndromes, however, may 
have an insidious onset and a slow progression, making 
their diagnosis difficult and in many cases delayed. Some 
enteropancreatic tumors do not secrete hormones. Those 
“silent” tumors usually are found during radiographic 
screening. Metastasis, most commonly to the liver, 
occurs in about a third of patients.
Gastrinomas are the most common enteropancreatic 
tumors observed in MEN 1 patients and result in the 
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). ZES is caused by 
excessive gastrin production and occurs in more than 
one-half of MEN 1 patients with small carcinoid-like 
tumors in the duodenal wall or, less often, by pancreatic 
islet cell tumors. There may be more than one gastrin-
producing tumor, making localization difficult. The 
robust acid production may cause esophagitis, duode-
nal ulcers throughout the duodenum, ulcers involving 
the proximal jejunum, and diarrhea. The ulcer diathe-
sis is commonly refractory to conservative therapy such 
as antacids. The diagnosis is made by finding increased 
gastric acid secretion, elevated basal gastrin levels in the 
serum [generally >115 pmol/L (200 pg/mL)], and an 
exaggerated response of serum gastrin to either secre-
tin or calcium. Other causes of elevated serum gastrin 
levels, such as achlorhydria, treatment with H2 recep-
tor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors, retained 
gastric antrum, small-bowel resection, gastric outlet 
obstruction, and hypercalcemia, should be excluded 
(Fig. 23-1). High-resolution, early-phase CT scanning, 
abdominal MRI with contrast, octreotide scan, and/or 
endoscopic ultrasound are the best preoperative tech-
niques for identification of the primary and metastatic 
gastrinoma; intraoperative ultrasonography is the most 
Patients with tumor, n
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
≤15
16–20
21–30
31–40
41–50
51–60
61–70
10
5
0
Age, years
Parathyroid tumor
Gastrinoma
Insulinoma
Prolactinoma
Figure 23-1
Age at onset of endocrine tumor expression in multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1). Data derived from ret-
rospective analysis for each endocrine organ hyperfunction 
in 130 cases of MEN 1. Age at onset is the age at first symp-
tom or, with tumors not causing symptoms, age at the time 
of the first abnormal finding on a screening test. The rate of 
diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism increased sharply between 
ages 16 and 20 years. (Reprinted with permission from S 
Marx et al: Ann Intern Med 129:484, 1998.)
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems 
365
sensitive method for detection of small tumors. Approx-
imately one-fourth of all cases of ZES occur in the con-
text of MEN 1.
Insulinomas are the second most common enteropan-
creatic tumors in patients who have MEN 1. Unlike 
gastrinomas, most insulinomas originate in the pan-
creas bed, becoming the most common pancreatic 
tumor in MEN 1. Hypoglycemia caused by insulino-
mas is observed in about one-third of MEN 1 patients 
with pancreatic islet cell tumors (Fig. 23-1). The tumors 
may be benign or malignant (25%). The diagnosis can 
be suggested by documenting hypoglycemia during a 
short fast with simultaneous inappropriate elevation of 
serum insulin and C-peptide levels. More commonly, it 
is necessary to subject the patient to a supervised 12- to 
72-h fast to provoke hypoglycemia (Chap. 20). Large 
insulinomas may be identified by CT or MRI scanning; 
small tumors not detected by conventional radiographic 
techniques may be localized by endoscopic ultrasound 
or selective arteriographic injection of calcium into each 
of the arteries that supply the pancreas and sampling of 
the hepatic vein for insulin to determine the anatomic 
region containing the tumor. Intraoperative ultrasonog-
raphy is used frequently to localize these tumors. The 
trend toward earlier diagnosis of, hence, smaller tumors 
has reduced the usefulness of octreotide scanning, 
which is positive in a minority of these patients.
Glucagonoma, which is seen occasionally in MEN 1, 
causes a syndrome of hyperglycemia, skin rash (necro-
lytic migratory erythema), anorexia, glossitis, anemia, 
depression, diarrhea, and venous thrombosis. In about 
half of these patients the plasma glucagon level is high, 
leading to its designation as the glucagonoma syndrome, 
although elevation of the plasma glucagon level in 
MEN 1 patients is not necessarily associated with these 
symptoms. Some patients with this syndrome also have 
elevated plasma ghrelin levels. The glucagonoma syn-
drome may represent a complex interaction between 
glucagon and ghrelin overproduction and the nutri-
tional status of the patient.
The Verner-Morrison, or watery diarrhea, syndrome con-
sists of watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, hypochlorhydria, 
and metabolic acidosis. The diarrhea can be volumi-
nous and almost always is found in association with 
an islet cell tumor in the context of MEN 1, prompt-
ing use of the term pancreatic cholera. However, when 
not associated with MEN 1, the syndrome outside of 
MEN 1 is not restricted to pancreatic islet tumors and 
has been observed with carcinoids or other tumors. 
This syndrome is believed to be due to overproduction 
of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), although plasma 
VIP levels may not be elevated. Hypercalcemia may 
be induced by the effects of VIP to stimulate osteoclas-
tic bone resorption as well as by hyperparathyroidism. 
Other disorders that should be considered in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of chronic diarrhea include infectious 
or parasitic diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, sprue, 
and other endocrine causes such as ZES, carcinoid, and 
medullary thyroid carcinoma.
The pancreatic neoplasms differ from the other com-
ponents of MEN 1 in that approximately one-third of 
the tumors display malignant features, including hepatic 
metastases. The pancreatic neoplasms also can be used 
to highlight another characteristic of MEN 1: the spe-
cific impact of a hormone produced by one compo-
nent of MEN 1 on another neoplastic component of 
this syndrome. Specific examples include the effects 
of either corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) or 
growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) produc-
tion by an islet cell tumor to cause a syndrome of excess 
adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) (Cushing’s disease) or GH 
(acromegaly) production by the pituitary gland. These 
secondary interactions add complexity to the diagnosis 
and management of these tumor syndromes. Pancre-
atic islet cell tumors are diagnosed by identification of a 
characteristic clinical syndrome, hormonal assays with or 
without provocative stimuli, or radiographic techniques. 
One approach involves annual screening of individuals 
at risk with measurement of basal and meal-stimulated 
levels of pancreatic polypeptide to identify the tumors as 
early as possible; the rationale for this screening strategy 
is the concept that surgical removal of islet cell tumors 
at an early stage will be curative. Other approaches to 
screening include measurement of serum gastrin and 
pancreatic polypeptide levels every 2–3 years, with the 
rationale that pancreatic neoplasms will be detected at a 
later stage but can be managed medically, if possible, or 
by surgery. High-resolution, early-phase CT scanning 
or endoscopic ultrasound provides the best preoperative 
technique for identification of these tumors; intraopera-
tive ultrasonography is the most sensitive method for 
detection of small tumors. Although fluorodeoxyglu-
cose–positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan-
ning detects ∼50% of pancreatic islet cell tumors, most 
of these tumors are large; as most of these tumors can 
be identified by CT or ultrasound, the lack of sensitivity 
for small tumors makes FDG-PET scanning unhelpful 
for early diagnosis.
Pituitary tumors occur in 20–30% of patients with 
MEN 1 and tend to be multicentric. These tumors can 
exhibit aggressive behavior and local invasiveness that 
makes them difficult to resect (Chap. 2). Prolactinomas 
are the most common (Fig. 23-1) and are diagnosed by 
finding serum prolactin levels >200 μg/L with or with-
out a pituitary mass evident on MRI. Values <200 μg/L
may be due to a prolactin-secreting neoplasm or to 
compression of the pituitary stalk by a different type of 
pituitary tumor. Acromegaly due to excessive GH pro-
duction is the second most common syndrome caused 
by pituitary tumors in MEN 1 and can rarely be due to 
production of GHRH by an islet cell tumor (see above). 
The possibility of hereditary growth hormone– or 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
366
prolactin-secreting tumors (discussed below in “Other 
Genetic Endocrine Tumor Syndromes”) should be con-
sidered in the differential diagnosis. Cushing’s disease 
can be caused by ACTH-producing pituitary tumors 
or by ectopic production of ACTH or CRH by other 
components of the MEN 1 syndrome, including islet 
cell or carcinoid tumors or adrenal adenomas. Diagno-
sis of pituitary Cushing’s disease is generally best accom-
plished by a high-dose dexamethasone suppression test 
or by petrosal venous sinus sampling for ACTH after IV 
injection of CRH. Differentiation of a primary pituitary 
tumor from an ectopic CRH-producing tumor may be 
difficult because the pituitary is the source of ACTH in 
both disorders; documentation of CRH production by 
a pancreatic islet or carcinoid tumor may be the only 
method of proving ectopic CRH production.
Adrenal cortical tumors are found in almost one-half 
of gene carriers but are rarely functional; malignancy 
in cortical adenomas is uncommon. Rare cases of 
pheochromocytoma have been described in the con-
text of MEN 1. Due to their rarity, screening for these 
tumors is indicated only when there are suggestive 
symptoms.
Carcinoid tumors in MEN 1 are of the foregut type 
and are derived from thymus, lung, stomach, or duode-
num; they may metastasize or be locally invasive. These 
tumors usually produce serotonin, calcitonin, or CRH; 
the typical carcinoid syndrome with flushing, diarrhea, 
and bronchospasm is rare (Chap. 22). Mediastinal car-
cinoid tumors (an upper mediastinal mass) are more 
common in men; bronchial carcinoid tumors are more 
common in women. Carcinoid tumors are a late mani-
festation of MEN 1; some reports have emphasized the 
importance of routine chest CT screening for mediasti-
nal carcinoid tumors because of their high rate of malig-
nant transformation and aggressive behavior.
Unusual manifestations of MEN 1
Subcutaneous or visceral lipomas and cutaneous leiomy-
omas also may be present but rarely undergo malignant 
transformation. Skin angiofibromas or collagenomas 
are seen in most patients with MEN 1 when carefully 
sought.
Genetic Considerations
MEN1 gene mutations are found in >90% of fami-
lies with the syndrome (Fig. 23-2). Genetic test-
ing can be performed in individuals at risk for the 
development of MEN 1 and is commercially available 
in the United States and Europe. The major value of 
genetic testing in a kindred with an identifiable muta-
tion is the assignment or exclusion of gene carrier status. 
In those identified as carrying the mutant gene, routine 
screening for individual manifestations of MEN 1 should 
be performed as outlined above. Those with negative 
genetic test results in a kindred with a known germ-line 
mutation can be excluded from further screening for 
MEN 1. A significant percentage of sporadic parathyroid, 
islet cell, and carcinoid tumors also have loss or mutation 
of MEN1. There is no correlation between a particular 
germ-line mutation and a clinical phenotype. It is pre-
sumed that these mutations are somatic and occur in a 
single cell, leading to subsequent transformation.
Treatment	
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1
Almost everyone who inherits a mutant MEN1 gene 
develops at least one clinical manifestation of the 
syndrome. Most develop hyperparathyroidism, 80% 
develop pancreatic islet cell tumors, and more than half 
develop pituitary tumors. For most of these tumors, 
initial surgery is not curative and patients frequently 
require multiple surgical procedures and surgery on two or 
more endocrine glands during a lifetime. For this reason, it 
is essential to establish clear goals for management of 
these patients rather than to recommend surgery casu-
ally each time a tumor is discovered. Ranges for accept-
able management are discussed below.
Hyperparathyroidism  Individuals with serum 
calcium levels >3.0 mmol/L (12 mg/dL), evidence of cal-
cium nephrolithiasis or renal dysfunction, neuropathic 
or muscular symptoms, or bone involvement (includ-
ing osteopenia) and individuals <50 years of age should 
undergo parathyroid exploration. There is less agree-
ment about the necessity for parathyroid exploration in 
individuals who do not meet these criteria, and observa-
tion may be appropriate in MEN 1 patients with asymp-
tomatic hyperparathyroidism.
When parathyroid surgery is indicated in MEN 1, 
there are two approaches. In the first, all parathyroid 
tissue is identified and removed at the time of primary 
operation, and parathyroid tissue is implanted in the 
nondominant forearm. Thymectomy also should be per-
formed because of the potential for later development 
of malignant carcinoid tumors. If reoperation for hyper-
parathyroidism is necessary at a later date, transplanted 
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
9
10
Figure 23-2
Schematic depiction of the MEN1 gene and the dis-
tribution of mutations. The shaded areas show coding 
sequence. The closed circles show the relative distribution of 
mutations, mostly inactivating, in each exon. Mutation data 
are derived from the Human Gene Mutation Database, from 
which more detailed information can be obtained at www.
uwcm.ac.uk/uwcm/mg/hgmd0.html. (From M Krawczak, DN 
Cooper: Trends Genet 13:1321, 1998.)
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems 
367
parathyroid tissue can be resected from the forearm 
with titration of tissue removal to lower the intact para-
thyroid hormone (PTH) to <50% of basal.
Another approach is to remove 3–3.5 parathyroid 
glands from the neck (leaving ∼50 mg of parathyroid tis-
sue), carefully marking the location of residual tissue so 
that the remaining tissue can be located easily during 
subsequent surgery. If this approach is used, intraopera-
tive PTH measurements should be utilized to monitor 
adequacy of removal of parathyroid tissue with a goal 
of reducing postoperative serum intact PTH to ≥50% of 
basal values.
The use of high-resolution CT scanning (1 mm) and 
imaging during three phases of contrast flow has sub-
stantially improved the ability to identify aberrantly 
located parathyroid tissue. As this issue arises with some 
frequency in the context of parathyroid disease in MEN 
1, this technique should be utilized to locate parathy-
roid tissue before reoperation for a failed exploration, 
and it may be useful before the initial operation.
Pancreatic Islet Cell Tumors  (See 
Chap. 22 for discussion of pancreatic islet cell tumors 
not associated with MEN 1.) Two features of pancreatic 
islet cell tumors in MEN 1 complicate management. First, 
the tumors are multicentric, are malignant about a third 
of the time, and cause death in 10–20% of patients. 
Second, performance of a total pancreatectomy to pre-
vent malignancy causes diabetes mellitus, a disease 
with significant long-term complications that include 
neuropathy, retinopathy, and nephropathy. These fea-
tures make it difficult to formulate clear-cut guidelines, 
but some general concepts appear to be valid. (1) Islet 
cell tumors producing insulin, glucagon, VIP, GHRH, or 
CRH should be resected because medical therapy for the 
hormonal effects of these tumors are generally ineffec-
tive. (2) Gastrin-producing islet cell tumors that cause 
ZES are frequently multicentric. Recent experience sug-
gests that a high percentage of ZES in MEN 1 is caused 
by duodenal wall carcinoid tumors and that resection of 
these tumors improves the cure rate. Treatment with H2 
receptor antagonists (cimetidine or ranitidine) or pro-
ton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, lansoprazole, esome-
prazole, etc.) provides an alternative, and some think 
preferable, therapy to surgery for control of ulcer dis-
ease in patients with multicentric tumors or hepatic 
metastases. (3) In families in which there is a high inci-
dence of malignant islet cell tumors that cause death, 
total pancreatectomy at an early age may be consid-
ered to prevent malignancy, although it should be 
noted that this surgical intervention does not prevent 
the development of neuroendocrine tumors outside 
the pancreato-duodenal region.
Management of metastatic islet cell carcinoma is 
unsatisfactory. Hormonal abnormalities sometimes can
be controlled. For example, ZES can be treated with H2 
receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors; the 
somatostatin analogues octreotide and lanreotide are 
useful in the management of carcinoid, glucagonoma, 
and the watery diarrhea syndrome. Bilateral adrenal-
ectomy may be required for ectopic ACTH syndrome if 
medical therapy is ineffective (Chap. 5). Islet cell carci-
nomas frequently metastasize to the liver but may grow 
slowly. Hepatic artery embolization, radiofrequency 
ablation, or chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil, streptozo-
cin, chlorozotocin, doxorubicin, or dacarbazine) may 
reduce tumor streptozotocin mass, control symptoms of 
hormone excess, and prolong life; however, these treat-
ments are never curative. There is evolving evidence 
that everolimus, an inhibitor of mTor (mammalian target 
of rapamycin) causes regression of tumor size; 2 of 13 
islet cell carcinomas and 2 of 12 carcinoid tumors had a 
>30% reduction in size and >60% had stable disease.
Pituitary Tumors  Treatment of prolactinomas 
with dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, cabergoline, or 
quinagolide) usually returns the serum prolactin level 
to normal and prevents further tumor growth (Chap. 2). 
Surgical resection of a prolactinoma is rarely curative 
but may relieve mass effects. Transsphenoidal resec-
tion is appropriate for neoplasms that secrete ACTH, 
GH, or the α subunit of the pituitary glycoprotein hor-
mones. Octreotide reduces tumor mass in one-third of 
GH-secreting tumors and reduces GH and insulin-like 
growth factor I levels in >75% of patients. Pegvisomant, 
a GH antagonist, rapidly lowers insulin-like growth factor 
levels in patients with acromegaly (Chap. 2). Radiation 
therapy may be useful for large or recurrent tumors.
Improvements in the management of MEN 1, par-
ticularly the earlier recognition of islet cell and pituitary 
tumors, have improved outcomes in these patients. As 
a result, other neoplastic manifestations that develop 
later in the course of this disorder, such as carcinoid syn-
drome, are now seen with increased frequency.
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2
Clinical manifestations
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and pheochro-
mocytoma are associated in two major syndromes: 
MEN type 2A and MEN type 2B (Table 23-1). MEN 
2A is the combination of MTC, hyperparathyroidism, 
and pheochromocytoma. Three subvariants of MEN 
2A are familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC), 
MEN 2A with cutaneous lichen amyloidosis, and MEN 
2A with Hirschsprung disease. MEN 2B is the com-
bination of MTC, pheochromocytoma, mucosal neu-
romas, intestinal ganglioneuromatosis, and marfanoid 
features.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
368
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A
MTC is the most common manifestation. This tumor 
usually develops in childhood, beginning as hyperplasia 
of the calcitonin-producing cells (C cells) of the thy-
roid. MTC typically is located at the junction of the 
upper one-third and lower two-thirds of each lobe of 
the thyroid, reflecting the high density of C cells in this 
location; tumors >1 cm in size frequently are associated 
with local or distant metastases.
Pheochromocytoma occurs in ∼50% of patients with 
MEN 2A and causes palpitations, nervousness, head-
aches, and sometimes sweating (Chap. 6). About half 
of the tumors are bilateral, and >50% of patients who 
have had unilateral adrenalectomy develop a pheochro-
mocytoma in the contralateral gland within a decade. 
A second feature of these tumors is a disproportionate 
increase in the secretion of epinephrine relative to nor-
epinephrine. This characteristic differentiates the MEN 2 
pheochromocytomas from sporadic pheochromocytoma 
and those associated with von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) syn-
drome, hereditary paraganglioma, or neurofibromatosis. 
Capsular invasion is common, but metastasis is uncom-
mon. Finally, the pheochromocytomas almost always 
are found in the adrenal gland, differentiating the pheo-
chromocytomas in MEN 2 from the extraadrenal tumors 
more commonly found in hereditary paraganglioma 
syndromes.
Hyperparathyroidism occurs in 15–20% of patients, 
with the peak incidence in the third or fourth decade. 
The manifestations of hyperparathyroidism do not dif-
fer from those in other forms of primary hyperparathy-
roidism (Chap. 27). Diagnosis is established by finding 
hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia, hypercalciuria, and 
an inappropriately high serum level of intact PTH. 
Multiglandular parathyroid hyperplasia is the most com-
mon histologic finding, although with long-standing 
disease adenomatous changes may be superimposed on 
hyperplasia.
The most common subvariant of MEN 2A is famil-
ial MTC, an autosomal dominant syndrome in which 
MTC is the only manifestation (Table 23-1). The 
clinical diagnosis of FMTC is established by the iden-
tification of MTC in multiple generations without a 
pheochromocytoma. Since the penetrance of pheochro-
mocytoma is 50% in MEN 2A, it is possible that MEN 
2A could masquerade as FMTC in small kindreds. It is 
important to consider this possibility carefully before 
classifying a kindred as having FMTC; failure to do so 
could lead to death or serious morbidity from pheo-
chromocytoma in an affected kindred member. The 
difficulty of differentiating MEN 2A and FMTC is dis-
cussed further under “Genetic Considerations.”
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B
The association of MTC, pheochromocytoma, mucosal 
neuromas, and a marfanoid habitus is designated MEN 
2B. MTC in MEN 2B develops earlier and is more 
aggressive than that in MEN 2A. Metastatic disease 
has been described before 1 year of age, and death may 
occur in the second or third decade of life. However, 
the prognosis is not invariably bad even in patients with 
metastatic disease, as evidenced by a number of multi-
generational families with this disease.
Pheochromocytoma occurs in more than half of 
MEN 2B patients and does not differ from that in MEN 
2A. Hypercalcemia is rare in MEN 2B, and there are no 
well-documented examples of hyperparathyroidism.
The mucosal neuromas and marfanoid body habitus 
are the most distinctive features and are recognizable 
in childhood. Neuromas are present on the tip of the 
tongue, under the eyelids, and throughout the gastroin-
testinal tract and are true neuromas, distinct from neu-
rofibromas. The most common presentation in children 
relates to gastrointestinal symptomatology, including 
intermittent colic, pseudoobstruction, and diarrhea.
Genetic Considerations
Mutations of the RET protooncogene have been iden-
tified in most patients with MEN 2 (Fig. 23-3). RET 
encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor that in combination 
with a co-receptor, GFRα, normally is activated by 
glial cell–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) or other 
members of this transforming growth factor β–like fam-
ily of peptides, including artemin, persephin, and neur-
turin. In the C cell there is evidence that persephin 
normally activates the RET/GFRα-4 receptor com-
plex and is partially responsible for migration of the C 
cells into the thyroid gland, whereas in the developing 
neuronal system of the gastrointestinal tract, GDNF 
activates the RET/GFRα-1 complex. RET mutations 
induce constitutive activity of the receptor, explaining 
the autosomal dominant transmission of the disorder.
Naturally occurring mutations localize to two regions 
of the RET tyrosine kinase receptor. The first is a cys-
teine-rich extracellular domain; point mutations in the 
coding sequence for one of six cysteines (codons 609, 
611, 618, 620, 630, and 634) cause amino acid substitu-
tions that induce receptor dimerization and activation in 
the absence of its ligand. Codon 634 mutations occur 
in 80% of MEN 2A kindreds and are most commonly 
associated with classic MEN 2A features (Figs. 23-2 and 
23-3); an arginine substitution at this codon accounts 
for half of all MEN 2A mutations. All reported fami-
lies with MEN 2A and cutaneous lichen amyloidosis 
have a codon 634 mutation. Mutations of codon 609, 
611, 618, or 620 occur in 10–15% of MEN 2A kin-
dreds and are more commonly associated with FMTC 
(Fig. 23-3). Mutations in codons 609, 618, and 620 
also have been identified in a variant of MEN 2A that 
includes Hirschsprung disease (Fig. 23-3). The second 
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems 
369
region of the RET tyrosine kinase that is mutated in 
MEN 2 is in the substrate recognition pocket at codon 
918 (Fig. 23-3). This activating mutation is present in 
∼95% of patients with MEN 2B and accounts for 5% 
of all RET protooncogene mutations in MEN 2. Muta-
tions of codon 883 and 922 also have been identified in 
a few patients with MEN 2B.
Uncommon mutations (<5% of the total) include 
those of codons 533 (exon 8), 666, 768, 777, 790, 791, 
804, 891, and 912. Mutations associated with only 
FMTC include codons 533, 768, and 912. With greater 
experience, mutations that once were associated with 
FMTC only (666, 791, V804L, V804M, and 891) have 
been found in MEN 2A as there have been occasional 
descriptions of pheochromocytoma. At present it is rea-
sonable to conclude that only kindreds with codon 533, 
768, or 912 mutations are consistently associated with 
FMTC; in kindreds with all other RET mutations, 
pheochromocytoma is a possibility. The recognition that 
germ-line mutations occur in at least 6% of patients with 
apparently sporadic MTC has led to the firm recommen-
dation that all patients with MTC should be screened 
for these mutations. The effort to screen patients with 
sporadic MTC, combined with the fact that new kin-
dreds with classic MEN 2A are being recognized less fre-
quently, has led to a shift in the mutation frequencies. 
>25%
918
533
Codon
609
611
618
620
Codon
630
<1%
Frequency
Sporadic
MTC
<1%
768
<1%
883
634
768
790
791
V804L
V804M
891
883
912
918
922
Signal
Cadherin
Cys-Rich
TM
TK 1
MEN2A
CLA
MEN2A
FMTC
FMTC
ONLY
MEN2B
MEN2A &
Hirschsprung's
disease
10q11.2
RET Protooncogene
Chromosome 10
Figure 23-3
Schematic diagram of the RET protooncogene showing 
mutations found in MEN type 2 and sporadic medullary thy-
roid carcinoma (MTC). The RET protooncogene is located on 
the proximal arm of chromosome 10q (10q11.2). Activating 
mutations of two functional domains of RET tyrosine kinase 
receptor have been identified. The first affects a cysteine-
rich (Cys-Rich) region in the extracellular portion of the recep-
tor. Each germ-line mutation changes a cysteine at codons 
609, 611, 618, 620, or 634 to another amino acid. The second 
region is the intracellular tyrosine kinase (TK) domain. Codon 
634 mutations account for ∼80% of all germ-line mutations. 
Mutations of codons 630, 768, 883, and 918 have been identi-
fied as somatic (non-germ-line) mutations that occur in a sin-
gle parafollicular or C cell within the thyroid gland in sporadic 
MTC. A codon 918 mutation is the most common somatic 
mutation. Cadherin, a cadherin-like region in the extracellu-
lar domain; CLA, cutaneous lichen amyloidosis; FMTC, familial 
medullary thyroid carcinoma; MEN2, multiple endocrine neo-
plasia type 2; Signal, the signal peptide; TK, tyrosine kinase 
domain; TM, transmembrane domain.
These findings mirror results in other malignancies in 
which germ-line mutations of cancer-causing genes con-
tribute to a greater percentage of apparently sporadic 
cancer than was considered previously. The recognition 
of new RET mutations suggests that more will be identi-
fied in the future.
Somatic mutations (found only in the tumor and not 
transmitted in the germ line) of the RET protoonco-
gene have been identified in sporadic MTC; 25–60% of 
sporadic tumors have codon 918 mutations, and somatic 
mutations in codons 630, 768, and 804 have been iden-
tified (Fig. 23-3).
Treatment	
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2
Screening For Multiple Endocrine 
Neoplasia Type 2  Death from MTC can be 
prevented by early thyroidectomy. The identification 
of RET protooncogene mutations and the application 
of DNA-based molecular diagnostic techniques to iden-
tify these mutations have simplified the screening pro-
cess. During the initial evaluation of a kindred, a RET 
protooncogene analysis should be performed on an 
individual with proven MEN 2A. Establishment of the 
specific germ-line mutation facilitates the subsequent
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
370
analysis of other family members. Each family mem-
ber at risk should be tested twice for the presence 
of the specific mutation; the second analysis should 
be performed on a new DNA sample and, ideally, in a 
second laboratory to exclude sample mix-up or tech-
nical error (see www.genetests.org for an up-to-date 
list of laboratory testing sites). Both false-positive 
and false-negative analyses have been described. A 
false-negative test result is of the greatest concern 
because calcitonin testing is now rarely performed 
as a diagnostic backup study; if there is a genetic 
test error, a child may present in the second or third 
decade with metastatic MTC. Individuals in a kin-
dred with a known mutation who have two normal 
analyses can be excluded from further screening.
There is a consensus that children with codon 883, 
918, and 922 mutations, those associated with MEN 2B, 
should have a total thyroidectomy and central lymph 
node dissection (level VI) performed during the first 
months of life or soon after identification of the syn-
drome. If local metastasis is discovered, a more exten-
sive lymph node dissection (levels II to V) is generally 
indicated. In children with codon 611, 618, 620, 630, 
634, and 891 mutations, thyroidectomy should be per-
formed before age 6 years because of reports of local 
metastatic disease in children this age. Finally, there are 
kindreds with codon 609, 768, 790, 791, 804, and 912 
mutations in which the phenotype of MTC appears to 
be less aggressive. A clinician caring for children with 
one of these mutations faces a dilemma. In many kin-
dreds there has never been a death from MTC caused 
by one of these mutations. However, in other kindreds 
there are examples of metastatic disease occurring 
early in life. For example, metastatic disease before age 
6 years has been described with codon 609 and 804 
mutations and before age 14 years in a patient with a 
codon 912 mutation. In kindreds with these mutations, 
two management approaches have been suggested: 
(1) perform a total thyroidectomy with or without cen-
tral node dissection at some arbitrary age (perhaps 
6–10 years of age) or (2) continue annual or biannual 
calcitonin provocative testing with performance of 
total thyroidectomy with or without central neck dis-
section when the test becomes abnormal. The penta-
gastrin test involves measurement of serum calcitonin 
basally and 2, 5, 10, and 15 min after a bolus injection 
of 5 μg pentagastrin per kilogram of body weight. 
Patients should be warned before pentagastrin injec-
tion of epigastric tightness, nausea, warmth, and tin-
gling of extremities and reassured that the symptoms 
will last ∼2 min. If pentagastrin is unavailable, an alter-
native is a short calcium infusion, performed by obtain-
ing a baseline serum calcitonin and then infusing  
150 mg calcium salt IV over 10 min with measurement of
serum calcitonin at 5, 10, 15, and 30 min after initiation 
of the infusion.
The RET protooncogene analysis should be per-
formed in patients with suspected MEN 2B to detect 
codon 883, 918, and 922 mutations, especially in new-
born children in whom the diagnosis is suspected but 
the clinical phenotype is not fully developed. Other 
family members at risk for MEN 2B also should be 
tested because the mucosal neuromas can be subtle. 
Most MEN 2B mutations represent de novo mutations 
derived from the paternal allele. In the rare families with 
proven germ-line transmission of MTC but no identifi-
able RET protooncogene mutation (sequencing of the 
entire RET gene should be performed), annual pen-
tagastrin or calcium testing should be performed on 
members at risk.
Annual screening for pheochromocytoma in patients 
with germ-line RET mutations should be performed by 
measuring basal plasma or 24-h urine catecholamines 
and metanephrines. The goal is to identify a pheochro-
mocytoma before it causes significant symptoms or is 
likely to cause sudden death, an event most commonly 
associated with large tumors. Although there are kin-
dreds with FMTC and specific RET mutations in which no 
pheochromocytomas have been identified (Fig. 23-3), 
clinical experience is insufficient to exclude pheochro-
mocytoma screening in these individuals. Radiographic 
studies such as MRI or CT scans generally are reserved 
for individuals with abnormal screening tests or symp-
toms suggestive of pheochromocytoma (Chap. 6). Women 
should be tested during pregnancy because undetected 
pheochromocytoma can cause maternal death during 
childbirth.
Measurement of serum calcium and parathyroid 
hormone levels every 2–3 years provides an adequate 
screen for hyperparathyroidism, except in families in 
which hyperparathyroidism is a prominent component, 
in which measurements should be made annually.
Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma  Heredi-
tary MTC is a multicentric disorder. Total thyroidectomy 
with a central lymph node dissection should be performed 
in children who carry the mutant gene. Incomplete 
thyroidectomy leaves the possibility of later transfor-
mation of residual C cells. The goal of early therapy is 
cure, and a strategy that does not accomplish this goal 
is shortsighted. Long-term follow-up studies indicate 
an excellent outcome, with ∼90% of children free of dis-
ease 15–20 years after surgery. In contrast, 15–25% of 
patients in whom the diagnosis is made on the basis  
of a palpable thyroid nodule die from the disease within 
15–20 years.
In adults with MTC >1 cm in size, metastases to regional 
lymph nodes are common (>75%). Total thyroidectomy
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems 
371
with central lymph node dissection and selective dis-
section of other regional chains provides the best 
chance for cure. In patients with extensive local meta-
static disease in the neck, external radiation may pre-
vent local recurrence or reduce tumor mass but is not 
curative. Chemotherapy with combinations of adria-
mycin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and dacarbazine 
may provide palliation. Clinical trials with small com-
pounds (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) that interact with 
the ATP-binding pocket of the RET, vascular endothe-
lial receptor, and type 2 and epidermal growth factor 
receptors and prevent phosphorylation have shown 
promise for treatment of hereditary and sporadic MTC. 
A phase I trial of vandetanib has shown that 45% of 
patients have a 30% or greater reduction of tumor 
size and prolongation of progression-free survival by 
at least 11 months. Similar phase II results have been 
observed for XL184, sunitinib, tipifarnib, and sorafenib, 
and phase II trials of E7080 and pazopanib are under 
way. It seems likely that one or more of these com-
pounds will be approved for treatment of metastatic 
MTC within the next few years.
Pheochromocytoma  The long-term goal 
for management of pheochromocytoma is to prevent 
death and cardiovascular complications. Improve-
ments in radiographic imaging of the adrenals make 
direct examination of the apparently normal contralat-
eral gland during surgery less important, and the rapid 
evolution of laparoscopic abdominal or retroperitoneal 
surgery has simplified management of early pheochro-
mocytoma. The major question is whether to remove 
both adrenal glands or remove only the affected adre-
nal at the time of primary surgery. Issues to be consid-
ered in making this decision include the possibility of 
malignancy (<15 reported cases), the high probability 
of developing pheochromocytoma in the apparently 
unaffected gland over an 8- to 10-year period, and the 
risks of adrenal insufficiency caused by removal of both 
glands (at least two deaths related to adrenal insuf-
ficiency have occurred in MEN 2 patients). Most clini-
cians recommend removing only the affected gland. If 
both adrenals are removed, glucocorticoid and miner-
alocorticoid replacement is mandatory. An alternative 
approach is to perform a cortical-sparing adrenalec-
tomy, removing the pheochromocytoma and adrenal 
medulla and leaving the adrenal cortex behind. This 
approach is usually successful and eliminates the neces-
sity for steroid hormone replacement in most patients, 
although the pheochromocytoma recurs in a small per-
centage.
Hyperparathyroidism  Hyperparathyroidism 
has been managed by one of two approaches. Removal 
of 3.5 glands with maintenance of the remaining half
gland in the neck is the usual procedure. In families in 
which hyperparathyroidism is a prominent manifesta-
tion (almost always associated with a codon 634 RET 
mutation) and recurrence is common, total parathyroid-
ectomy with transplantation of parathyroid tissue into 
the nondominant forearm is preferred. This approach is 
discussed above in the context of hyperparathyroidism 
associated with MEN 1.
Other Genetic Endocrine Tumor 
Syndromes
A number of mixed syndromes exist in which the neo-
plastic associations differ from those in MEN 1 or 2 
(Table 23-1).
The cause of VHL syndrome—the association of 
central nervous system tumors, renal cell carcinoma, 
pheochromocytoma, and islet cell neoplasms—is a 
mutation in the VHL tumor-suppressor gene. Germ-
line-inactivating mutations of the VHL gene cause 
tumor formation when there is additional loss or 
somatic mutation of the normal VHL allele in brain, 
kidney, pancreatic islet, or adrenal medullary cells. Mis-
sense mutations been identified in >40% of VHL fami-
lies with pheochromocytoma, suggesting that families 
with this type of mutation should be surveyed routinely 
for pheochromocytoma. A point that may be useful in 
differentiating VHL from MEN 1 (overlapping features 
include islet cell tumor and rare pheochromocytoma) or 
MEN 2 (overlapping feature is pheochromocytoma) is 
that hyperparathyroidism rarely occurs in VHL.
The molecular defect in type 1 neurofibromatosis 
inactivates neurofibromin, a cell membrane–associated 
protein that normally activates a GTPase. Inactivation of 
this protein impairs GTPase and causes continuous acti-
vation of p21 Ras and its downstream tyrosine kinase 
pathway. Endocrine tumors also form in less common 
neoplastic genetic syndromes. These include Cowden 
disease, Carney complex, familial growth hormone 
and prolactin tumors, and familial carcinoid syndrome. 
Carney complex includes myxomas of the heart, skin, 
and breast; peripheral nerve schwannomas; spotty skin 
pigmentation; and testicular, adrenal, and GH-secret-
ing pituitary tumors. Linkage analysis has identified 
two loci: chromosome 2p in half of the families and 
17q in the others. The 17q gene has been identified 
as the regulatory subunit (type IA) of protein kinase A 
(PRKA1A). Familial growth hormone– or prolactin-
producing neoplasms without other manifestations of 
MEN 1 are caused by germ-line-inactivating mutation 
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein 
(AIP). It is transmitted in an autosomal dominant man-
ner. Other types of endocrine tumors have not, to date, 
been associated with AIP mutations.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
372
Table 23-2
Features of Polyglandular Autoimmune 
(PGA) Syndromes
PGA I
PGA II
Epidemiology
Autosomal recessive
Polygenic inheritance
Mutations in APECED gene
HLA-DR3 and HLA-DR4 
associated
Childhood onset
Adult onset
Equal male:female ratio
Female predominance
Disease Associations
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Adrenal insufficiency
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Adrenal insufficiency
Graves’ disease
Hypogonadism
Type 1 diabetes
Alopecia
Hypogonadism
Hypothyroidism
Hypophysitis
Dental enamel hypoplasia
Myasthenia gravis
Malabsorption
Vitiligo
Chronic active hepatitis
Alopecia
Vitiligo
Pernicious anemia
Pernicious anemia
Celiac disease
Abbreviation: APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis- 
ectodermal dystrophy.
Immunologic Syndromes 
Affecting Multiple Endocrine 
Organs
When immune dysfunction affects two or more endo-
crine glands and other nonendocrine immune disorders 
are present, the polyglandular autoimmune (PGA) syn-
dromes should be considered. The PGA syndromes are 
classified as two main types: the type I syndrome starts 
in childhood and is characterized by mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and adrenal insuffi-
ciency; the type II, or Schmidt, syndrome is more likely 
to present in adults and most commonly includes adre-
nal insufficiency, thyroiditis, or type 1 diabetes mellitus. 
Some authors have attempted to subdivide PGA II on 
the basis of association with some autoimmune disorders 
but not others (i.e., type II and type III). The type III 
syndrome is heterogeneous and may consist of autoim-
mune thyroid disease along with a variety of other auto-
immune endocrine disorders (Table 23-2). However, 
little information is gained by making this subdivision 
in terms of understanding pathogenesis or prevention of 
future endocrine complications in individual patients or 
in the affected families.
Polyglandular Autoimmune 
Syndrome Type I
PGA type I usually is recognized in the first decade of 
life and requires two of three components for diagnosis: 
mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and ad-
renal insufficiency. Mucocutaneous candidiasis and 
hypoparathyroidism present with similar high frequency 
(100% and 79–96%, respectively). Adrenal insufficiency 
is observed in 60–72% of patients. Mineralocorticoids 
and glucocorticoids may be lost simultaneously or 
sequentially. PGA type 1 is also called autoimmune poly-
endocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). 
Other endocrine defects can include gonadal failure 
(60% female, 14% male), hypothyroidism (5%), and des­
truction of the beta cells of the pancreatic islets and 
development of insulin-dependent (type 1) diabetes mel-
litus (14% lifetime risk). Additional features include 
hypoplasia of the dental enamel, nail dystrophy, tym-
panic membrane sclerosis, vitiligo, keratopathy, and gastric 
parietal cell dysfunction resulting in pernicious anemia 
(13%). Some patients develop autoimmune hepatitis (12%), 
malabsorption (variably attributed to intestinal lymphan-
giectasia, bacterial overgrowth, or hypoparathyroidism), 
asplenism, achalasia, and cholelithiasis (Table 23-2). At 
the outset, only one organ may be involved, but the 
number increases with time so that patients eventually 
manifest two to five components of the syndrome.
Most patients initially present with oral candidia-
sis in childhood; it is poorly responsive to treatment 
(Chap. 27) and relapses frequently. Chronic hypopara-
thyroidism usually occurs before adrenal insufficiency 
develops. More than 60% of postpubertal women 
develop premature hypogonadism. The endocrine com-
ponents, including adrenal insufficiency and hypopara-
thyroidism, may not develop until the fourth decade, 
making continued surveillance necessary.
Type I PGA syndrome is not associated with a par-
ticular HLA type and usually is inherited as an auto-
somal recessive trait. It may occur sporadically. The 
responsible gene, designated as either APECED or 
AIRE, encodes a transcription factor that is expressed in 
thymus and lymph nodes; a variety of different muta-
tions have been reported. The mechanism by which 
these mutations lead to the diverse manifestations of 
type I PGA is unknown.
Polyglandular Autoimmune 
Syndrome Type II
PGA type II is characterized by two or more of the 
endocrinopathies listed in Table 23-2. Most often these 
endocrinopathies include primary adrenal insufficiency, 
Graves’ disease or autoimmune hypothyroidism, type 1 
diabetes mellitus, and primary hypogonadism. Because 
adrenal insufficiency is relatively rare, it is used fre-
quently to define the presence of the syndrome. Among 
patients with adrenal insufficiency, type 1 diabetes mel-
litus coexists in 52% and autoimmune thyroid disease 
occurs in 69%. However, many patients with antimicro-
somal and antithyroglobulin antibodies never develop 
 
CHAPTER 23
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems 
373
abnormalities of thyroid function. Thus, increased anti-
body titers alone are poor predictors of future disease. 
Other associated conditions include hypophysitis, celiac 
disease (2–3%), atrophic gastritis, and pernicious anemia 
(13%). Vitiligo, which is caused by antibodies against 
the melanocyte, and alopecia are less common than in 
the type I syndrome. Mucocutaneous candidiasis does 
not occur. A few patients develop a late-onset, usually 
transient hypoparathyroidism caused by antibodies that 
compete with PTH for binding to the PTH receptor. 
Up to 25% of patients with myasthenia gravis and an 
even higher percentage who have myasthenia and a thy-
moma have PGA type II.
The type II syndrome is familial in nature, often trans-
mitted as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete 
penetrance. As in many of the individual autoimmune 
endocrinopathies, certain HL-DR3 and -DR4 alleles 
increase disease susceptibility; several different genes 
probably contribute to the expression of this syndrome.
A variety of autoantibodies are seen in PGA type II, 
including antibodies directed against (1) thyroid anti-
gens such as thyroid peroxidase, thyroglobulin, and the 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor; (2) adre-
nal side chain cleavage enzyme, steroid 21-hydroxylase, 
or ACTH receptor; and (3) pancreatic islet glutamic 
acid decarboxylase or the insulin receptor, among others. 
The roles of cytokines such as interferon and cell-mediated 
immunity are unclear.
Diagnosis
The clinical manifestations of adrenal insufficiency often 
develop slowly, may be difficult to detect, and can be 
fatal if not diagnosed and treated appropriately. Thus, 
prospective screening should be performed routinely in 
all patients and family members at risk for PGA types I 
and II. The most effective screening test for adrenal dis-
ease is a cosyntropin stimulation test (Chap. 5). A fast-
ing blood glucose level can be obtained to screen for 
hyperglycemia. Additional screening tests should include 
measurements of TSH, luteinizing hormone, follicle-
stimulating hormone, and, in men, testosterone levels. 
In families with suspected type I PGA syndrome, cal-
cium and phosphorus levels should be measured. These 
screening studies should be performed every 1–2 years up 
to about age 50 in families with PGA type II syndrome 
and until about age 40 in patients with type I syndrome. 
Screening measurements of autoantibodies against poten-
tially affected endocrine organs are of uncertain prognos-
tic value. The differential diagnosis of PGA syndrome 
should include the DiGeorge syndrome (hypoparathy-
roidism due to glandular agenesis and mucocutaneous 
candidiasis), Kearns-Sayre syndrome (hypoparathyroid-
ism, primary hypogonadism, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and 
panhypopituitarism), Wolfram’s syndrome (congenital 
diabetes insipidus and diabetes mellitus), IPEX syndrome 
(immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enter-
opathy, X-linked), and congenital rubella (type 1 diabetes 
mellitus and hypothyroidism).
Treatment	
Polyglandular Autoimmune Syndrome
With the exception of Graves’ disease, the management 
of each of the endocrine components of the disease 
involves hormone replacement and is covered in detail 
in the chapters on adrenal, thyroid, gonadal, and para-
thyroid disease (Chaps. 4, 5, 8, 10, and 27). Some 
aspects of therapy merit special emphasis. Primary 
hypothyroidism can mask adrenal insufficiency by 
prolonging the half-life of cortisol; consequently, admin-
istration of thyroid hormone to a patient with unsus-
pected adrenal insufficiency can precipitate adrenal 
crisis. Thus, all patients with hypothyroidism in the con-
text of PGA syndrome should be screened for adrenal 
disease and, if it is present, treated with glucocorticoids 
before or concurrently with thyroid hormone therapy. 
Hypoglycemia or decreasing insulin requirements in a 
patient with diabetes mellitus type 1 may be the earliest 
symptom of adrenal insufficiency. Consequently, such 
patients should be screened for adrenal disease. Treat-
ment of mucocutaneous candidiasis with ketoconazole 
may induce adrenal insufficiency. This drug also may 
elevate liver enzymes, making the diagnosis of auto-
immune hepatitis more difficult. Hypocalcemia in PGA 
type II is more commonly due to malabsorption associ-
ated with celiac disease than to hypoparathyroidism.
Other Autoimmune Endocrine 
Syndromes
Insulin resistance caused by antibodies
Rare insulin-resistance syndromes occur in patients who 
develop antibodies that block the interaction of insu-
lin with its receptor. Conversely, other classes of anti-
insulin receptor antibodies can activate the receptor and 
can cause hypoglycemia; this disorder should be consid-
ered in the differential diagnosis of fasting hypoglycemia 
(Chap. 20).
Patients with insulin receptor antibodies and acan-
thosis nigricans are often middle-aged women who 
acquire insulin resistance in association with other auto-
immune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus 
and Sjögren’s syndrome. Vitiligo, alopecia, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon, and arthritis also may be seen. Other 
autoimmune endocrine disorders, including thyrotoxi-
cosis, hypothyroidism, and hypogonadism, occur rarely. 
Acanthosis nigricans, a velvety, hyperpigmented, thick-
ened skin lesion, is prominent on the dorsum of the 
neck and other skinfold areas in the axillae or groin and 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
374
often heralds the diagnosis in these patients. However, 
acanthosis nigricans also occurs in patients with obesity 
or polycystic ovarian syndrome, in which insulin resis-
tance appears to be due to a postreceptor defect; thus, 
acanthosis nigricans itself is not diagnostic of the immu-
nologic form of insulin resistance.
Some patients with acanthosis nigricans have mild 
glucose intolerance, with a compensatory increase in 
insulin secretion that is detected only when insulin levels 
are measured. Others have severe diabetes mellitus that 
requires massive doses of insulin (several thousand units 
per day) to lower the blood glucose levels. The nature 
of the antibodies determines the manifestations; though 
insulin resistance is more common, fasting hypoglycemia 
can result from insulinomimetic antibodies.
Insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus associated with 
anti-insulin antibodies occurs in patients with ataxia-
telangiectasia. This is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by mutations in ATM, a gene involved in cellu-
lar responses to ionizing radiation and oxidative damage. 
This disorder is characterized by ataxia, telangiectasia, 
immune abnormalities, and an increased incidence of 
malignancies.
Autoimmune insulin syndrome with 
hypoglycemia
This disorder typically occurs in patients with other 
autoimmune disorders and is caused by polyclonal 
autoantibodies that bind to endogenously synthesized 
insulin. If the insulin dissociates from the antibodies 
several hours or more after a meal, hypoglycemia can 
result. Most cases of the syndrome have been described 
from Japan, and there may be a genetic component. In 
plasma cell dyscrasias such as multiple myeloma, the 
plasma cells may produce monoclonal antibodies against 
insulin and cause hypoglycemia by a similar mechanism.
Antithyroxine antibodies and hypothyroidism
Circulating autoantibodies against thyroid hormones 
in patients with both immune thyroid disease and 
plasma cell dyscrasias such as Waldenström’s macro-
globulinemia can bind thyroid hormones, decrease their 
biologic activity, and result in primary hypothyroidism. 
In other patients the antibodies simply interfere with 
thyroid hormone immunoassays and cause false eleva-
tions or decreases in measured hormone levels.
Crow-Fukase syndrome
The features of this syndrome are highlighted by an 
acronym that emphasizes its important features: poly-
neuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-proteins, 
and skin changes (POEMS). The most important fea-
ture is a severe, progressive sensorimotor polyneuropa-
thy associated with a plasma cell dyscrasia. Localized 
collections of plasma cells (plasmacytomas) can cause 
sclerotic bone lesions and produce monoclonal IgG 
or IgA proteins. Endocrine manifestations in men or 
women include hyperprolactinemia, diabetes mellitus 
type 2, primary hypothyroidism, and adrenal insuffi-
ciency. Additional findings include ovarian failure and 
amenorrhea in women and testicular failure, impotence, 
and gynecomastia in men. Skin changes include hyper-
pigmentation, thickening of the dermis, hirsutism, and 
hyperhidrosis. Hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy 
occur in about two-thirds of patients, and splenomegaly 
is seen in about one-third. Other manifestations include 
increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure with papilledema, 
peripheral edema, ascites, pleural effusions, glomerulo-
nephritis, and fever. Median survival may be >10 years, 
though shorter in patients with extravascular volume 
overload or clubbing.
The systemic nature of the disorder may cause con-
fusion with other connective tissue diseases. The endo-
crine manifestations suggest an autoimmune basis of the 
disorder, but circulating antibodies against endocrine 
cells have not been demonstrated. Increased serum and 
tissue levels of interleukin 6, interleukin 1β, vascu-
lar endothelial growth factor, matrix metalloproteins, 
and tumor necrosis factor α are present, but the patho-
physiologic basis for the POEMS syndrome is uncer-
tain. Therapy directed against the plasma cell dyscrasia 
such as local radiation of bony lesions, chemotherapy, 
thalidomide, plasmapheresis, bone marrow or stem cell 
transplantation, and treatment with all-trans retinoic acid 
may improve the endocrine manifestations.
 J. Larry Jameson 
375
 In addition to local tissue invasion and metastasis, neo-
plastic cells can produce a variety of products that can 
stimulate hormonal, hematologic, dermatologic, and 
neurologic responses.  Paraneoplastic syndromes is the term 
used to refer to the disorders that accompany benign or 
malignant tumors but are not directly related to mass 
effects or invasion. Tumors of neuroendocrine origin, 
such as small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and carci-
noids, produce a wide array of peptide hormones and 
are common causes of paraneoplastic syndromes. How-
ever, almost every type of tumor has the potential to 
produce hormones or cytokines or to induce immu-
nologic responses. Careful studies of the prevalence of 
paraneoplastic syndromes indicate that they are more 
common than is generally appreciated. The signs, symp-
toms, and metabolic alterations associated with parane-
oplastic disorders may be overlooked in the context of 
a malignancy and its treatment. Consequently, atypical 
clinical manifestations in a patient with cancer should 
prompt consideration of a paraneoplastic syndrome. The 
most common endocrinologic and hematologic syn-
dromes associated with underlying neoplasia will be dis-
cussed here. 
 endocrine paraneoplastic 
syndromes 
 Etiology 
 Hormones can be produced from eutopic or ectopic 
sources.  Eutopic refers to the expression of a hormone 
from its normal tissue of origin, whereas  ectopic refers 
to hormone production from an atypical tissue source. 
For example, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
is expressed eutopically by the corticotrope cells of the 
anterior pituitary, but it can be expressed ectopically 
in SCLC. Many hormones are produced at low levels 
from a wide array of tissues in addition to the classic 
endocrine source. Thus, ectopic expression is often a 
quantitative change rather than an absolute change in 
tissue expression. Nevertheless, the term  ectopic expression
is fi rmly entrenched and conveys the abnormal physiol-
ogy associated with hormone production by neoplastic 
cells. In addition to high levels of hormones, ectopic 
expression typically is characterized by abnormal regu-
lation of hormone production (e.g., defective feed-
back control) and peptide processing (resulting in large, 
unprocessed precursors). 
 A diverse array of molecular mechanisms has been 
suggested to cause ectopic hormone production. In 
rare instances, genetic rearrangements explain aberrant 
hormone expression. For example, translocation of the 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) gene can result in high levels 
of PTH expression in tissues other than the parathyroid 
gland, apparently because the genetic rearrangement 
brings the  PTH gene under the control of atypical reg-
ulatory elements. A related phenomenon is well docu-
mented in many forms of leukemia and lymphoma, in 
which somatic genetic rearrangements confer a growth 
advantage and alter cellular differentiation and function. 
Although genetic rearrangements may cause selected 
cases of ectopic hormone production, this mechanism 
is probably rare, as many tumors are associated with 
excessive production of numerous peptides. Cellular 
dedifferentiation probably underlies most cases of ecto-
pic hormone production. Many cancers are poorly dif-
ferentiated, and certain tumor products, such as human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), parathyroid hormone–
related protein (PTHrP), and α fetoprotein, are char-
acteristic of gene expression at earlier developmental 
stages. In contrast, the propensity of certain cancers to 
produce particular hormones (e.g., squamous cell carci-
nomas produce PTHrP) suggests that dedifferentiation is 
partial or that selective pathways are derepressed. These 
expression profi les probably refl ect alterations in tran-
scriptional repression, changes in DNA methylation, or 
other factors that govern cell differentiation. 
 cHapter 24 
 ENDOCRINE PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
376
In SCLC, the pathway of differentiation has been 
relatively well defined. The neuroendocrine phenotype 
is dictated in part by the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) 
transcription factor human achaete-scute homologue 1 
(hASH-1), which is expressed at abnormally high lev-
els in SCLC associated with ectopic ACTH. The activ-
ity of hASH-1 is inhibited by hairy enhancer of split 
1 (HES-1) and by Notch proteins, which also are capable 
of inducing growth arrest. Thus, abnormal expression of 
these developmental transcription factors appears to pro-
vide a link between cell proliferation and differentiation.
Ectopic hormone production would only be an epi-
phenomenon associated with cancer if it did not result 
in clinical manifestations. Excessive and unregulated pro-
duction of hormones such as ACTH, PTHrP, and vaso-
pressin can lead to substantial morbidity and complicate 
the cancer treatment plan. Moreover, the paraneoplastic 
endocrinopathies are sometimes the presenting feature 
of underlying malignancy and may prompt the search 
for an unrecognized tumor.
A large number of paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes 
have been described, linking overproduction of particu-
lar hormones with specific types of tumors. However, 
certain recurring syndromes emerge from this group 
(Table 24-1). The most common paraneoplastic endo-
crine syndromes include hypercalcemia from over-
production of PTHrP and other factors, hyponatremia 
from excess vasopressin, and Cushing’s syndrome from 
ectopic ACTH.
Hypercalcemia Caused by Ectopic 
Production of PTHrP
(See also Chap. 27)
Etiology
Humoralhypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM) occurs 
in up to 20% of patients with cancer. HHM is most 
common in cancers of the lung, head and neck, skin, 
esophagus, breast, and genitourinary tract and in multi-
ple myeloma and lymphomas. Although several distinct 
humoral causes of HHM occur, it is caused most com-
monly by overproduction of PTHrP. In addition to act-
ing as a circulating humoral factor, bone metastases (e.g., 
breast, multiple myeloma) may produce PTHrP, leading 
to local osteolysis and hypercalcemia.
PTHrP is structurally related to PTH and binds to 
the PTH receptor, explaining the similar biochemi-
cal features of HHM and hyperparathyroidism. PTHrP 
plays a key role in skeletal development and regulates 
cellular proliferation and differentiation in other tissues, 
including skin, bone marrow, breast, and hair follicles. 
The mechanism of PTHrP induction in malignancy is 
incompletely understood; however, tumor-bearing tissues 
commonly associated with HHM normally produce 
PTHrP during development or cell renewal. PTHrP 
expression is stimulated by hedgehog pathways and Gli 
transcription factors that are active in many malignan-
cies. Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), which is 
produced by many tumors, also stimulates PTHrP, in 
part by activating the Gli pathway. Mutations in cer-
tain oncogenes, such as Ras, also can activate PTHrP 
expression. In adult T-cell lymphoma, the transactivat-
ing Tax protein produced by human T-cell lympho-
tropic virus I (HTLV-I) stimulates PTHrP promoter 
activity. Metastatic lesions to bone are more likely to 
produce PTHrP than are metastases in other tissues, 
suggesting that bone produces factors (e.g., TGF-β) that 
enhance PTHrP production or that PTHrP-producing 
metastases have a selective growth advantage in bone. 
Thus, PTHrP production can be stimulated by muta-
tions in oncogenes, altered expression of viral or cellular 
transcription factors, and local growth factors.
Another relatively common cause of HHM is excess 
production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Like granuloma-
tous disorders associated with hypercalcemia, lymphomas 
can produce an enzyme that converts 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
to the more active 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, leading 
to enhanced gastrointestinal calcium absorption. Other 
causes of HHM include tumor-mediated production of 
osteolytic cytokines and inflammatory mediators.
Clinical Manifestations
The typical presentation of HHM is a patient with a 
known malignancy who is found to be hypercalcemic on 
routine laboratory tests. Less often, hypercalcemia is the 
initial presenting feature of malignancy. Particularly when 
calcium levels are markedly increased [>3.5 mmol/L 
(>14 mg/dL)], patients may experience fatigue, mental sta-
tus changes, dehydration, or symptoms of nephrolithiasis.
Diagnosis
Features that favor HHM, as opposed to primary hyper-
parathyroidism, include known malignancy, recent 
onset of hypercalcemia, and very high serum calcium 
levels. Like hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia caused 
by PTHrP is accompanied by hypercalciuria and hypo-
phosphatemia. Patients with HHM typically have 
metabolic alkalosis rather than hyperchloremic acido-
sis, as is seen in hyperparathyroidism. Measurement of 
PTH is useful to exclude primary hyperparathyroid-
ism; the PTH level should be suppressed in HHM. An 
elevated PTHrP level confirms the diagnosis, and it is 
increased in ∼80% of hypercalcemic patients with can-
cer. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D levels may be increased 
in patients with lymphoma.
 
CHAPTER 24
Endocrine Paraneoplastic Syndromes
377
Table 24-1
Paraneoplastic Syndromes Caused by Ectopic Hormone Production
Paraneoplastic Syndrome
Ectopic Hormone
Typical Tumor Typesa
Common
Hypercalcemia of malignancy
Parathyroid hormone–related protein 
(PTHrP)
Squamous cell (head and neck,  
lung, skin), breast, genitourinary,  
gastrointestinal
1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D
Lymphomas
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) (rare)
Lung, ovary
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) (rare)
Renal, lung
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion (SIADH)
Vasopressin
Lung (squamous, small cell),  
gastrointestinal, genitourinary, ovary
Cushing’s syndrome
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Lung (small cell, bronchial carcinoid, 
adenocarcinoma, squamous), thymus, 
pancreatic islet, medullary thyroid  
carcinoma
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
(rare)
Pancreatic islet, carcinoid, lung,  
prostate
Ectopic expression of gastric inhibitory 
peptide (GIP), luteinizing hormone 
(LH)/human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG), other G protein–coupled  
receptors (rare)
Macronodular adrenal hyperplasia
Less Common
Non–islet cell hypoglycemia
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-II)
Mesenchymal tumors, sarcomas,  
adrenal, hepatic, gastrointestinal,  
kidney, prostate
Insulin (rare)
Cervix (small cell carcinoma)
Male feminization
hCGb
Testis (embryonal, seminomas),  
germinomas, choriocarcinoma,  
lung, hepatic, pancreatic islet
Diarrhea or intestinal hypermotility
Calcitoninc
Lung, colon, breast, medullary thyroid 
carcinoma
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
Pancreas, pheochromocytoma,  
esophagus
Rare
Oncogenic osteomalacia
Phosphatonin [fibroblast growth factor 
23 (FGF23)]
Hemangiopericytomas,  
osteoblastomas, fibromas, sarcomas, 
giant cell tumors, prostate, lung
Acromegaly
Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
(GHRH)
Pancreatic islet, bronchial and other 
carcinoids
Growth hormone (GH)
Lung, pancreatic islet
Hyperthyroidism
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Hydatidiform mole, embryonal tumors, 
struma ovarii
Hypertension
Renin
Juxtaglomerular tumors, kidney, lung, 
pancreas, ovary
aOnly the most common tumor types are listed. For most ectopic hormone syndromes, an extensive list of tumors has been reported to produce 
one or more hormones.
bhCG is produced eutopically by trophoblastic tumors. Certain tumors produce disproportionate amounts of the hCG α or hCG β subunit. High 
levels of hCG rarely cause hyperthyroidism because of weak binding to the TSH receptor.
cCalcitonin is produced eutopically by medullary thyroid carcinoma and is used as a tumor marker.
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
378
Treatment	
Humoral Hypercalcemia of Malignancy
The management of HHM begins with removal of excess 
calcium in the diet, medications, or IV solutions. Oral 
phosphorus (e.g., 250 mg Neutra-Phos 3–4 times daily) 
should be given until serum phosphorus is >1 mmol/L 
(>3 mg/dL). Saline rehydration is used to dilute serum 
calcium and promote calciuresis. Forced diuresis with 
furosemide or other loop diuretics can enhance cal-
cium excretion but provides relatively little value except 
in life-threatening hypercalcemia. When used, loop diuret-
ics should be administered only after complete rehydra-
tion and with careful monitoring of fluid balance. Bisphos-
phonates such as pamidronate (60–90 mg IV), zoledronate 
(4–8 mg IV), and etidronate (7.5 mg/kg per day PO for  
3–7 consecutive days) can reduce serum calcium within 
1–2 days and suppress calcium release for several weeks. 
Bisphosphonate infusions can be repeated, or oral 
bisphosphonates can be used for chronic treatment. 
Dialysis should be considered in severe hypercalcemia 
when saline hydration and bisphosphonate treatments 
are not possible or are too slow in onset. Previously 
used agents such as calcitonin and mithramycin have 
little utility now that bisphosphonates are available. 
Calcitonin (2–8 U/kg SC every 6–12 h) should be con-
sidered when rapid correction of severe hypercalcemia 
is needed. Hypercalcemia associated with lymphomas, 
multiple myeloma, or leukemia may respond to gluco-
corticoid treatment (e.g., prednisone 40–100 mg PO in 
four divided doses).
Ectopic Vasopressin:  
Tumor-Associated SIADH
Etiology
Vasopressin is an antidiuretic hormone normally produced 
by the posterior pituitary gland. Ectopic vasopressin pro-
duction by tumors is a common cause of the syndrome 
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), occur-
ring in at least half of patients with SCLC. SIADH also can 
be caused by a number of nonneoplastic conditions, includ-
ing central nervous system (CNS) trauma, infections, 
and medications (Chap. 3). Compensatory responses to 
SIADH, such as decreased thirst, may mitigate the devel-
opment of hyponatremia. However, with prolonged pro-
duction of excessive vasopressin, the osmostat control-
ling thirst and hypothalamic vasopressin secretion may 
become reset. In addition, intake of free water, orally or 
intravenously, can quickly worsen hyponatremia because 
of reduced renal diuresis.
Tumors with neuroendocrine features, such as SCLC 
and carcinoids, are the most common sources of ectopic 
vasopressin production, but it also occurs in other forms 
of lung cancer and with CNS lesions, head and neck 
cancer, and genitourinary, gastrointestinal, and ovarian 
cancers. The mechanism of activation of the vasopres-
sin gene in these tumors is unknown but often involves 
concomitant expression of the adjacent oxytocin gene, 
suggesting derepression of this locus.
Clinical Manifestations
Most patients with ectopic vasopressin secretion are 
asymptomatic and are identified because of the presence 
of hyponatremia on routine chemistry testing. Symp-
toms may include weakness, lethargy, nausea, confusion, 
depressed mental status, and seizures. The severity of 
symptoms reflects the rapidity of onset as well as the 
extent of hyponatremia. Hyponatremia usually develops 
slowly but may be exacerbated by the administration of 
IV fluids or the institution of new medications.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic features of ectopic vasopressin produc-
tion are the same as those of other causes of SIADH 
(Chap. 3). Hyponatremia and reduced serum osmolal-
ity occur in the setting of an inappropriately normal 
or increased urine osmolality. Urine sodium excretion 
is normal or increased unless volume depletion is pres-
ent. Other causes of hyponatremia should be excluded, 
including renal, adrenal, or thyroid insufficiency. Physi-
ologic sources of vasopressin stimulation (CNS lesions, 
pulmonary disease, nausea), adaptive circulatory mecha-
nisms (hypotension, heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis), and 
medications, including many chemotherapeutic agents, 
also should be considered as possible causes of hypona-
tremia. Vasopressin measurements are not usually neces-
sary to make the diagnosis.
Treatment	
Ectopic Vasopressin: Tumor-Associated 
SIADH
Most patients with ectopic vasopressin production 
develop hyponatremia over several weeks or months. 
The disorder should be corrected gradually unless men-
tal status is altered or there is a risk of seizures. Treatment 
of the underlying malignancy may reduce ectopic vaso-
pressin production, but this response is slow if it occurs 
at all. Fluid restriction to less than urine output, plus 
insensible losses, is often sufficient to correct hyponatre-
mia partially. However, strict monitoring of the amount 
and types of liquids consumed or administered intra-
venously is required for fluid restriction to be effective. 
Salt tablets and saline are not helpful unless volume 
depletion is also present. Demeclocycline (150–300 mg 
orally three to four times daily) can be used to inhibit
 
CHAPTER 24
Endocrine Paraneoplastic Syndromes
379
vasopressin action on the renal distal tubule, but its 
onset of action is relatively slow (1–2 weeks). Conivap-
tan, a nonpeptide V2-receptor antagonist, can be admin-
istered either PO (20–120 mg bid) or IV (10–40 mg) 
and is particularly effective when used in combina-
tion with fluid restriction in euvolemic hyponatremia. 
Severe hyponatremia (Na <115 meq/L) or mental status 
changes may require treatment with hypertonic (3%) 
or normal saline infusion together with furosemide to 
enhance free water clearance. The rate of sodium cor-
rection should be slow (0.5–1 meq/L per h) to prevent 
rapid fluid shifts and the possible development of cen-
tral pontinemyelinolysis.
Cushing’s Syndrome Caused by 
Ectopic ACTH Production
(See also Chap. 5)
Etiology
Ectopic ACTH production accounts for 10–20% of 
cases of Cushing’s syndrome. The syndrome is particu-
larly common in neuroendocrine tumors. SCLC (>50%) 
is by far the most common cause of ectopic ACTH, 
followed by thymic carcinoid (15%), islet cell tumors 
(10%), bronchial carcinoid (10%), other carcinoids (5%), 
and pheochromocytomas (2%). Ectopic ACTH produc-
tion is caused by increased expression of the proopi-
omelanocortin (POMC) gene, which encodes ACTH, 
along with melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), 
β lipotropin, and several other peptides. In many tumors, 
there is abundant but aberrant expression of the POMC 
gene from an internal promoter, proximal to the third 
exon, which encodes ACTH. However, because this 
product lacks the signal sequence necessary for protein 
processing, it is not secreted. Increased production of 
ACTH arises instead from less abundant, but unregu-
lated, POMC expression from the same promoter site 
used in the pituitary. However, because the tumors lack 
many of the enzymes needed to process the POMC 
polypeptide, it is typically released as multiple large, bio-
logically inactive fragments along with relatively small 
amounts of fully processed, active ACTH.
Rarely, corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is 
produced by pancreatic islet cell tumors, SCLC, med-
ullary thyroid cancer, carcinoids, or prostate cancer. 
When levels are high enough, CRH can cause pitu-
itary corticotrope hyperplasia and Cushing’s syndrome. 
Tumors that produce CRH sometimes also produce 
ACTH, raising the possibility of a paracrine mechanism 
for ACTH production.
A distinct mechanism for ACTH-independent Cush-
ing’s syndrome involves ectopic expression of various G 
protein–coupled receptors in the adrenal nodules. Ecto-
pic expression of the gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) 
receptor is the best-characterized example of this mech-
anism. In this case, meals induce GIP secretion, which 
inappropriately stimulates adrenal growth and glucocor-
ticoid production.
Clinical manifestations
The clinical features of hypercortisolemia are detected 
in only a small fraction of patients with documented 
ectopic ACTH production. Patients with ectopic ACTH 
syndrome generally exhibit less marked weight gain 
and centripetal fat redistribution, probably because the 
exposure to excess glucocorticoids is relatively short 
and because cachexia reduces the propensity for weight 
gain and fat deposition. The ectopic ACTH syndrome 
is associated with several clinical features that distinguish 
it from other causes of Cushing’s syndrome (e.g., pitu-
itary adenomas, adrenal adenomas, iatrogenic glucocor-
ticoid excess). The metabolic manifestations of ectopic 
ACTH syndrome are dominated by fluid retention and 
hypertension, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, glu-
cose intolerance, and occasionally steroid psychosis. The 
very high ACTH levels often cause increased pigmen-
tation, and melanotrope-stimulating hormone (MSH) 
activity derived from the POMC precursor peptide is 
also increased. The extraordinarily high glucocorticoid 
levels in patients with ectopic sources of ACTH can 
lead to marked skin fragility and easy bruising. In addi-
tion, the high cortisol levels often overwhelm the renal 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II enzyme, 
which normally inactivates cortisol and prevents it from 
binding to renal mineralocorticoid receptors. Conse-
quently, in addition to the excess mineralocorticoids 
produced by ACTH stimulation of the adrenal gland, 
high levels of cortisol exert activity through the min-
eralocorticoid receptor, leading to severe hypokalemia.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ectopic ACTH syndrome is usually not 
difficult in the setting of a known malignancy. Urine free 
cortisol levels fluctuate but are typically greater than two 
to four times normal, and the plasma ACTH level is usu-
ally >22 pmol/L (>100 pg/mL). A suppressed ACTH level 
excludes this diagnosis and indicates an ACTH-indepen-
dent cause of Cushing’s syndrome (e.g., adrenal or exog-
enous glucocorticoid). In contrast to pituitary sources of 
ACTH, most ectopic sources of ACTH do not respond 
to glucocorticoid suppression. Therefore, high-dose dexa-
methasone (8 mg PO) suppresses 8:00 a.m. serum cor-
tisol (50% decrease from baseline) in ∼80% of pituitary 
ACTH-producing adenomas but fails to suppress ectopic 
ACTH in ∼90% of cases. Bronchial and other carcinoids 
SECTION IV
Disorders Affecting Multiple Endocrine Systems
380
are well-documented exceptions to these general guide-
lines, as these ectopic sources of ACTH may exhibit feed-
back regulation indistinguishable from pituitary adenomas, 
including suppression by high-dose dexamethasone, and 
ACTH responsiveness to adrenal blockade with metyra-
pone. If necessary, petrosal sinus catheterization can be 
used to evaluate a patient with ACTH-dependent 
Cushing’s syndrome when the source of ACTH is unclear. 
After CRH stimulation, a 3:1 petrosalsinus:peripheral ACTH 
ratio strongly suggests a pituitary ACTH source. Imaging 
studies are also useful in the evaluation of suspected carci-
noid lesions, allowing biopsy and characterization of hor-
mone production using special stains.
Treatment	
Cushing’s Syndrome Caused by Ectopic 
ACTH Production
The morbidity associated with the ectopic ACTH syn-
drome can be substantial. Patients may experience 
depression or personality changes because of extreme 
cortisol excess. Metabolic derangements, including dia-
betes mellitus and hypokalemia, can worsen fatigue. 
Poor wound healing and predisposition to infections 
can complicate the surgical management of tumors, 
and opportunistic infections caused by organisms 
such as Pneumocystis carinii and mycoses are often the 
cause of death in patients with ectopic ACTH produc-
tion. Depending on prognosis and treatment plans for 
the underlying malignancy, measures to reduce cortisol 
levels are often indicated. Treatment of the underlying 
malignancy may reduce ACTH levels but is rarely suffi-
cient to reduce cortisol levels to normal. Adrenalectomy 
is not practical for most of these patients but should 
be considered if the underlying tumor is not resectable 
and the prognosis is otherwise favorable (e.g., carci-
noid). Medical therapy with ketoconazole (300–600 mg 
PO bid), metyrapone (250–500 mg PO every 6 h), mito-
tane (3–6 g PO in four divided doses, tapered to main-
tain low cortisol production), or other agents that block 
steroid synthesis or action is often the most practical 
strategy for managing the hypercortisolism associated 
with ectopic ACTH production (Chap. 2). Glucocorticoid 
replacement should be provided to prevent adrenal 
insufficiency. Unfortunately, many patients eventually 
progress despite medical blockade.
Tumor-Induced Hypoglycemia 
Caused by Excess Production  
of IGF-II
(See also Chap. 20) Mesenchymal tumors, hemangio-
pericytomas, hepatocellular tumors, adrenal carcinomas, 
and a variety of other large tumors have been reported 
to produce excessive amounts of insulin-like growth 
factor type II (IGF-II) precursor, which binds weakly to 
insulin receptors and strongly to IGF-I receptors, lead-
ing to insulin-like actions. The gene encoding IGF-II 
resides on a chromosome 11p15 locus that is normally 
imprinted (that is, expression is exclusively from a single 
parental allele). Biallelic expression of the IGF-II gene 
occurs in a subset of tumors, suggesting loss of meth-
ylation and loss of imprinting as a mechanism for gene 
induction. In addition to increased IGF-II production, 
IGF-II bioavailability is increased due to complex alter-
ations in circulating binding proteins. Increased IGF-II 
suppresses growth hormone (GH) and insulin, result-
ing in reduced IGF binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3), IGF-
I, and acid-labile subunit (ALS). The reduction in ALS 
and IGFBP-3, which normally sequester IGF-II, causes 
it to be displaced to a small circulating complex that has 
greater access to insulin target tissues. For this reason, 
circulating IGF-II levels may not be markedly increased 
despite causing hypoglycemia. In addition to IGF-II–
mediated hypoglycemia, tumors may occupy enough of 
the liver to impair gluconeogenesis.
In most cases, the tumor causing hypoglycemia is 
clinically apparent (usually >10 cm in size) and hypo-
glycemia develops in association with fasting. The diag-
nosis is made by documenting low serum glucose and 
suppressed insulin levels in association with symptoms of 
hypoglycemia. Serum IGF-II levels may not be increased 
(IGF-II assays may not detect IGF-II precursors). Increased 
IGF-II mRNA expression is found in most of these 
tumors. Any medications associated with hypoglyce-
mia should be eliminated. Treatment of the underlying 
malignancy, if possible, may reduce the predisposition to 
hypoglycemia. Frequent meals and IV glucose, especially 
during sleep or fasting, are often necessary to prevent 
hypoglycemia. Glucagon and glucocorticoids have also 
been used to enhance glucose production.
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
hCG is composed of α and β subunits and can be pro-
duced as intact hormone, which is biologically active, 
or as uncombined biologically inert subunits. Ectopic 
production of intact hCG occurs most often in asso-
ciation with testicular embryonal tumors, germ cell 
tumors, extragonadal germinomas, lung cancer, hepa-
toma, and pancreatic islet tumors. Eutopic production 
of hCG occurs with trophoblastic malignancies. hCG α 
subunit production is particularly common in lung can-
cer and pancreatic islet cancer. In men, high hCG levels 
stimulate steroidogenesis and aromatase activity in tes-
ticular Leydig cells, resulting in increased estrogen pro-
duction and the development of gynecomastia. Preco-
cious puberty in boys or gynecomastia in men should 
prompt measurement of hCG and consideration of a 
 
CHAPTER 24
Endocrine Paraneoplastic Syndromes
381
testicular tumor or another source of ectopic hCG pro-
duction. Most women are asymptomatic. hCG is easily 
measured. Treatment should be directed at the underly-
ing malignancy.
Oncogenic Osteomalacia
Hypophosphatemic oncogenic osteomalacia, also called 
tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO), is characterized by 
markedly reduced serum phosphorus and renal phosphate 
wasting, leading to muscle weakness, bone pain, and 
osteomalacia. Serum calcium and PTH levels are normal, 
and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D is low. Oncogenic osteo-
malacia is usually caused by benign mesenchymal tumors, 
such as hemangiopericytomas, fibromas, and giant 
cell tumors, often of the skeletal extremities or head. 
It has also been described in sarcomas and in patients 
with prostate and lung cancer. Resection of the tumor 
reverses the disorder, confirming its humoral basis. The 
circulating phosphaturic factor is called phosphatonin—a 
factor that inhibits renal tubular reabsorption of phos-
phate and renal conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Phosphatonin has been iden-
tified as fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). FGF23 levels 
are increased in some, but not all, patients with osteo-
genic osteomalacia. The disorder exhibits biochemical 
features similar to those seen with inactivating mutations 
in the PHEX gene, the cause of hereditary X-linked 
hypophosphatemia. The PHEX gene encodes a protease 
that inactivates FGF23. Treatment involves removal of 
the tumor, if possible, and supplementation with phos-
phate and vitamin D. Octreotide treatment reduces phos-
phate wasting in some patients with tumors that express 
somatostatin receptor subtype 2. Octreotide scans may 
also be useful in detecting these tumors.
This page intentionally left blank 
Disorders of Bone 
and  
Calcium Metabolism
SECTION V
 f. richard Bringhurst I  marie B. Demay I  stephen m. Krane 
 I  Henry m. Kronenberg 
384
 bone struCture anD metabolism 
 Bone is a dynamic tissue that is remodeled constantly 
throughout life. The arrangement of compact and can-
cellous bone provides strength and density suitable for 
both mobility and protection. In addition, bone provides 
a reservoir for calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, sodium, 
and other ions necessary for homeostatic functions. 
Bone also hosts and regulates hematopoiesis by provid-
ing niches for hematopoietic cell proliferation and dif-
ferentiation. The skeleton is highly vascular and receives 
about 10% of the cardiac output. Remodeling of bone is 
accomplished by two distinct cell types: osteoblasts pro-
duce bone matrix, and osteoclasts resorb the matrix. 
 The extracellular components of bone consist of a 
solid mineral phase in close association with an organic
matrix, of which 90–95% is type I collagen . The non-
collagenous portion of the organic matrix is heteroge-
neous and contains serum proteins such as albumin as 
well as many locally produced proteins, whose functions 
are incompletely understood. Those proteins include cell 
attachment/signaling proteins such as thrombospondin, 
osteopontin, and fi bronectin; calcium-binding proteins 
such as matrix gla protein and osteocalcin; and proteo-
glycans such as biglycan and decorin. Some of the pro-
teins organize collagen fi brils; others infl uence mineral-
ization and binding of the mineral phase to the matrix. 
 The mineral phase is made up of calcium and phos-
phate and is best characterized as a poorly crystalline 
hydroxyapatite. The mineral phase of bone is deposited 
initially in intimate relation to the collagen fi brils and 
is found in specifi c locations in the “holes” between 
the collagen fi brils. This architectural arrangement of 
mineral and matrix results in a two-phase material well 
suited to withstand mechanical stresses. The organization 
 BONE AND MINERAL METABOLISM IN 
HEALTH AND DISEASE 
 ChaPter 25 
of collagen infl uences the amount and type of mineral 
phase formed in bone. Although the primary structures of 
type I collagen in skin and bone tissues are similar, there 
are differences in posttranslational modifi cations and 
distribution of intermolecular cross-links. The holes in 
the packing structure of the collagen are larger in min-
eralized collagen of bone and dentin than in unminer-
alized collagens such as those in tendon. Single amino 
acid substitutions in the helical portion of either the 
α1 ( COL1A1 ) or α2 ( COL1A2 ) chains of type I col-
lagen disrupt the organization of bone in osteogenesis 
imperfecta. The severe skeletal fragility associated with 
this group of disorders highlights the importance of the 
fi brillar matrix in the structure of bone . 
Osteoblasts synthesize and secrete the organic matrix. 
They are derived from cells of mesenchymal origin 
( Fig. 25-1 A ). Active osteoblasts are found on the sur-
face of newly forming bone. As an osteoblast secretes 
matrix, which then is mineralized, the cell becomes an 
osteocyte , still connected with its blood supply through 
a series of canaliculi. Osteocytes account for the vast 
majority of the cells in bone. They are thought to be 
the mechanosensors in bone that communicate signals 
to surface osteoblasts and their progenitors through the 
canalicular network and thereby serve as master regulators 
of bone formation and resorption. Remarkably, osteo-
cytes also secrete fi broblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), a 
major regulator of phosphate metabolism (see “Causes” 
under “Hypophosphatemia”). Mineralization of the 
matrix, both in trabecular bone and in osteones of com-
pact cortical bone ( Haversian systems ), begins soon after 
the matrix is secreted (primary mineralization) but is not 
completed for several weeks or even longer (second-
ary mineralization). Although this mineralization takes 
advantage of the high concentrations of calcium and 
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
385
phosphate, already near saturation in serum, mineral-
ization is a carefully regulated process that is dependent 
on the activity of osteoblast-derived alkaline phospha-
tase, which probably works by hydrolyzing inhibitors of 
mineralization.
Genetic studies in humans and mice have identified 
several key genes that control osteoblast development. 
Runx2 is a transcription factor expressed specifically 
in chondrocyte (cartilage cells) and osteoblast progeni-
tors as well as in hypertrophic chondrocytes and mature 
osteoblasts. Runx2 regulates the expression of several 
important osteoblast proteins, including osterix (another 
transcription factor needed for osteoblast maturation), 
osteopontin, bone sialoprotein, type I collagen, osteo-
calcin, and receptor-activator of NFκB (RANK) ligand. 
Runx2 expression is regulated in part by bone mor-
phogenic proteins (BMPs). Runx2-deficient mice are 
devoid of osteoblasts, whereas mice with a deletion of 
only one allele (Runx2 +/−) exhibit a delay in forma-
tion of the clavicles and some cranial bones. The latter 
abnormalities are similar to those in the human disorder 
cleidocranial dysplasia, which is also caused by heterozy-
gous inactivating mutations in Runx2.
The paracrine signaling molecule, Indian hedgehog 
(Ihh), also plays a critical role in osteoblast development, 
as evidenced by Ihh-deficient mice that lack osteoblasts 
in bone formed on a cartilage mold (endochondral ossi-
fication). Signals originating from members of the wnt 
(wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integra-
tion site) family of paracrine factors are also important 
for osteoblast proliferation and differentiation. Numerous 
other growth-regulatory factors affect osteoblast func-
tion, including the three closely related transforming 
growth factor βs, fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) 2 
and 18, platelet-derived growth factor, and insulin-like 
growth factors (IGFs) I and II. Hormones such as para-
thyroid hormone (PTH) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 
[1,25(OH)2D] activate receptors expressed by osteoblasts 
to ensure mineral homeostasis and influence a variety of 
bone cell functions.
Mesenchymal
osteoblast
progenitor
Osteoblast
precursor
Collagen (I)
Alkaline phosphatase
Osteocalcin, osteopontin
Bone sialoprotein
c-src+
β3 integrin+
PYK2 kinase+
Cathepsin K+
TRAF+
Carbonic anhydrase II+
Runx2
Hematopoietic
osteoclast
progenitor
M-CSF
BMPs
PTH, Vit D, IGFs,
BMPs, Wnts
Osteoclast
precursor
Active
osteoblast
Mononuclear
osteoclast
Quiescent
osteoclast
Active
osteoclast
PU-1+
c-fos+
NKκB+
TRAF+
Commitment
RANK Ligand
Differentiation
M-CSF
RANK Ligand
IL-1, IL-6
Fusion
RANK Ligand
IL-1
A  
B  
Figure 25-1
Pathways regulating development of (A) osteoblasts and 
(B) osteoclasts. Hormones, cytokines, and growth factors 
that control cell proliferation and differentiation are shown 
above the arrows. Transcription factors and other markers 
specific for various stages of development are depicted 
below the arrows. BMPs, bone morphogenic proteins; IGFs, 
insulin-like growth factors; IL-1, interleukin 1; IL-6, inter-
leukin 6; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; 
NFκB, nuclear factor κB; PTH, parathyroid hormone; PU-1, a 
monocyte- and B lymphocyte–specific ets family transcrip-
tion factor; RANK ligand, receptor activator of NFκB ligand;
Runx2, Runt-related transcription factor 2; TRAF, tumor 
necrosis factor receptor–associated factors; Vit D, vitamin D; 
wnts, wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integration 
site. (Modified from T Suda et al: Endocr Rev 20:345, 1999, 
with permission.)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
386
Resorption of bone is carried out mainly by osteoclasts, 
multinucleated cells that are formed by fusion of cells 
derived from the common precursor of macrophages 
and osteoclasts. Multiple factors that regulate osteoclast 
development have been identified (Fig. 25-1B). Factors 
produced by osteoblasts or marrow stromal cells allow 
osteoblasts to control osteoclast development and activ-
ity. Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) plays 
a critical role during several steps in the pathway and 
ultimately leads to fusion of osteoclast progenitor cells to 
form multinucleated, active osteoclasts. RANK ligand, 
a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family, is 
expressed on the surface of osteoblast progenitors and 
stromal fibroblasts. In a process involving cell-cell inter-
actions, RANK ligand binds to the RANK receptor on 
osteoclast progenitors, stimulating osteoclast differentia-
tion and activation. Alternatively, a soluble decoy receptor, 
referred to as osteoprotegerin, can bind RANK ligand 
and inhibit osteoclast differentiation. Several growth fac-
tors and cytokines (including interleukins 1, 6, and 11; 
TNF; and interferon γ) modulate osteoclast differentiation 
and function. Most hormones that influence osteoclast 
function do not target these cells directly but instead influ-
ence M-CSF and RANK ligand signaling by osteoblasts. 
Both PTH and 1,25(OH)2D increase osteoclast number 
and activity, whereas estrogen decreases osteoclast num-
ber and activity by this indirect mechanism. Calcitonin, in 
contrast, binds to its receptor on the basal surface of osteo-
clasts and directly inhibits osteoclast function.
Osteoclast-mediated resorption of bone takes place in 
scalloped spaces (Howship’s lacunae) where the osteoclasts 
are attached through a specific αvβ3 integrin to com-
ponents of the bone matrix such as osteopontin. The 
osteoclast forms a tight seal to the underlying matrix and 
secretes protons, chloride, and proteinases into a con-
fined space that has been likened to an extracellular lyso-
some. The active osteoclast surface forms a ruffled border 
that contains a specialized proton-pump ATPase, which 
secretes acid and solubilizes the mineral phase. Carbonic 
anhydrase (type II isoenzyme) within the osteoclast gen-
erates the needed protons. The bone matrix is resorbed 
in the acid environment adjacent to the ruffled border by 
proteases that act at low pH such as cathepsin K.
In the embryo and the growing child, bone devel-
ops by remodeling and replacing previously calcified 
cartilage (endochondral bone formation) or is formed 
without a cartilage matrix (intramembranous bone for-
mation). During endochondral bone formation, chon-
drocytes proliferate, secrete and mineralize a matrix, 
enlarge (hypertrophy), and then die, enlarging bone and 
providing the matrix and factors that stimulate endo-
chondral bone formation. This program is regulated by 
both local factors such as IGF-I and -II, Ihh, parathy-
roid hormone–related peptide (PTHrP), and FGFs and 
by systemic hormones such as growth hormone, gluco-
corticoids, and estrogen.
New bone, whether formed in infants or in adults 
during repair, has a relatively high ratio of cells to 
matrix and is characterized by coarse fiber bundles of 
collagen that are interlaced and randomly dispersed 
(woven bone). In adults, the more mature bone is orga-
nized with fiber bundles regularly arranged in paral-
lel or concentric sheets (lamellar bone). In long bones, 
deposition of lamellar bone in a concentric arrange-
ment around blood vessels forms the Haversian systems. 
Growth in length of bones is dependent on prolifera-
tion of cartilage cells and the endochondral sequence 
at the growth plate. Growth in width and thickness is 
accomplished by formation of bone at the periosteal 
surface and by resorption at the endosteal surface, with 
the rate of formation exceeding that of resorption. In 
adults, after the growth plates close, growth in length 
and endochondral bone formation cease except for 
some activity in the cartilage cells beneath the articular 
surface. Even in adults, however, remodeling of bone 
(within Haversian systems as well as along the surfaces 
of trabecular bone) continues throughout life. In adults, 
∼4% of the surface of trabecular bone (such as iliac crest) 
is involved in active resorption, whereas 10–15% of tra-
becular surfaces are covered with osteoid, unmineralized 
new bone formed by osteoblasts. Radioisotope studies 
indicate that as much as 18% of the total skeletal cal-
cium is deposited and removed each year. Thus, bone 
is an active metabolizing tissue that requires an intact 
blood supply. The cycle of bone resorption and forma-
tion is a highly orchestrated process carried out by the 
basic multicellular unit, which is composed of a group 
of osteoclasts and osteoblasts (Fig. 25-2).
The response of bone to fractures, infection, and 
interruption of blood supply and to expanding lesions 
is relatively limited. Dead bone must be resorbed, and 
new bone must be formed, a process carried out in 
association with growth of new blood vessels into the 
involved area. In injuries that disrupt the organization 
of the tissue such as a fracture in which apposition of 
fragments is poor or when motion exists at the fracture 
site, the progenitor stromal cells recapitulate the endo-
chondral bone formation of early development and 
form cartilage that is replaced by bone and, variably, 
fibrous tissue. When there is good apposition with fixa-
tion and little motion at the fracture site, repair occurs 
predominantly by formation of new bone without other 
mediating tissue.
Remodeling of bone occurs along lines of force 
generated by mechanical stress. The signals from these 
mechanical stresses are sensed by osteocytes, which 
transmit signals to osteoclasts and osteoblasts or their 
precursors. One such signal is sclerostin, an inhibitor 
of wnt signaling. Mechanical forces suppress sclerostin 
production and thus increase bone formation by osteo-
blasts. Expanding lesions in bone such as tumors induce 
resorption at the surface in contact with the tumor by 
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
387
producing ligands such as PTHrP that stimulate osteo-
clast differentiation and function. Even in a disorder as 
architecturally disruptive as Paget’s disease, remodeling 
is dictated by mechanical forces. Thus, bone plasticity 
reflects the interaction of cells with each other and with 
the environment.
Measurement of the products of osteoblast and osteo-
clast activity can assist in the diagnosis and management 
of bone diseases. Osteoblast activity can be assessed by 
measuring serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase. 
Similarly, osteocalcin, a protein secreted from osteo-
blasts, is made virtually only by osteoblasts. Osteoclast 
activity can be assessed by measurement of products 
of collagen degradation. Collagen molecules are cova-
lently linked to each other in the extracellular matrix 
through the formation of hydroxypyridinium cross-
links. After digestion by osteoclasts, these cross-linked 
peptides can be measured both in urine and in blood.
Calcium Metabolism
Over 99% of the 1–2 kg of calcium present normally 
in the adult human body resides in the skeleton, where 
it provides mechanical stability and serves as a reservoir 
sometimes needed to maintain extracellular fluid (ECF) 
calcium concentration (Fig. 25-3). Skeletal calcium 
accretion first becomes significant during the third tri-
mester of fetal life, accelerates throughout childhood 
and adolescence, reaches a peak in early adulthood, and 
gradually declines thereafter at rates that rarely exceed 
1–2% per year. These slow changes in total skeletal cal-
cium content contrast with relatively high daily rates of 
~3 weeks
~3 months
Osteoid
Osteoclast
precursor
Osteocyte
Osteoclast
Active osteoclast
Osteoblast
precursors
Bone
remodeling
unit
Osteoblast
Lining cells
Activation
Resorption
Bone formation
Mineralization
Cement
  line
Reversal
Resting
  bone
  surface
Figure 25-2
Schematic representation of bone remodeling. The cycle 
of bone remodeling is carried out by the basic multicellular 
unit (BMU), which consists of a group of osteoclasts and 
osteoblasts. In cortical bone, the BMUs tunnel through the 
tissue, whereas in cancellous bone, they move across the 
trabecular surface. The process of bone remodeling is initi-
ated by contraction of the lining cells and the recruitment of 
osteoclast precursors. These precursors fuse to form multi-
nucleated, active osteoclasts that mediate bone resorption. 
Osteoclasts adhere to bone and subsequently remove 
it by acidification and proteolytic digestion. As the BMU 
advances, osteoclasts leave the resorption site and osteo-
blasts move in to cover the excavated area and begin the 
process of new bone formation by secreting osteoid, which 
eventually is mineralized into new bone. After osteoid min-
eralization, osteoblasts flatten and form a layer of lining cells 
over new bone.
Kidney
Bone
ECF
1–2 g
Intestine
1000–2000 g
0.25–0.5 g
0.25–0.5 g
0.15–0.30 g
0.3–1 g
0.4–1.5 g
8–10 g
7.9–9.7 g
0.25–0.5 g
0.1–0.2 g
closely matched fluxes of calcium into and out of bone 
(∼250–500 mg each), a process mediated by coupled 
osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity. Another 0.5–1% of 
skeletal calcium is freely exchangeable (e.g., in chemical 
equilibrium) with that in the ECF.
Figure 25-3
Calcium homeostasis. Schematic illustration of calcium 
content of extracellular fluid (ECF) and bone as well as of diet 
and feces; magnitude of calcium flux per day as calculated 
by various methods is shown at sites of transport in intes-
tine, kidney, and bone. Ranges of values shown are approxi-
mate and were chosen to illustrate certain points discussed 
in the text. In conditions of calcium balance, rates of calcium 
release from and uptake into bone are equal.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
388
The concentration of ionized calcium in the ECF 
must be maintained within a narrow range because of 
the critical role it plays in a wide array of cellular func-
tions, especially those involved in neuromuscular activity, 
secretion, and signal transduction. Intracellular cytosolic 
free calcium levels are ∼100 nmol/L and are 10,000-fold 
lower than ionized calcium concentration in the blood 
and ECF (1.1–1.3 mmol/L). Cytosolic calcium does not 
play the structural role played by extracellular calcium; 
instead, it serves a signaling function. The steep chemical 
gradient of calcium from outside to inside the cell pro-
motes rapid calcium influx through various membrane 
calcium channels that can be activated by hormones, 
metabolites, or neurotransmitters, swiftly changing cellu-
lar function. In blood, total calcium concentration is nor-
mally 2.2–2.6 mM (8.5–10.5 mg/dL), of which ∼50% is 
ionized. The remainder is bound ionically to negatively 
charged proteins (predominantly albumin and immuno-
globulins) or loosely complexed with phosphate, citrate, 
sulfate, or other anions. Alterations in serum protein 
concentrations directly affect the total blood calcium 
concentration even if the ionized calcium concentra-
tion remains normal. An algorithm to correct for pro-
tein changes adjusts the total serum calcium (in mg/dL) 
upward by 0.8 times the deficit in serum albumin (g/dL) 
or by 0.5 times the deficit in serum immunoglobulin 
(in g/dL). Such corrections provide only rough approxi-
mations of actual free calcium concentrations, however, 
and may be misleading, particularly during acute illness. 
Acidosis also alters ionized calcium by reducing its associ-
ation with proteins. The best practice is to measure blood 
ionized calcium directly by a method that employs calcium- 
selective electrodes in acute settings during which calcium 
abnormalities might occur.
Control of the ionized calcium concentration in the 
ECF ordinarily is accomplished by adjusting the rates of 
calcium movement across intestinal and renal epithelia. 
These adjustments are mediated mainly via changes in 
blood levels of the hormones PTH and 1,25(OH)2D. 
Blood ionized calcium directly suppresses PTH secre-
tion by activating parathyroid calcium-sensing receptors 
(CaSRs). Also, ionized calcium indirectly affects PTH 
secretion via effects on 1,25(OH)2D production. This 
active vitamin D metabolite inhibits PTH production 
by an incompletely understood mechanism of negative 
feedback (Chap. 27).
Normal dietary calcium intake in the United States 
varies widely, ranging from 10 to 37 mmol/d (400–1500 
mg/d). Many individuals, in an effort to prevent osteo-
porosis, routinely supplement this with oral calcium salts 
to a total intake of 37–50 mmol/d (1500–2000 mg/d). 
Intestinal absorption of ingested calcium involves both 
active (transcellular) and passive (paracellular) mecha-
nisms. Passive calcium absorption is nonsaturable and 
approximates 5% of daily calcium intake, whereas active 
absorption involves apical calcium entry via specific 
ion channels (TRPV5 and TRPV6), whose expres-
sion is controlled principally by 1,25(OH)2D, and nor-
mally ranges from 20 to 70%. Active calcium transport 
occurs mainly in the proximal small bowel (duode-
num and proximal jejunum), although some active cal-
cium absorption occurs in most segments of the small 
intestine. Optimal rates of calcium absorption require 
gastric acid. This is especially true for weakly disso-
ciable calcium supplements such as calcium carbonate. 
In fact, large boluses of calcium carbonate are poorly 
absorbed because of their neutralizing effect on gastric 
acid. In achlorhydric subjects and for those taking drugs 
that inhibit gastric acid secretion, supplements should 
be taken with meals to optimize their absorption. Use 
of calcium citrate may be preferable in these circum-
stances. Calcium absorption may also be blunted in dis-
ease states such as pancreatic or biliary insufficiency, in 
which ingested calcium remains bound to unabsorbed 
fatty acids or other food constituents. At high levels of 
calcium intake, synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D is reduced; this 
decreases the rate of active intestinal calcium absorp-
tion. The opposite occurs with dietary calcium restric-
tion. Some calcium, ∼2.5–5 mmol/d (100–200 mg/d), 
is excreted as an obligate component of intestinal secre-
tions and is not regulated by calciotropic hormones.
The feedback-controlled hormonal regulation of 
intestinal absorptive efficiency results in a relatively con-
stant daily net calcium absorption of ∼5–7.5 mmol/d 
(200–400 mg/d) despite large changes in daily dietary 
calcium intake. This daily load of absorbed calcium is 
excreted by the kidneys in a manner that is also tightly 
regulated by the concentration of ionized calcium in 
the blood. Approximately 8–10 g/d of calcium is fil-
tered by the glomeruli, of which only 2–3% appears in the 
urine. Most filtered calcium (65%) is reabsorbed in 
the proximal tubules via a passive, paracellular route that is 
coupled to concomitant NaCl reabsorption and not spe-
cifically regulated. The cortical thick ascending limb 
of Henle’s loop (cTAL) reabsorbs roughly another 20% 
of filtered calcium, also via a paracellular mechanism. 
Calcium reabsorption in the cTAL requires a tight-
junctional protein called paracellin-1 and is inhibited 
by increased blood concentrations of calcium or mag-
nesium, acting via the CaSR, which is highly expressed 
on basolateral membranes in this nephron segment. 
Operation of the renal CaSR provides a mechanism, 
independent of those engaged directly by PTH or 
1,25(OH)2D, by which serum ionized calcium can con-
trol renal calcium reabsorption. Finally, ∼10% of filtered 
calcium is reabsorbed in the distal convoluted tubules 
(DCTs) by a transcellular mechanism. Calcium enters 
the luminal surface of the cell through specific apical 
calcium channels (TRPV5), whose number is regu-
lated. It then moves across the cell in association with 
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
389
a specific calcium-binding protein (calbindin-D28k) 
that buffers cytosolic calcium concentrations from the 
large mass of transported calcium. Ca2+-ATPases and 
Na+/Ca2+ exchangers actively extrude calcium across 
the basolateral surface and thereby maintain the trans-
cellular calcium gradient. All these processes are stimu-
lated directly or indirectly by PTH. The DCT is also 
the site of action of thiazide diuretics, which lower uri-
nary calcium excretion by inducing sodium depletion 
and thereby augmenting proximal calcium reabsorption. 
Conversely, dietary sodium loads, or increased distal 
sodium delivery caused by loop diuretics or saline infu-
sion, induce calciuresis.
The homeostatic mechanisms that normally maintain 
a constant serum ionized calcium concentration may fail 
at extremes of calcium intake or when the hormonal sys-
tems or organs involved are compromised. Thus, even 
with maximal activity of the vitamin D–dependent intes-
tinal active transport system, sustained calcium intakes 
<5 mmol/d (<200 mg/d) cannot provide enough net 
calcium absorption to replace obligate losses via the 
intestine, the kidney, sweat, and other secretions. In this 
case, increased blood levels of PTH and 1,25(OH)2D 
activate osteoclastic bone resorption to obtain needed 
calcium from bone, which leads to progressive bone 
loss and negative calcium balance. Increased PTH and 
1,25(OH)2D also enhance renal calcium reabsorption, 
and 1,25(OH)2D enhances calcium absorption in the gut. 
At very high calcium intakes [>100 mmol/d (>4 g/d)], 
passive intestinal absorption continues to deliver calcium 
into the ECF despite maximally downregulated intestinal 
active transport and renal tubular calcium reabsorption. 
This can cause severe hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, 
progressive renal failure, and hypercalcemia (e.g., “milk-
alkali syndrome”). Deficiency or excess of PTH or 
vitamin D, intestinal disease, and renal failure represent 
other commonly encountered challenges to normal cal-
cium homeostasis (Chap. 27).
Phosphorus Metabolism
Although 85% of the ∼600 g of body phosphorus is 
present in bone mineral, phosphorus is also a major 
intracellular constituent both as the free anion(s) and 
as a component of numerous organophosphate com-
pounds, including structural proteins, enzymes, tran-
scription factors, carbohydrate and lipid intermediates, 
high-energy stores [ATP (adenosine triphosphate), cre-
atine phosphate], and nucleic acids. Unlike calcium, 
phosphorus exists intracellularly at concentrations close 
to those present in ECF (e.g., 1–2 mmol/L). In cells 
and in the ECF, phosphorus exists in several forms, pre-
dominantly as H2PO4
− or NaHPO4
−, with perhaps 10% 
as HPO4
2−. This mixture of anions will be referred to 
here as “phosphate.” In serum, about 12% of phospho-
rus is bound to proteins. Concentrations of phosphates 
in blood and ECF generally are expressed in terms of 
elemental phosphorus, with the normal range in adults 
being 0.75–1.45 mmol/L (2.5–4.5 mg/dL). Because the 
volume of the intracellular fluid compartment is twice 
that of the ECF, measurements of ECF phosphate may 
not accurately reflect phosphate availability within cells 
that follows even modest shifts of phosphate from one 
compartment to the other.
Phosphate is widely available in foods and is absorbed 
efficiently (65%) by the small intestine even in the 
absence of vitamin D. However, phosphate absorptive 
efficiency may be enhanced (to 85–90%) via active trans-
port mechanisms that are stimulated by 1,25(OH)2D. 
These mechanisms involve activation of Na+/PO4
2− 
co-transporters that move phosphate into intestinal 
cells against an unfavorable electrochemical gradient. 
Daily net intestinal phosphate absorption varies widely 
with the composition of the diet but is generally in the 
range of 500–1000 mg/d. Phosphate absorption can be 
inhibited by large doses of calcium salts or by sevelamer 
hydrochloride (Renagel), strategies commonly used to 
control levels of serum phosphate in renal failure. Alumi-
num hydroxide antacids also reduce phosphate absorp-
tion but are used less commonly because of the potential 
for aluminum toxicity. Low serum phosphate stimulates 
renal proximal tubular synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D, perhaps 
by suppressing blood levels of FGF23 (see below).
Serum phosphate levels vary by as much as 50% on 
a normal day. This reflects the effect of food intake but 
also an underlying circadian rhythm that produces a nadir 
between 7 and 10 a.m. Carbohydrate administration, 
especially as IV dextrose solutions in fasting subjects, can 
decrease serum phosphate by >0.7 mmol/L (2 mg/dL) 
due to rapid uptake into and utilization by cells. A simi-
lar response is observed in the treatment of diabetic keto-
acidosis and during metabolic or respiratory alkalosis. 
Because of this wide variation in serum phosphate, it is 
best to perform measurements in the basal, fasting state.
Control of serum phosphate is determined mainly 
by the rate of renal tubular reabsorption of the fil-
tered load, which is ∼4–6 g/d. Because intestinal phos-
phate absorption is highly efficient, urinary excretion 
is not constant but varies directly with dietary intake. 
The fractional excretion of phosphate (ratio of phos-
phate to creatinine clearance) is generally in the range 
of 10–15%. The proximal tubule is the principal site at 
which renal phosphate reabsorption is regulated. This is 
accomplished by changes in the levels of apical expres-
sion and activity of specific Na+/PO4
2− co-transporters 
(NaPi-2 and NaPi-2c) in the proximal tubule. Levels of 
these transporters at the apical surface of these cells are 
reduced rapidly by PTH, the major known hormonal 
regulator of renal phosphate excretion. FGF23 can 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
390
impair phosphate reabsorption dramatically by a similar 
mechnism. Activating FGF23 mutations cause the rare 
disorder autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rick-
ets. In contrast to PTH, FGF23 also leads to reduced 
synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D, which may worsen the result-
ing hypophosphatemia by lowering intestinal phosphate 
absorption. Renal reabsorption of phosphate is respon-
sive to changes in dietary intake such that experimental 
dietary phosphate restriction leads to a dramatic lower-
ing of urinary phosphate within hours, preceding any 
decline in serum phosphate (e.g., filtered load). This 
physiologic renal adaptation to changes in dietary phos-
phate availability occurs independently of PTH and 
may be mediated in part by changes in levels of serum 
FGF23. Findings in FGF23-knockout mice suggest that 
FGF23 normally acts to lower blood phosphate and 
1,25(OH)2D levels. In turn, elevation of blood phos-
phate increases blood levels of FGF23.
Renal phosphate reabsorption is impaired by hypo-
calcemia, hypomagnesemia, and severe hypophosphate-
mia. Phosphate clearance is enhanced by ECF volume 
expansion and impaired by dehydration. Phosphate 
retention is an important pathophysiologic feature of 
renal insufficiency.
Hypophosphatemia
Causes
Hypophosphatemia can occur by one or more of three 
primary mechanisms: (1) inadequate intestinal phos-
phate absorption, (2) excessive renal phosphate excre-
tion, and (3) rapid redistribution of phosphate from the 
ECF into bone or soft tissue (Table 25-1). Because 
phosphate is so abundant in foods, inadequate intestinal 
absorption is almost never observed now that alumi-
num hydroxide antacids, which bind phosphate in the 
gut, are no longer used commonly. Fasting or starva-
tion, however, may result in depletion of body phos-
phate and predispose to subsequent hypophosphatemia 
during refeeding, especially if this is accomplished with 
IV glucose alone.
Chronic hypophosphatemia usually signifies a persis-
tent renal tubular phosphate-wasting disorder. Excessive 
activation of PTH/PTHrP receptors in the proximal 
tubule as a result of primary or secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism or because of the PTHrP-mediated hyper-
calcemia syndrome in malignancy (Chap. 27) is among 
the more common causes of renal hypophosphatemia, 
especially because of the high prevalence of vitamin D 
Table 25-1
Causes of Hypophosphatemia
I.	Reduced renal tubular phosphate reabsorption
	 A.	PTH/PTHrP dependent
	 	
1.	 Primary hyperparathyroidism
	 	
2.	 Secondary hyperparathyroidism
	 	
	
a.	 Vitamin D deficiency/resistance
	 	
	
b.	 Calcium starvation/malabsorption
	 	
	
c.	 Bartter’s syndrome
	 	
	
d.	 Autosomal recessive renal hypercalciuria with hypo-
magnesemia
	 	
3.	 PTHrP-dependent hypercalcemia of malignancy
	 	
4.	 Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
	 B.	PTH/PTHrP independent
	 	
1.	 Excess FGF23 or other “phosphatonins”
	 	
	
a.	 X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLHR)
	 	
	
b.	 Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHP)
	 	
	
c.	 Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets 
(ADHR)
	 	
	
d.	 Tumor-induced osteomalacia syndrome (TIO)
	 	
	
e.	 McCune-Albright syndrome (fibrous dysplasia)
	 	
	
f.	 Epidermal nevus syndrome
	 	
2.	 Intrinsic renal disease
	 	
	
a.	 Fanconi’s syndrome(s)
	 	
	
b.	 Cystinosis
	 	
	
c.	 Wilson’s disease
	 	
	
d.	 NaPi-2a or NaPi-2c mutations
	 	
3.	 Other systemic disorders
	 	
	
a.	 Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus
	 	
	
b.	 Alcoholism
	 	
	
c.	 Hyperaldosteronism
	 	
	
d.	 Hypomagnesemia
	 	
	
e.	 Amyloidosis
	 	
	
f.	 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
	 	
	
g.	 Renal transplantation or partial liver resection
	 	
	
h.	 Rewarming or induced hyperthermia
	 	
4.	 Drugs or toxins
	 	
	
a.	 Ethanol
	 	
	
b.	 Acetazolamide, other diuretics
	 	
	
c.	 High-dose estrogens or glucocorticoids
	 	
	
d.	 Heavy metals (lead, cadmium)
	 	
	
e.	 Toluene, N-methyl formamide
	 	
	
f.	 Cisplatin, ifosfamide, foscarnet, rapamycin
	 II.	 Impaired intestinal phosphate absorption
	 	
A.	Aluminum-containing antacids
	 	
B.	Sevalamer
	 III.	Shifts of extracellular phosphate into cells
	 	
A.	Intravenous glucose
	 	
B.	Insulin therapy for prolonged hyperglycemia or dia-
betic ketoacidosis
	 	
C.	Catecholamines (epinephrine, dopamine, albuterol)
	 	
D.	Acute respiratory alkalosis
	 	
E.	 Gram-negative sepsis, toxic shock syndrome
	 	
F.	 Recovery from starvation or acidosis
	 	
G.	Rapid cellular proliferation
	 	
	
1.	Leukemic blast crisis
	 	
	
2.	Intensive erythropoietin, other growth factor 
therapy
	 IV.	Accelerated net bone formation
	 	
A.	After parathyroidectomy
	 	
B.	Treatment of vitamin D deficiency, Paget’s disease
	 	
C.	Osteoblastic metastases
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
391
deficiency in older Americans. Familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcemia and Jansen’s chondrodystrophy are rare 
examples of genetic disorders in this category (Chap. 27).
Several genetic and acquired diseases cause PTH/
PTHrP-independent tubular phosphate wasting with asso-
ciated rickets and osteomalacia. All these diseases manifest 
severe hypophosphatemia; renal phosphate wasting, some-
times accompanied by aminoaciduria; low blood levels 
of 1,25(OH)2D; low-normal serum levels of calcium; 
and evidence of impaired cartilage or bone mineraliza-
tion. Analysis of these diseases has led to the discovery of 
the hormone FGF23, which is an important physiologic 
regulator of phosphate metabolism. FGF23 decreases 
phosphate reabsorption in the proximal tubule and also 
suppresses the 1α-hydroxylase responsible for synthesis of 
1,25(OH)2D. FGF23 is synthesized by cells of the osteo-
blast lineage, primarily osteocytes. High-phosphate diets 
increase FGF23 levels, and low-phosphate diets decrease 
them. Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets 
(ADHR) was the first disease linked to abnormalities in 
FGF23. ADHR results from activating mutations in the 
gene that encodes FGF23. The most common inherited 
cause of hypophosphatemia is X-linked hypophospha-
temic rickets (XLHR), which results from inactivating 
mutations in an endopeptidase termed PHEX (phosphate- 
regulating gene with homologies to endopeptidases on 
the X chromosome) that is expressed most abundantly on 
the surface of osteocytes and mature osteoblasts. Patients 
with XLH usually have high FGF23 levels, and abla-
tion of the FGF23 gene reverses the hypophosphatemia 
found in the mouse version of XLH. How inactivation 
of PHEX leads to increased levels of FGF23 has not been 
determined. A third hypophosphatemic disorder, tumor-
induced osteomalacia (TIO), is an acquired disorder in 
which tumors, usually of mesenchymal origin and gen-
erally histologically benign, secrete molecules that induce 
renal phosphate wasting. The hypophosphatemic syn-
drome resolves completely within hours to days after suc-
cessful resection of the responsible tumor. Such tumors 
express large amounts of FGF23 mRNA, and patients 
with TIO usually exhibit elevations of FGF23 in their 
blood.
Dent’s disease is an X-linked recessive disorder 
caused by inactivating mutations in CLCN5, a chlo-
ride transporter expressed in endosomes of the proximal 
tubule; features include hypercalciuria, hypophospha-
temia, and recurrent kidney stones. Renal phosphate 
wasting is common among poorly controlled diabetic 
patients and alcoholics, who therefore are at risk for iat-
rogenic hypophosphatemia when treated with insulin 
or IV glucose, respectively. Diuretics and certain other 
drugs and toxins can cause defective renal tubular phos-
phate reabsorption (Table 25-1).
In hospitalized patients, hypophosphatemia is often 
attributable to massive redistribution of phosphate 
from the ECF into cells. Insulin therapy for diabetic 
ketoacidosis is a paradigm for this phenomenon, in 
which the severity of the hypophosphatemia is related 
to the extent of antecedent depletion of phosphate and 
other electrolytes (Chap. 19). The hypophosphatemia 
is usually greatest at a point many hours after initiation 
of insulin therapy and is difficult to predict from baseline 
measurements of serum phosphate at the time of presen-
tation, when prerenal azotemia can obscure significant 
phosphate depletion. Other factors that may contribute 
to such acute redistributive hypophosphatemia include 
antecedent starvation or malnutrition, administration of 
IV glucose without other nutrients, elevated blood cat-
echolamines (endogenous or exogenous), respiratory 
alkalosis, and recovery from metabolic acidosis.
Hypophosphatemia also can occur transiently (over 
weeks to months) during the phase of accelerated net 
bone formation that follows parathyroidectomy for 
severe primary hyperparathyroidism or during treatment 
of vitamin D deficiency or lytic Paget’s disease. This is 
usually most prominent in patients who preoperatively 
have evidence of high bone turnover (e.g., high serum 
levels of alkaline phosphatase). Osteoblastic metastases 
can also lead to this syndrome.
Clinical and laboratory findings
The clinical manifestations of severe hypophosphatemia 
reflect a generalized defect in cellular energy metabo-
lism because of ATP depletion, a shift from oxidative 
phosphorylation toward glycolysis, and associated tissue 
or organ dysfunction. Acute, severe hypophosphatemia 
occurs mainly or exclusively in hospitalized patients with 
underlying serious medical or surgical illness and preex-
isting phosphate depletion due to excessive urinary losses, 
severe malabsorption, or malnutrition. Chronic hypo-
phosphatemia tends to be less severe, with a clinical pre-
sentation dominated by musculoskeletal complaints such 
as bone pain, osteomalacia, pseudofractures, and proximal 
muscle weakness or, in children, rickets and short stature.
Neuromuscular manifestations of severe hypophos-
phatemia are variable but may include muscle weakness, 
lethargy, confusion, disorientation, hallucinations, dysar-
thria, dysphagia, oculomotor palsies, anisocoria, nystag-
mus, ataxia, cerebellar tremor, ballismus, hyporeflexia, 
impaired sphincter control, distal sensory deficits, pares-
thesia, hyperesthesia, generalized or Guillain-Barré–like 
ascending paralysis, seizures, coma, and even death. Seri-
ous sequelae such as paralysis, confusion, and seizures are 
likely only at phosphate concentrations <0.25 mmol/L 
(<0.8 mg/dL). Rhabdomyolysis may develop during 
rapidly progressive hypophosphatemia. The diagnosis 
of hypophosphatemia-induced rhabdomyolysis may be 
overlooked, as up to 30% of patients with acute hypo-
phosphatemia (<0.7 mM) have creatine phosphokinase 
elevations that peak one to two days after the nadir in 
serum phosphate, when the release of phosphate from 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
392
injured myocytes may have led to a near normalization 
of circulating levels of phosphate.
Respiratory failure and cardiac dysfunction, which are 
reversible with phosphate treatment, may occur at serum 
phosphate levels of 0.5–0.8 mmol/L (1.5–2.5 mg/dL). 
Renal tubular defects, including tubular acidosis, glycos-
uria, and impaired reabsorption of sodium and calcium, 
may occur. Hematologic abnormalities correlate with 
reductions in intracellular ATP and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate 
and may include erythrocyte microspherocytosis and 
hemolysis; impaired oxyhemoglobin dissociation; defec-
tive leukocyte chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and bacterial 
killing; and platelet dysfunction with spontaneous gas-
trointestinal hemorrhage.
Treatment	
Hypophosphatemia
Severe hypophosphatemia [<0.75 mmol/L (<2 mg/dL)], 
particularly in the setting of underlying phosphate 
depletion, constitutes a dangerous electrolyte abnor-
mality that should be corrected promptly. Unfortunately, 
the cumulative deficit in body phosphate cannot be 
predicted easily from knowledge of the circulating level 
of phosphate, and therapy must be approached empiri-
cally. The threshold for IV phosphate therapy and the 
dose administered should reflect consideration of renal 
function, the likely severity and duration of the underly-
ing phosphate depletion, and the presence and severity 
of symptoms consistent with those of hypophospha-
temia. In adults, phosphate may be safely administered 
IV as neutral mixtures of sodium and potassium phos-
phate salts at initial doses of 0.2–0.8 mmol/kg of ele-
mental phosphorus over 6 hours (e.g., 10–50 mmol 
over 6 hours), with doses >20 mmol/6 hours reserved
Table 25-2
Intravenous Therapy for Hypophosphatemia
Consider
Likely severity of underlying phosphate depletion
Concurrent parenteral glucose administration
Presence of neuromuscular, cardiopulmonary, or hematologic complications of hypophosphatemia
Renal function [reduce dose by 50% if serum creatinine >220 μmol/L (>2.5 mg/dL)]
Serum calcium level (correct hypocalcemia first; reduce dose by 50% in hypercalcemia)
Guidelines
Serum Phosphorus,  
mM (mg/dL)
Rate of Infusion,  
mmol/h
Duration,  
h
Total Administered,  
mmol
<0.8 (<2.5)
              2
         6
                 12
<0.5 (<1.5)
              4
         6
                 24
<0.3 (<1)
              8
         6
                 48
Note: Rates shown are calculated for a 70-kg person; levels of serum calcium and phosphorus must be measured every 6 to 12 h during therapy; 
infusions can be repeated to achieve stable serum phosphorus levels >0.8 mmol/L (>2.5 mg/dL); most formulations available in the United 
States provide 3 mmol/mL of sodium or potassium phosphate.
for those who have serum levels <0.5 mmol/L (1.5 mg/
dL) and normal renal function. A suggested approach 
is presented in Table 25-2. Serum levels of phosphate 
and calcium must be monitored closely (every 6–12 
hours) throughout treatment. It is necessary to avoid a 
serum calcium-phosphorus product >50 to reduce the 
risk of heterotopic calcification. Hypocalcemia, if pres-
ent, should be corrected before administering IV phos-
phate. Less severe hypophosphatemia, in the range of 
0.5–0.8 mmol/L (1.5–2.5 mg/dL), usually can be treated 
with oral phosphate in divided doses of 750–2000 mg/d 
as elemental phosphorus; higher doses can cause bloat-
ing and diarrhea.
Management of chronic hypophosphatemia requires 
knowledge of the cause(s) of the disorder. Hypophos-
phatemia related to the secondary hyperparathyroidism 
of vitamin D deficiency usually responds to treatment 
with vitamin D and calcium alone. XLHR, ADHR, TIO, 
and related renal tubular disorders usually are managed 
with divided oral doses of phosphate, often with cal-
cium and 1,25(OH)2D supplements to bypass the block 
in renal 1,25(OH)2D synthesis and prevent secondary 
hyperparathyroidism caused by suppression of ECF cal-
cium levels. Thiazide diuretics may be used to prevent 
nephrocalcinosis in patients who are managed this way. 
Complete normalization of hypophosphatemia is gen-
erally not possible in these conditions. Optimal therapy 
for TIO is extirpation of the responsible tumor, which 
may be localized by radiographic skeletal survey or 
bone scan (many are located in bone) or by radionuclide 
scanning using sestamibi or labeled octreotide. 
Successful treatment of TIO-induced hypophosphate-
mia with octreotide has been reported in a small num-
ber of patients.
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
393
Hyperphosphatemia
Causes
When the filtered load of phosphate and glomerular fil-
tration rate (GFR) are normal, control of serum phos-
phate levels is achieved by adjusting the rate at which 
phosphate is reabsorbed by the proximal tubular NaPi-2 
co-transporters. The principal hormonal regulators of 
NaPi-2 activity are PTH and FGF23. Hyperphosphate-
mia, defined in adults as a fasting serum phosphate con-
centration >1.8 mmol/L (5.5 mg/dL), usually results 
from impaired glomerular filtration, hypoparathyroidism, 
excessive delivery of phosphate into the ECF (from bone, 
gut, or parenteral phosphate therapy), or a combination 
of these factors (Table 25-3). The upper limit of normal 
serum phosphate concentrations is higher in children and 
neonates [2.4 mmol/L (7 mg/dL)]. It is useful to distin-
guish hyperphosphatemia caused by impaired renal phos-
phate excretion from that which results from excessive 
delivery of phosphate into the ECF (Table 25-3).
In chronic renal insufficiency, reduced GFR leads to 
phosphate retention. Hyperphosphatemia in turn further 
impairs renal synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D and stimulates 
PTH secretion and hypertrophy both directly and indi-
rectly (by lowering blood ionized calcium levels). Thus, 
hyperphosphatemia is a major cause of the second-
ary hyperparathyroidism of renal failure and must be 
addressed early in the course of the disease (Chap. 27). 
Hypoparathyroidism leads to hyperphosphatemia via 
increased expression of NaPi-2 co-transporters in the prox-
imal tubule. Hypoparathyroidism, or parathyroid suppres-
sion, has multiple potential causes, including autoimmune 
disease; developmental, surgical, or radiation-induced 
absence of functional parathyroid tissue; vitamin D 
intoxication or other causes of PTH-independent hyper-
calcemia; cellular PTH resistance (pseudohypoparathy-
roidism or hypomagnesemia); infiltrative disorders such 
as Wilson’s disease and hemochromatosis; and impaired 
PTH secretion caused by hypermagnesemia, severe 
hypomagnesemia, or activating mutations in the CaSR. 
Hypocalcemia may also contribute directly to impaired 
phosphate clearance, as calcium infusion can induce 
hyperphosphaturia in hypoparathyroid subjects. Increased 
tubular phosphate reabsorption also occurs in acro-
megaly, during heparin administration, and in tumoral 
calcinosis. Tumoral calcinosis is caused by a rare group 
of genetic disorders in which the FGF23 gene is inac-
tivated directly or FGF23 is processed in a way that 
leads to low levels of active FGF23 in the bloodstream. 
A similar syndrome results from FGF23 resistance due to 
inactivating mutations of the FGF23 co-receptor Klotho. 
These abnormalities cause elevated serum 1,25(OH)2D, 
parathyroid suppression, increased intestinal calcium 
absorption, and focal hyperostosis with large, lobu-
lated periarticular heterotopic ossifications (especially at 
shoulders or hips) and are accompanied by hyperphos-
phatemia. In some forms of tumoral calcinosis serum 
phosphorus levels are normal.
When large amounts of phosphate are delivered rap-
idly into the ECF, hyperphosphatemia can occur despite 
normal renal function. Examples include overzealous IV 
phosphate therapy, oral or rectal administration of large 
amounts of phosphate-containing laxatives or enemas 
(especially in children), extensive soft tissue injury or 
necrosis (crush injuries, rhabdomyolysis, hyperthermia, 
fulminant hepatitis, cytotoxic chemotherapy), exten-
sive hemolytic anemia, and transcellular phosphate shifts 
induced by severe metabolic or respiratory acidosis.
Clinical Findings
The clinical consequences of acute, severe hyperphos-
phatemia are due mainly to the formation of widespread 
calcium phosphate precipitates and resulting hypocal-
cemia. Thus, tetany, seizures, accelerated nephrocalci-
nosis (with renal failure, hyperkalemia, hyperuricemia, 
and metabolic acidosis), and pulmonary or cardiac cal-
cifications (including development of acute heart block) 
may occur. The severity of these complications relates 
Table 25-3
Causes of Hyperphosphatemia
I.	 Impaired renal phosphate excretion
	
A.	Renal insufficiency
	
B.	Hypoparathyroidism
	
	
1.	Developmental
	
	
2.	Autoimmune
	
	
3.	After neck surgery or radiation
	
	
4.	Activating mutations of the calcium-sensing 
receptor
	
C.	Parathyroid suppression
	
	
1.	Parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia
	
	
	
a.	Vitamin D or vitamin A intoxication
	
	
	
b.	Sarcoidosis, other granulomatous diseases
	
	
	
c.	Immobilization, osteolytic metastases
	
	
	
d.	Milk-alkali syndrome
	
	
2.	Severe hypermagnesemia or hypomagnesemia
	
D.	Pseudohypoparathyroidism
	
E.	Acromegaly
	
F.	 Tumoral calcinosis
	
G.	Heparin therapy
II.	 Massive extracellular fluid phosphate loads
	
A.	Rapid administration of exogenous phosphate 
(intravenous, oral, rectal)
	
B.	Extensive cellular injury or necrosis
	
	
1.	Crush injuries
	
	
2.	Rhabdomyolysis
	
	
3.	Hyperthermia
	
	
4.	Fulminant hepatitis
	
	
5.	Cytotoxic therapy
	
	
6.	Severe hemolytic anemia
	
C.	Transcellular phosphate shifts
	
	
1.	Metabolic acidosis
	
	
2.	Respiratory acidosis
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
394
to the elevation of serum phosphate levels, which can 
reach concentrations as high as 7 mmol/L (20 mg/dL) 
in instances of massive soft tissue injury or tumor lysis 
syndrome.
Treatment	
Hyperphosphatemia
Therapeutic options for management of severe hyper-
phosphatemia are limited. Volume expansion may enhance 
renal phosphate clearance. Aluminum hydroxide antac-
ids or sevalamer may be helpful in chelating and limiting 
absorption of offending phosphate salts present in the 
intestine. Hemodialysis is the most effective therapeutic 
strategy and should be considered early in the course of 
severe hyperphosphatemia, especially in the setting 
of renal failure and symptomatic hypocalcemia.
Magnesium Metabolism
Magnesium is the major intracellular divalent cation. 
Normal concentrations of extracellular magnesium and 
calcium are crucial for normal neuromuscular activ-
ity. Intracellular magnesium forms a key complex with 
ATP and is an important cofactor for a wide range of 
enzymes, transporters, and nucleic acids required for 
normal cellular function, replication, and energy metab-
olism. The concentration of magnesium in serum is 
closely regulated within the range of 0.7–1 mmol/L 
(1.5–2 meq/L; 1.7–2.4 mg/dL), of which 30% is pro-
tein bound and another 15% is loosely complexed to 
phosphate and other anions. One-half of the 25 g (1000 
mmol) of total body magnesium is located in bone, only 
one-half of which is insoluble in the mineral phase. 
Almost all extraskeletal magnesium is present within 
cells, where the total concentration is 5 mM, 95% of 
which is bound to proteins and other macromolecules. 
Because only 1% of body magnesium resides in the ECF, 
measurements of serum magnesium levels may not accu-
rately reflect the level of total body magnesium stores.
Dietary magnesium content normally ranges from 
6 to 15 mmol/d (140–360 mg/d), of which 30–40% 
is absorbed, mainly in the jejunum and ileum. Intes-
tinal magnesium absorptive efficiency is stimulated by 
1,25(OH)2D and can reach 70% during magnesium depri-
vation. Urinary magnesium excretion normally matches 
net intestinal absorption and is ∼4 mmol/d (100 mg/d). 
Regulation of serum magnesium concentrations is 
achieved mainly by control of renal magnesium reab-
sorption. Only 20% of filtered magnesium is reabsorbed 
in the proximal tubule, whereas 60% is reclaimed in 
the cTAL and another 5–10% in the DCT. Magnesium 
reabsorption in the cTAL occurs via a paracellular route 
that requires both a lumen-positive potential, created by 
NaCl reabsorption, and tight-junction proteins encoded 
by members of the Claudin gene family. Magnesium 
reabsorption in the cTAL is increased by PTH but 
inhibited by hypercalcemia or hypermagnesemia, both 
of which activate the CaSR in this nephron segment.
Hypomagnesemia
Causes
Hypomagnesemia usually signifies substantial deple-
tion of body magnesium stores (0.5–1 mmol/kg). 
Hypomagnesemia can result from intestinal malabsorp-
tion; protracted vomiting, diarrhea, or intestinal drain-
age; defective renal tubular magnesium reabsorption; 
or rapid shifts of magnesium from the ECF into cells, 
bone, or third spaces (Table 25-4). Dietary magne-
sium deficiency is unlikely except possibly in the set-
ting of alcoholism. A rare genetic disorder that causes 
selective intestinal magnesium malabsorption has been 
described (primary infantile hypomagnesemia). Another 
rare inherited disorder (hypomagnesemia with second-
ary hypocalcemia) is caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding TRPM6, a protein that, along with TRPM7, 
forms a channel important for both intestinal and distal-
tubular renal magnesium transport. Malabsorptive states, 
often compounded by vitamin D deficiency, can criti-
cally limit magnesium absorption and produce hypomag-
nesemia despite the compensatory effects of secondary 
hyperparathyroidism and of hypocalcemia and hypomag-
nesemia to enhance cTAL magnesium reabsorption. Diar-
rhea or surgical drainage fluid may contain ≥5 mmol/L of 
magnesium.
Several genetic magnesium-wasting syndromes have 
been described, including inactivating mutations of genes 
encoding the DCT NaCl co-transporter (Gitelman’s syn-
drome), proteins required for cTAL Na-K-2Cl transport 
(Bartter’s syndrome), paracellin-1 (autosomal recessive 
renal hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria), a DCT 
Na+,K+-ATPase γ-subunit (autosomal dominant renal 
hypomagnesemia with hypocalciuria), and a mitochon-
drial DNA gene encoding a mitochondrial tRNA. ECF 
expansion, hypercalcemia, and severe phosphate deple-
tion may impair magnesium reabsorption, as can various 
forms of renal injury, including those caused by drugs 
such as cisplatin, cyclosporine, aminoglycosides, and 
pentamidine as well as the EGF receptor inhibitory anti-
body cetuximab (Table 25-4). A rising blood concentration 
of ethanol directly impairs tubular magnesium reabsorp-
tion, and persistent glycosuria with osmotic diuresis 
leads to magnesium wasting and probably contributes to 
the high frequency of hypomagnesemia in poorly con-
trolled diabetic patients. Magnesium depletion is aggra-
vated by metabolic acidosis, which causes intracellular losses 
as well.
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
395
Table 25-4
Causes of Hypomagnesemia
	 I.	 Impaired intestinal absorption
	
A.	Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia  
(TRPM6 mutations)
	
B.	Malabsorption syndromes
	
C.	Vitamin D deficiency
	II.	 Increased intestinal losses
	
A.	Protracted vomiting/diarrhea
	
B.	Intestinal drainage, fistulas
	III.	 Impaired renal tubular reabsorption
	
A.	Genetic magnesium-wasting syndromes
	
	
1.	Gitelman’s syndrome
	
	
2.	Bartter’s syndrome
	
	
3.	Claudin 16 or 19 mutations
	
	
4.	Na+,K+-ATPase γ-subunit mutations 
(FXYD2)
	
	
5.	Autosomal dominant, with low bone mass
	
B.	Acquired renal disease
	
	
1.	Tubulointerstitial disease
	
	
2.	Postobstruction, ATN (diuretic phase)
	
	
3.	Renal transplantation
	
C.	Drugs and toxins
	
	
1.	Ethanol
	
	
2.	Diuretics (loop, thiazide, osmotic)
	
	
3.	Cisplatin
	
	
4.	Pentamidine, foscarnet
	
	
5.	Cyclosporine
	
	
6.	Aminoglycosides, amphotericin B
	
	
7.	Cetuximab
	
D.	Other
	
	
1.	Extracellular fluid volume expansion
	
	
2.	Hyperaldosteronism
	
	
3.	SIADH
	
	
4.	Diabetes mellitus
	
	
5.	Hypercalcemia
	
	
6.	Phosphate depletion
	
	
7.	Metabolic acidosis
	
	
8.	Hyperthyroidism
	IV.	 Rapid shifts from extracellular fluid
	
A.	Intracellular redistribution
	
	
1.	Recovery from diabetic ketoacidosis
	
	
2.	Refeeding syndrome
	
	
3.	Correction of respiratory acidosis
	
	
4.	Catecholamines
	
B.	Accelerated bone formation
	
	
1.	Post-parathyroidectomy
	
	
2.	Treatment of vitamin D deficiency
	
	
3.	Osteoblastic metastases
	
C.	Other
	
	
1.	Pancreatitis, burns, excessive sweating
	
	
2.	Pregnancy (third trimester) and lactation
Abbreviations: ATN, acute tubular necrosis; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone.
Hypomagnesemia due to rapid shifts of magnesium 
from ECF into the intracellular compartment can occur 
during recovery from diabetic ketoacidosis, starvation, 
or respiratory acidosis. Less acute shifts may be seen dur-
ing rapid bone formation after parathyroidectomy, with 
treatment of vitamin D deficiency, or with osteoblastic 
metastases. Large amounts of magnesium may be lost 
with acute pancreatitis, extensive burns, and protracted 
and severe sweating and during pregnancy and lactation.
Clinical and laboratory findings
Hypomagnesemia may cause generalized alterations in 
neuromuscular function, including tetany, tremor, sei-
zures, muscle weakness, ataxia, nystagmus, vertigo, apathy, 
depression, irritability, delirium, and psychosis. Patients 
are usually asymptomatic when serum magnesium con-
centrations are >0.5 mmol/L (1 meq/L; 1.2 mg/dL), 
although the severity of symptoms may not correlate with 
serum magnesium levels. Cardiac arrhythmias may occur, 
including sinus tachycardia, other supraventricular tachy-
cardias, and ventricular arrhythmias. Electrocardiographic 
abnormalities may include prolonged PR or QT inter-
vals, T-wave flattening or inversion, and ST straightening. 
Sensitivity to digitalis toxicity may be enhanced.
Other electrolyte abnormalities often seen with hypo-
magnesemia, including hypocalcemia (with hypocalciuria) 
and hypokalemia, may not be easily corrected unless 
magnesium is administered as well. The hypocalcemia 
may be a result of concurrent vitamin D deficiency, 
although hypomagnesemia can cause impaired synthesis 
of 1,25(OH)2D, cellular resistance to PTH, and, at very 
low serum magnesium [<0.4 mmol/L (<0.8 meq/L; 
<1 mg/dL)], a defect in PTH secretion; these abnormal-
ities are reversible with therapy.
Treatment	
Hypomagnesemia
Mild, asymptomatic hypomagnesemia may be treated 
with oral magnesium salts [MgCl2, MgO, Mg(OH)2] in 
divided doses totaling 20–30 mmol/d (40–60 meq/d). 
Diarrhea may occur with larger doses. More severe 
hypomagnesemia should be treated parenterally, 
preferably with IV MgCl2, which can be administered 
safely as a continuous infusion of 50 mmol/d (100 meq 
Mg2+/d) if renal function is normal. If GFR is reduced, 
the infusion rate should be lowered by 50–75%. Use of 
IM MgSO4 is discouraged; the injections are painful and 
provide relatively little magnesium (2 mL of 50% MgSO4 
supplies only 4 mmol). MgSO4 may be given IV instead 
of MgCl2, although the sulfate anions may bind cal-
cium in serum and urine and aggravate hypocalcemia. 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
396
Serum magnesium should be monitored at intervals of 
12–24 hours during therapy, which may continue for sev-
eral days because of impaired renal conservation of mag-
nesium (only 50–70% of the daily IV magnesium dose is 
retained) and delayed repletion of intracellular deficits, 
which may be as high as 1–1.5 mmol/kg (2–3 meq/kg).
It is important to consider the need for calcium, 
potassium, and phosphate supplementation in patients 
with hypomagnesemia. Vitamin D deficiency frequently 
coexists and should be treated with oral or parenteral 
vitamin D or 25(OH)D [but not with 1,25(OH)2D, which 
may impair tubular magnesium reabsorption, possi-
bly via PTH suppression]. In severely hypomagnesemic 
patients with concomitant hypocalcemia and hypo-
phosphatemia, administration of IV magnesium alone 
may worsen hypophosphatemia, provoking neuromus-
cular symptoms or rhabdomyolysis, due to rapid stimu-
lation of PTH secretion. This is avoided by administering 
both calcium and magnesium.
Hypermagnesemia
Causes
Hypermagnesemia is rarely seen in the absence of 
renal insufficiency, as normal kidneys can excrete large 
amounts (250 mmol/d) of magnesium. Mild hyperma-
gnesemia due to excessive reabsorption in the cTAL 
occurs with calcium-sensing receptor mutations in famil-
ial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and has been described 
in some patients with adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroid-
ism, or hypothermia. Massive exogenous magnesium 
exposures, usually via the gastrointestinal tract, can over-
whelm renal excretory capacity and cause life-threatening 
hypermagnesemia (Table 25-5). A notable example of 
this is prolonged retention of even normal amounts of 
magnesium-containing cathartics in patients with intes-
tinal ileus, obstruction, or perforation. Extensive soft tis-
sue injury or necrosis can also deliver large amounts of 
magnesium into the ECF in patients who have suffered 
trauma, shock, sepsis, cardiac arrest, or severe burns.
Clinical and laboratory findings
The most prominent clinical manifestations of hyperma-
gnesemia are vasodilation and neuromuscular blockade, 
which may appear at serum magnesium concentrations 
>2 mmol/L (>4 meq/L; >4.8 mg/dL). Hypotension 
that is refractory to vasopressors or volume expansion 
may be an early sign. Nausea, lethargy, and weakness 
may progress to respiratory failure, paralysis, and coma, 
with hypoactive tendon reflexes, at serum magnesium 
levels >4 mmol/L. Other findings may include gastro-
intestinal hypomotility or ileus; facial flushing; pupil-
lary dilation; paradoxical bradycardia; prolongation of 
PR, QRS, and QT intervals; heart block; and, at serum 
magnesium levels approaching 10 mmol/L, asystole.
Hypermagnesemia, acting via the CaSR, causes hypo-
calcemia and hypercalciuria due to both parathyroid sup-
pression and impaired cTAL calcium reabsorption.
Treatment	
Hypermagnesemia
Successful treatment of hypermagnesemia gener-
ally involves identifying and interrupting the source 
of magnesium and employing measures to increase 
magnesium clearance from the ECF. Use of magnesium-
free cathartics or enemas may be helpful in clearing 
ingested magnesium from the gastrointestinal tract. 
Vigorous IV hydration should be attempted, if appro-
priate. Hemodialysis is effective and may be required 
in patients with significant renal insufficiency. Calcium, 
administered IV in doses of 100–200 mg over 1–2 hours, 
has been reported to provide temporary improvement 
in signs and symptoms of hypermagnesemia.
Vitamin D
Synthesis and Metabolism
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D] is the major steroid 
hormone involved in mineral ion homeostasis regulation. 
Table 25-5 
Causes of Hypermagnesemia
	
I.	 Excessive magnesium intake
	
	 A.	Cathartics, urologic irrigants
	
	 B.	Parenteral magnesium administration
	 II.	 Rapid mobilization from soft tissues
	
	 A.	Trauma, shock, sepsis
	
	 B.	Cardiac arrest
	
	 C.	Burns
	 III.	 Impaired magnesium excretion
	
	 A.	Renal failure
	
	 B.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
	 IV.	 Other
	
	 A.	Adrenal insufficiency
	
	 B.	Hypothyroidism
	
	 C.	Hypothermia
	 V.	 Excessive magnesium intake
	
	 A.	Cathartics, urologic irrigants
	
	 B.	Parenteral magnesium administration
	 VI.	 Rapid mobilization from soft tissues
	
	 A.	Trauma, shock, sepsis
	
	 B.	Cardiac arrest
	
	 C.	Burns
	VII.	 Impaired magnesium excretion
	
	 A.	Renal failure
	
	 B.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
	VIII.	 Other
	
	 A.	Adrenal insufficiency
	
	 B.	Hypothyroidism
	
	 C.	Hypothermia
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
397
Vitamin D and its metabolites are hormones and hor-
mone precursors rather than vitamins, since in the 
proper biologic setting, they can be synthesized endog-
enously (Fig. 25-4). In response to ultraviolet radia-
tion of the skin, a photochemical cleavage results in the 
formation of vitamin D from 7-dehydrocholesterol. 
Cutaneous production of vitamin D is decreased by 
melanin and high solar protection factor sunblocks, 
which effectively impair skin penetration by ultraviolet 
light. The increased use of sunblocks in North America 
and Western Europe and a reduction in the magnitude 
of solar exposure of the general population over the 
last several decades has led to an increased reliance on 
dietary sources of vitamin D. In the United States and 
Canada, these sources largely consist of fortified cereals 
and dairy products, in addition to fish oils and egg yolks. 
Vitamin D from plant sources is in the form of vitamin D2,
whereas that from animal sources is vitamin D3. These 
two forms have equivalent biologic activity and are 
activated equally well by the vitamin D hydroxylases 
in humans. Vitamin D enters the circulation, whether 
absorbed from the intestine or synthesized cutaneously, 
bound to vitamin D–binding protein, an α-globulin 
synthesized in the liver. Vitamin D is subsequently 
25-hydroxylated in the liver by cytochrome P450–like 
enzymes in the mitochondria and microsomes. The 
activity of this hydroxylase is not tightly regulated, and the 
resultant metabolite, 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], 
is the major circulating and storage form of vitamin D. 
Approximately 88% of 25(OH)D circulates bound to 
the vitamin D–binding protein, 0.03% is free, and the rest 
circulates bound to albumin. The half-life of 25(OH)D 
is approximately two to three weeks; however, it is 
shortened dramatically when vitamin D–binding protein 
levels are reduced, as can occur with increased urinary 
losses in the nephrotic syndrome.
The second hydroxylation, required for the for-
mation of the mature hormone, occurs in the kidney 
(Fig. 25-5). The 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1α-hydroxylase 
is a tightly regulated cytochrome P450–like mixed-
function oxidase expressed in the proximal convoluted 
tubule cells of the kidney. PTH and hypophosphate-
mia are the major inducers of this microsomal enzyme, 
whereas calcium, FGF23, and the enzyme’s product, 
1,25(OH)2D, repress it. The 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1α-
hydroxylase is also present in epidermal keratinocytes, 
but keratinocyte production of 1,25(OH)2D is not thought 
to contribute to circulating levels of this hormone. In 
addition to being present in the trophoblastic layer of 
the placenta, the 1α-hydroxylase is produced by mac-
rophages associated with granulomas and lymphomas. In 
these latter pathologic states, the activity of the enzyme 
is induced by interferon γ and TNF-α but is not regu-
lated by calcium or 1,25(OH)2D; therefore, hypercalce-
mia, associated with elevated levels of 1,25(OH)2D, may 
be observed. Treatment of sarcoidosis-associated hyper-
calcemia with glucocorticoids, ketoconazole, or chloro-
quine reduces 1,25(OH)2D production and effectively 
lowers serum calcium. In contrast, chloroquine has not 
been shown to lower the elevated serum 1,25(OH)2D 
levels in patients with lymphoma.
The major pathway for inactivation of vitamin D 
metabolites is an additional hydroxylation step by the 
vitamin D 24-hydroxylase, an enzyme that is expressed 
in most tissues. 1,25(OH)2D is the major inducer of 
this enzyme; therefore, this hormone promotes its own 
inactivation, thereby limiting its biologic effects. Polar 
metabolites of 1,25(OH)2D are secreted into the bile and 
reabsorbed via the enterohepatic circulation. Impairment 
of this recirculation, which is seen with diseases of the 
terminal ileum, leads to accelerated losses of vitamin D 
metabolites.
Skin
7-Dehydrocholesterol
25(OH)D
1,25(OH)2D
Gut
Vitamin D
Vitamin D
Liver
Kidney
Figure 25-4
Vitamin D synthesis and activation. Vitamin D is synthe-
sized in the skin in response to ultraviolet radiation and also 
is absorbed from the diet. It is then transported to the liver, 
where it undergoes 25-hydroxylation. This metabolite is the 
major circulating form of vitamin D. The final step in hormone 
activation, 1α-hydroxylation, occurs in the kidney.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
398
Actions of 1,25(OH)2D
1,25(OH)2D mediates its biologic effects by bind-
ing to a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, 
the vitamin D receptor (VDR). This receptor belongs 
to the subfamily that includes the thyroid hormone 
receptors, the retinoid receptors, and the peroxisome 
proliferator–activated receptors; however, in contrast 
to the other members of this subfamily, only one VDR 
isoform has been isolated. The VDR binds to target 
DNA sequences as a heterodimer with the retinoid X 
receptor, recruiting a series of coactivators that modify 
chromatin and approximate the VDR to the basal tran-
scriptional apparatus, resulting in the induction of tar-
get gene expression. The mechanism of transcriptional 
repression by the VDR varies with different target 
genes but has been shown to involve either interference 
with the action of activating transcription factors or the 
recruitment of novel proteins to the VDR complex, 
resulting in transcriptional repression.
The affinity of the VDR for 1,25(OH)2D is approxi-
mately three orders of magnitude higher than that for 
other vitamin D metabolites. In normal physiologic 
circumstances, these other metabolites are not thought 
to stimulate receptor-dependent actions. However, in 
states of vitamin D toxicity, the markedly elevated levels 
of 25(OH)D may lead to hypercalcemia by interacting 
directly with the VDR and by displacing 1,25(OH)2D 
from vitamin D–binding protein, resulting in increased 
bioavailability of the active hormone.
The VDR is expressed in a wide range of cells and 
tissues. The molecular actions of 1,25(OH)2D have 
been studied most extensively in tissues involved in 
the regulation of mineral ion homeostasis. This hor-
mone is a major inducer of calbindin 9K, a calcium-
binding protein expressed in the intestine, which is 
thought to play an important role in the active trans-
port of calcium across the enterocyte. The two major 
calcium transporters expressed by intestinal epithelia, 
TRPV5 and TRPV6 (transient receptor potential vanil-
loid), are also vitamin D responsive. By inducing the 
expression of these and other genes in the small intes-
tine, 1,25(OH)2D increases the efficiency of intestinal 
calcium absorption, and it also has been shown to have 
several important actions in the skeleton. The VDR 
is expressed in osteoblasts and regulates the expres-
sion of several genes in this cell. These genes include 
the bone matrix proteins osteocalcin and osteopontin, 
which are upregulated by 1,25(OH)2D, in addition to 
type I collagen, which is transcriptionally repressed by 
1,25(OH)2D. Both 1,25(OH)2D and PTH induce the 
expression of RANK ligand, which promotes osteo-
clast differentiation and increases osteoclast activity, 
by binding to RANK on osteoclast progenitors and 
mature osteoclasts. This is the mechanism by which 
1,25(OH)2D induces bone resorption. However, the 
skeletal features associated with VDR-knockout mice 
(rickets, osteomalacia) are largely corrected by increas-
ing calcium and phosphorus intake, underscoring the 
importance of vitamin D action in the gut.
The VDR is expressed in the parathyroid gland, and 
1,25(OH)2D has been shown to have antiproliferative 
effects on parathyroid cells and to suppress the transcrip-
tion of the parathyroid hormone gene. These effects of 
1,25(OH)2D on the parathyroid gland are an important 
part of the rationale for current therapies directed at 
1,
25
(O
H)
2D
3 
C
a2
+ 
H
P
O
4
2–
   
   
   
  
C
al
ci
fi
ca
ti
on
 
C
a2
+ 
H
P
O
4
2–
Vitamin D3
Vitamin D-
25 hydroxylase
Liver
Kidney
Parathyroid
glands
Bone
25(OH)D-1α-
hydroxylase
 and
other factors
25(OH)D3
PTH
PTH
–
–
–
Blood
calcium
Intestine
Pi
/ +
– /
1,25(OH)2D3
Figure 25-5
Schematic representation of the hormonal control loop 
for vitamin D metabolism and function. A reduction in the 
serum calcium below ∼2.2 mmol/L (8.8 mg/dL) prompts a 
proportional increase in the secretion of parathyroid hor-
mone (PTH) and so mobilizes additional calcium from the 
bone. PTH promotes the synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D in the kid-
ney, which in turn stimulates the mobilization of calcium from 
bone and intestine and regulates the synthesis of PTH by 
negative feedback.
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
399
preventing and treating hyperparathyroidism associated 
with renal insufficiency.
The VDR is also expressed in tissues and organs that 
do not play a role in mineral ion homeostasis. Notable 
in this respect is the observation that 1,25(OH)2D has 
an antiproliferative effect on several cell types, includ-
ing keratinocytes, breast cancer cells, and prostate can-
cer cells. The effects of 1,25(OH)2D and the VDR on 
keratinocytes are particularly intriguing. Alopecia is seen 
in humans and mice with mutant VDRs but is not a 
feature of vitamin D deficiency; thus, the effects of the 
VDR on the hair follicle are ligand independent.
Vitamin D Deficiency
The mounting concern about the relationship between 
solar exposure and the development of skin cancer has 
led to increased reliance on dietary sources of vitamin D. 
Although the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency varies, 
the third National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES III) revealed that vitamin D defi-
ciency is prevalent throughout the United States. The 
clinical syndrome of vitamin D deficiency can be a result 
of deficient production of vitamin D in the skin, lack of 
dietary intake, accelerated losses of vitamin D, impaired 
vitamin D activation, or resistance to the biologic effects 
of 1,25(OH)2D (Table 25-6). The elderly and nursing 
home residents are particularly at risk for vitamin D defi-
ciency, since both the efficiency of vitamin D synthesis 
in the skin and the absorption of vitamin D from the 
intestine decline with age. Similarly, intestinal malabsorp-
tion of dietary fats leads to vitamin D deficiency. This is 
further exacerbated in the presence of terminal ileal dis-
ease, which results in impaired enterohepatic circulation 
of vitamin D metabolites. In addition to intestinal dis-
eases, accelerated inactivation of vitamin D metabolites 
can be seen with drugs that induce hepatic cytochrome 
P450 mixed-function oxidases such as barbiturates, 
phenytoin, and rifampin. Impaired 25-hydroxylation, 
associated with severe liver disease or isoniazid, is an 
uncommon cause of vitamin D deficiency. A mutation in 
the gene responsible for 25-hydroxylation has been 
identified in one kindred. Impaired 1α-hydroxylation is
prevalent in the population with profound renal dys-
function due to an increase in circulating FGF23 levels 
and a decrease in functional renal mass. Thus, therapeu-
tic interventions should be considered in patients whose 
creatinine clearance is <0.5 mL/s (30 mL/min). Muta-
tions in the renal 1α-hydroxylase are the basis for the 
genetic disorder, pseudovitamin D–deficiency rickets. 
This autosomal recessive disorder presents with the syn-
drome of vitamin D deficiency in the first year of life. 
Patients present with growth retardation, rickets, and 
hypocalcemic seizures. Serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are low 
despite normal 25(OH)D levels and elevated PTH lev-
els. Treatment with vitamin D metabolites that do not 
require 1α-hydroxylation results in disease remission, 
although lifelong therapy is required. A second autosomal 
recessive disorder, hereditary vitamin D–resistant rick-
ets, a consequence of vitamin D receptor mutations, is a 
greater therapeutic challenge. These patients present in 
a similar fashion during the first year of life, but alopecia 
often accompanies the disorder, demonstrating a func-
tional role of the VDR in postnatal hair regeneration. 
Serum levels of 1,25(OH)2D are dramatically elevated in 
these individuals both because of increased production due 
to stimulation of 1α-hydroxylase activity as a consequence 
of secondary hyperparathyroidism and because of impaired 
inactivation, since induction of the 24-hydroxylase by 
1,25(OH)2D requires an intact VDR. Since the receptor 
mutation results in hormone resistance, daily calcium and 
phosphorus infusions may be required to bypass the defect 
in intestinal mineral ion absorption.
Regardless of the cause, the clinical manifestations 
of vitamin D deficiency are largely a consequence of 
impaired intestinal calcium absorption. Mild to moder-
ate vitamin D deficiency is asymptomatic, whereas long-
standing vitamin D deficiency results in hypocalcemia 
accompanied by secondary hyperparathyroidism, impaired 
mineralization of the skeleton (osteopenia on x-ray or 
decreased bone mineral density), and proximal myopathy. 
Vitamin D deficiency also has been shown to be associ-
ated with an increase in overall mortality rates, including 
cardiovascular causes. In the absence of an intercurrent 
illness, the hypocalcemia associated with long-standing 
vitamin D deficiency rarely presents with acute symptoms 
of hypocalcemia such as numbness, tingling, and seizures. 
However, the concurrent development of hypomagnese-
mia, which impairs parathyroid function, or the admin-
istration of potent bisphosphonates, which impair bone 
resorption, can lead to acute symptomatic hypocalcemia 
in vitamin D–deficient individuals.
Table 25-6
Causes of Impaired Vitamin D Action
Vitamin D deficiency
Impaired cutaneous  
production
  Dietary absence
  Malabsorption
Accelerated loss of  
vitamin D
Increased metabolism 
(barbiturates,  
phenytoin, rifampin)
Impaired enterohepatic 
circulation
Nephrotic syndrome
Impaired 25-hydroxylation
Liver disease, isoniazid
Impaired 1α-hydroxylation
Hypoparathyroidism
Renal failure
Ketoconazole
1α-hydroxylase mutation
Oncogenic osteomalacia
X-linked  
hypophosphatemic 
rickets
Target organ resistance
Vitamin D receptor 
mutation
Phenytoin
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
400
Rickets and osteomalacia
In children, before epiphyseal fusion, vitamin D deficiency 
results in growth retardation associated with an expan-
sion of the growth plate known as rickets. Three layers of 
chondrocytes are present in the normal growth plate: the 
reserve zone, the proliferating zone, and the hypertrophic 
zone. Rickets associated with impaired vitamin D action 
is characterized by expansion of the hypertrophic chon-
drocyte layer. The proliferation and differentiation of the 
chondrocytes in the rachitic growth plate are normal, and 
the expansion of the growth plate is a consequence of 
impaired apoptosis of the late hypertrophic chondrocytes, 
an event that precedes replacement of these cells by osteo-
blasts during endochondral bone formation. Investigations 
in murine models demonstrate that hypophosphatemia, 
which in vitamin D deficiency is a consequence of sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism, is a key etiologic factor in the 
development of the rachitic growth plate.
The hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia that 
accompany vitamin D deficiency result in impaired min-
eralization of bone matrix proteins, a condition known as 
osteomalacia. Osteomalacia is also a feature of long-standing
hypophosphatemia, which may be a consequence of 
renal phosphate wasting or chronic use of etidronate or 
phosphate-binding antacids. This hypomineralized matrix 
is biomechanically inferior to normal bone; as a result, 
patients with vitamin D deficiency are prone to bow-
ing of weight-bearing extremities and skeletal fractures. 
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation have been 
shown to decrease the incidence of hip fracture among 
ambulatory nursing home residents in France, suggesting 
that undermineralization of bone contributes significantly 
to morbidity in the elderly. Proximal myopathy is a strik-
ing feature of severe vitamin D deficiency both in chil-
dren and in adults. Rapid resolution of the myopathy is 
observed upon vitamin D treatment.
Though vitamin D deficiency is the most common 
cause of rickets and osteomalacia, many disorders lead to 
inadequate mineralization of the growth plate and bone. 
Calcium deficiency without vitamin D deficiency, the 
disorders of vitamin D metabolism previously discussed, 
and hypophosphatemia can all lead to inefficient min-
eralization. Even in the presence of normal calcium 
and phosphate levels, chronic acidosis and drugs such 
as bisphosphonates can lead to osteomalacia. The inor-
ganic calcium/phosphate mineral phase of bone cannot 
form at low pH, and bisphosphonates bind to and pre-
vent mineral crystal growth. Since alkaline phosphatase 
is necessary for normal mineral deposition, probably 
because the enzyme can hydrolyze inhibitors of min-
eralization such as inorganic pyrophosphate, genetic 
inactivation of the alkaline phosphatase gene (hereditary 
hypophosphatasia) also can lead to osteomalacia in the 
setting of normal calcium and phosphate levels.
Diagnosis of vitamin D deficiency, rickets, and 
osteomalacia
The most specific screening test for vitamin D defi-
ciency in otherwise healthy individuals is a serum 
25(OH)D level. Although the normal ranges vary, lev-
els of 25(OH)D <37 nmol/L (<15 ng/mL) are asso-
ciated with increasing PTH levels and lower bone 
density; optimal vitamin D levels are >80 nmol/L 
(>32 ng/mL). Vitamin D deficiency leads to impaired 
intestinal absorption of calcium, resulting in decreased 
serum total and ionized calcium values. This hypo-
calcemia results in secondary hyperparathyroidism, a 
homeostatic response that initially maintains serum cal-
cium levels at the expense of the skeleton. Due to the 
PTH-induced increase in bone turnover, alkaline phos-
phatase levels are often increased. In addition to increas-
ing bone resorption, PTH decreases urinary calcium 
excretion while promoting phosphaturia. This results 
in hypophosphatemia, which exacerbates the mineral-
ization defect in the skeleton. With prolonged vitamin 
D deficiency resulting in osteomalacia, calcium stores 
in the skeleton become relatively inaccessible, since 
osteoclasts cannot resorb unmineralized osteoid, and 
frank hypocalcemia ensues. Since PTH is a major stim-
ulus for the renal 25(OH)D 1α-hydroxylase, there is 
increased synthesis of the active hormone, 1,25(OH)2D. 
Paradoxically, levels of this hormone are often normal 
in severe vitamin D deficiency. Therefore, measure-
ments of 1,25(OH)2D are not accurate reflections of 
vitamin D stores and should not be used to diagnose 
vitamin D deficiency in patients with normal renal 
function.
Radiologic features of vitamin D deficiency in chil-
dren include a widened, expanded growth plate that 
is characteristic of rickets. These findings not only are 
apparent in the long bones but also are present at the 
costochondral junction, where the expansion of the 
growth plate leads to swellings known as the “rachitic 
rosary.” Impairment of intramembranous bone miner-
alization leads to delayed fusion of the calvarial sutures 
and a decrease in the radiopacity of cortical bone in the 
long bones. If vitamin D deficiency occurs after epiph-
yseal fusion, the main radiologic finding is a decrease 
in cortical thickness and relative radiolucency of the 
skeleton. A specific radiologic feature of osteomalacia, 
whether associated with phosphate wasting or vitamin D 
deficiency, is pseudofractures, or Looser’s zones. These 
are radiolucent lines that occur where large arteries are 
in contact with the underlying skeletal elements; it is 
thought that the arterial pulsations lead to the radiolu-
cencies. As a result, these pseudofractures are usually a 
few millimeters wide, are several centimeters long, and 
are seen particularly in the scapula, the pelvis, and the 
femoral neck.
 
CHAPTER 25
Bone and Mineral Metabolism in Health and Disease 
401
Treatment	
Vitamin D Deficiency
Daily intake of a multivitamin (400 IU) is often insuf-
ficient to prevent vitamin D deficiency. Based on the 
observation that 800 IU of vitamin D, with calcium 
supplementation, decreases the risk of hip fractures 
in elderly women, this higher dose is thought to be an 
appropriate daily intake for prevention of vitamin D 
deficiency in adults. The safety margin for vitamin D is 
large, and vitamin D toxicity usually is observed only 
in patients taking doses in the range of 40,000 IU daily. 
Treatment of vitamin D deficiency should be directed 
at the underlying disorder, if possible, and also should 
be tailored to the severity of the condition. Vitamin D 
should always be repleted in conjunction with calcium 
supplementation since most of the consequences of 
vitamin D deficiency are a result of impaired mineral 
ion homeostasis. In patients in whom 1α-hydroxylation 
is impaired, metabolites that do not require this acti-
vation step are the treatment of choice. They include 
1,25(OH)2D3 [calcitriol (Rocaltrol), 0.25–0.5 μg/d] and 
1α-hydroxyvitamin D2 (Hectorol, 2.5–5 μg/d). If the 
pathway required for activation of vitamin D is intact,
severe vitamin D deficiency can be treated with phar-
macologic repletion initially (50,000 IU weekly for 3–12 
weeks), followed by maintenance therapy (800 IU daily). 
Pharmacologic doses may be required for maintenance 
therapy in patients who are taking medications such as 
barbiturates or phenytoin, that accelerate metabolism 
of, or cause resistance to 1,25(OH)2D. Calcium supple-
mentation should include 1.5–2 g/d of elemental cal-
cium. Normocalcemia is usually observed within one 
week of the institution of therapy, although increases 
in PTH and alkaline phosphatase levels may persist for 
three to six months. The most efficacious methods to 
monitor treatment and resolution of vitamin D defi-
ciency are serum and urinary calcium measurements. 
In patients who are vitamin D replete and are tak-
ing adequate calcium supplementation, the 24-hour 
urinary calcium excretion should be in the range of 
100–250 mg/24 h. Lower levels suggest problems with 
adherence to the treatment regimen or with absorption 
of calcium or vitamin D supplements. Levels >250 mg/24 h 
predispose to nephrolithiasis and should lead to a 
reduction in vitamin D dosage and/or calcium sup-
plementation.
 Sundeep Khosla 
402
 The calcium ion plays a critical role in normal cellular 
function and signaling, regulating diverse physiologic 
processes such as neuromuscular signaling, cardiac con-
tractility, hormone secretion, and blood coagulation. Thus,
extracellular calcium concentrations are maintained within 
an exquisitely narrow range through a series of feedback 
mechanisms that involve parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 
the active vitamin D metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitmin D
[1,25(OH) 2 D]. These feedback mechanisms are orches-
trated by integrating signals between the parathyroid glands, 
kidney, intestine, and bone ( Fig. 26-1 ;  Chap. 25 ). 
 Disorders of serum calcium concentration are rela-
tively common and often serve as a harbinger of under-
lying disease. This chapter provides a brief summary of 
the approach to patients with altered serum calcium levels. 
 See  Chap. 27 for a detailed discussion of this topic. 
 HypeRcalcemia 
 etiology 
 The causes of hypercalcemia can be understood and classi-
fi ed based on derangements in the normal feedback mech-
anisms that regulate serum calcium ( Table 26-1 ). Excess 
PTH production, which is not appropriately suppressed
by increased serum calcium concentrations, occurs in pri-
mary neoplastic disorders of the parathyroid glands (para-
thyroid adenomas; hyperplasia; or, rarely, carcinoma) 
that are associated with increased parathyroid cell mass 
and impaired feedback inhibition by calcium. Inappropri-
ate PTH secretion for the ambient level of serum calcium 
also occurs with heterozygous inactivating calcium sen-
sor receptor (CaSR) mutations, which impair extracellular 
calcium sensing by the parathyroid glands and the kidneys, 
resulting in familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH). 
Although PTH secretion by tumors is extremely rare, 
many solid tumors produce PTH-related peptide (PTHrP),
which shares homology with PTH in the fi rst 13 amino 
 HYPERCALCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA 
 cHapTeR 26 
acids and binds the PTH receptor, thus mimicking effects 
of PTH on bone and the kidney. In PTHrP-mediated
hypercalcemia of malignancy, PTH levels are suppressed
by the high serum calcium levels. Hypercalcemia associated 
Parathyroid glands
Kidney
Bone
Intestine
PTH
1,25 (OH)2D
ECF Ca2+
1
2
2
3
4
 FIGURe 26-1 
feedback mechanisms maintaining extracellular cal-
cium concentrations within a narrow, physiologic range 
[8.9–10.1 mg/dl (2.2–2.5 m M )] . A decrease in extracellular 
(ECF) calcium (Ca 2+ ) triggers an increase in parathyroid hor-
mone (PTH) secretion (1) via the calcium sensor receptor on 
parathyroid cells. PTH, in turn, results in increased tubular 
reabsorption of calcium by the kidney (2) and resorption of 
calcium from bone (2) and also stimulates renal 1,25(OH) 2 D 
production (3). 1,25(OH) 2 D, in turn, acts principally on the 
intestine to increase calcium absorption (4). Collectively, 
these homeostatic mechanisms serve to restore serum cal-
cium levels to normal. 
 
CHAPTER 26
Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia
403
with granulomatous disease (e.g., sarcoidosis) or lympho-
mas is caused by enhanced conversion of 25(OH)D to 
the potent 1,25(OH)2D. In these disorders, 1,25(OH)2D 
enhances intestinal calcium absorption, resulting in 
hypercalcemia and suppressed PTH. Disorders that 
directly increase calcium mobilization from bone, such 
as hyperthyroidism or osteolytic metastases, also lead to 
hypercalcemia with suppressed PTH secretion as does 
exogenous calcium overload, as in milk-alkali syndrome, 
or total parenteral nutrition with excessive calcium 
supplementation.
Clinical Manifestations
Mild hypercalcemia (up to 11–11.5 mg/dL) is usually 
asymptomatic and recognized only on routine calcium 
measurements. Some patients may complain of vague 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, including trouble concen-
trating, personality changes, or depression. Other pre-
senting symptoms may include peptic ulcer disease or 
nephrolithiasis, and fracture risk may be increased. More 
severe hypercalcemia (>12–13 mg/dL), particularly if it 
develops acutely, may result in lethargy, stupor, or coma, 
as well as gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, anorexia, 
constipation, or pancreatitis). Hypercalcemia decreases 
Table 26-1
Causes of Hypercalcemia
Excessive PTH production
Primary hyperparathyroidism (adenoma, hyperplasia, 
rarely carcinoma)
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (long-term stimulation of 
PTH secretion in renal insufficiency)
Ectopic PTH secretion (very rare)
Inactivating mutations in the CaSR (FHH)
Alterations in CaSR function (lithium therapy)
Hypercalcemia of malignancy
Overproduction of PTHrP (many solid tumors)
Lytic skeletal metastases (breast, myeloma)
Excessive 1,25(OH)2D production
Granulomatous diseases (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, 
silicosis)
Lymphomas
Vitamin D intoxication
Primary increase in bone resorption
Hyperthyroidism
Immobilization
Excessive calcium intake
Milk-alkali syndrome
Total parenteral nutrition
Other causes
Endocrine disorders (adrenal insufficiency, pheochro-
mocytoma, VIPoma)
Medications (thiazides, vitamin A, antiestrogens)
Abbreviations: CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; FHH, familial hypo-
calciuric hypercalcemia; PTH, parathyroid hormone; PTHrP, PTH-
related peptide.
renal concentrating ability, which may cause polyuria 
and polydipsia. With long-standing hyperparathyroid-
ism, patients may present with bone pain or pathologic 
fractures. Finally, hypercalcemia can result in signifi-
cant electrocardiographic changes, including brady-
cardia, AV block, and short QT interval; changes in 
serum calcium can be monitored by following the QT 
interval.
Diagnostic Approach
The first step in the diagnostic evaluation of hyper- or 
hypocalcemia is to ensure that the alteration in serum 
calcium levels is not due to abnormal albumin concen-
trations. About 50% of total calcium is ionized, and the 
rest is bound principally to albumin. Although direct 
measurements of ionized calcium are possible, they are 
easily influenced by collection methods and other arti-
facts; thus, it is generally preferable to measure total 
calcium and albumin to “correct” the serum calcium. 
When serum albumin concentrations are reduced, a 
corrected calcium concentration is calculated by adding 
0.2 mM (0.8 mg/dL) to the total calcium level for every 
decrement in serum albumin of 1.0 g/dL below the ref-
erence value of 4.1 g/dL for albumin, and, conversely, 
for elevations in serum albumin.
A detailed history may provide important clues regard-
ing the etiology of the hypercalcemia (Table 26-1). 
Chronic hypercalcemia is most commonly caused by 
primary hyperparathyroidism, as opposed to the second 
most common etiology of hypercalcemia, an underlying 
malignancy. The history should include medication use, 
previous neck surgery, and systemic symptoms sugges-
tive of sarcoidosis or lymphoma.
Once true hypercalcemia is established, the second 
most important laboratory test in the diagnostic evalu-
ation is a PTH level using a two-site assay for the intact 
hormone. Increases in PTH are often accompanied by 
hypophosphatemia. In addition, serum creatinine should 
be measured to assess renal function; hypercalcemia may 
impair renal function, and renal clearance of PTH may 
be altered depending on the fragments detected by the 
assay. If the PTH level is increased (or “inappropri-
ately normal”) in the setting of elevated calcium and 
low phosphorus, the diagnosis is almost always primary 
hyperparathyroidism. Because individuals with familial 
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) may also present 
with mildly elevated PTH levels and hypercalcemia, this 
diagnosis should be considered and excluded because para-
thyroid surgery is ineffective in this condition. A calcium/ 
creatinine clearance ratio (calculated as urine calcium/serum 
calcium divided by urine creatinine/serum creatinine) 
of <0.01 is suggestive of FHH, particularly when there 
is a family history of mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia. 
In addition, a number of laboratories are now offering 
sequence analysis of the CaSR gene for the definitive 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
404
diagnosis of FHH. Ectopic PTH secretion is extremely 
rare.
A suppressed PTH level in the face of hypercalcemia 
is consistent with non-parathyroid-mediated hyper-
calcemia, most often due to underlying malignancy. 
Although a tumor that causes hypercalcemia is gener-
ally overt, a PTHrP level may be needed to establish 
the diagnosis of hypercalcemia of malignancy. Serum 
1,25(OH)2D levels are increased in granulomatous dis-
orders, and clinical evaluation in combination with lab-
oratory testing will generally provide a diagnosis for the 
various disorders listed in Table 26-1.
Treatment	
Hypercalcemia
Mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia does not require 
immediate therapy, and management should be dic-
tated by the underlying diagnosis. By contrast, significant, 
symptomatic hypercalcemia usually requires therapeu-
tic intervention independent of the etiology of hyper-
calcemia. Initial therapy of significant hypercalcemia 
begins with volume expansion because hypercalce- 
mia invariably leads to dehydration; 4–6 L of intravenous 
saline may be required over the first 24 h, keeping in 
mind that underlying comorbidities (e.g., congestive 
heart failure) may require the use of loop diuretics to 
enhance sodium and calcium excretion. However, loop 
diuretics should not be initiated until the volume sta-
tus has been restored to normal. If there is increased 
calcium mobilization from bone (as in malignancy 
or severe hyperparathyroidism), drugs that inhibit 
bone resorption should be considered. Zoledronic acid  
(e.g., 4 mg intravenously over ∼30 min), pamidronate 
(e.g., 60–90 mg intravenously over 2–4 h), and etidro-
nate (e.g., 7.5 mg/kg per day for 3–7 consecutive days) 
are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
for the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy in 
adults. Onset of action is within 1–3 days, with normal-
ization of serum calcium levels occurring in 60–90% of 
patients. Bisphosphonate infusions may need to be 
repeated if hypercalcemia relapses. Because of their 
effectiveness, bisphosphonates have replaced calcitonin 
or plicamycin, which are rarely used in current practice 
for the management of hypercalcemia. In rare instances, 
dialysis may be necessary. Finally, while intravenous 
phosphate chelates calcium and decreases serum cal-
cium levels, this therapy can be toxic because calcium-
phosphate complexes may deposit in tissues and cause 
extensive organ damage.
In patients with 1,25(OH)2D-mediated hypercalce-
mia, glucocorticoids are the preferred therapy, as they 
decrease 1,25(OH)2D production. Intravenous hydrocor-
tisone (100–300 mg daily) or oral prednisone (40–60 mg 
daily) for 3–7 days is used most often. Other drugs,
such as ketoconazole, chloroquine, and hydroxychlo-
roquine, may also decrease 1,25(OH)2D production and 
are used occasionally.
Hypocalcemia
Etiology
The causes of hypocalcemia can be differentiated accord-
ing to whether serum PTH levels are low (hypopara-
thyroidism) or high (secondary hyperparathyroidism). 
Although there are many potential causes of hypocal-
cemia, impaired PTH or vitamin D production are the 
most common etiologies (Table 26-2) (Chap. 27).
Because PTH is the main defense against hypocalcemia, 
disorders associated with deficient PTH production 
or secretion may be associated with profound, life- 
threatening hypocalcemia. In adults, hypoparathyroidism 
Table 26-2
Causes of Hypocalcemia
Low Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Hypoparathyroidism)
Parathyroid agenesis
Isolated
DiGeorge syndrome
Parathyroid destruction
Surgical
Radiation
Infiltration by metastases or systemic diseases
Autoimmune
Reduced parathyroid function
Hypomagnesemia
Activating CaSR mutations
High Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Secondary 
Hyperparathyroidism)
Vitamin D deficiency or impaired 1,25(OH)2D production/
action
Nutritional vitamin D deficiency (poor intake or absorption)
Renal insufficiency with impaired 1,25(OH)2D production
Vitamin D resistance, including receptor defects
Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes
PTH receptor mutations
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (G protein mutations)
Drugs
Calcium chelators
Inhibitors of bone resorption (bisphosphonates,  
plicamycin)
Altered vitamin D metabolism (phenytoin, ketoconazole)
Miscellaneous causes
Acute pancreatitis
Acute rhabdomyolysis
Hungry bone syndrome after parathyroidectomy
Osteoblastic metastases with marked stimulation of 
bone formation (prostate cancer)
Abbreviations: CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; PTH, parathyroid 
hormone.
 
CHAPTER 26
Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia
405
most commonly results from inadvertent damage to all 
four glands during thyroid or parathyroid gland surgery. 
Hypoparathyroidism is a cardinal feature of autoimmune 
endocrinopathies (Chap. 23); rarely, it may be associated 
with infiltrative diseases such as sarcoidosis. Impaired 
PTH secretion may be secondary to magnesium deficiency 
or to activating mutations in the CaSR, which suppress 
PTH, leading to effects that are opposite to those that 
occur in FHH.
Vitamin D deficiency, impaired 1,25(OH)2D produc-
tion (primarily secondary to renal insufficiency), or vita-
min D resistance also cause hypocalcemia. However, the 
degree of hypocalcemia in these disorders is generally not 
as severe as that seen with hypoparathyroidism because 
the parathyroids are capable of mounting a compensatory 
increase in PTH secretion. Hypocalcemia may also occur 
in conditions associated with severe tissue injury such as 
burns, rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis, or pancreatitis. The 
cause of hypocalcemia in these settings may include a 
combination of low albumin, hyperphosphatemia, tissue 
deposition of calcium, and impaired PTH secretion.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with hypocalcemia may be asymptomatic if 
the decreases in serum calcium are relatively mild and 
chronic, or they may present with life-threatening com-
plications. Moderate to severe hypocalcemia is associ-
ated with paresthesias, usually of the fingers, toes, and 
circumoral regions, and is caused by increased neuro-
muscular irritability. On physical examination, a Chvostek’s 
sign (twitching of the circumoral muscles in response 
to gentle tapping of the facial nerve just anterior to the 
ear) may be elicited, although it is also present in ∼10% 
of normal individuals. Carpal spasm may be induced 
by inflation of a blood pressure cuff to 20 mmHg 
above the patient’s systolic blood pressure for 3 min 
(Trousseau’s sign). Severe hypocalcemia can induce sei-
zures, carpopedal spasm, bronchospasm, laryngospasm, 
and prolongation of the QT interval.
Diagnostic Approach
In addition to measuring serum calcium, it is useful to 
determine albumin, phosphorus, and magnesium levels. 
As for the evaluation of hypercalcemia, determining the 
PTH level is central to the evaluation of hypocalcemia. 
A suppressed (or “inappropriately low”) PTH level in 
the setting of hypocalcemia establishes absent or reduced 
PTH secretion (hypoparathyroidism) as the cause of 
the hypocalcemia. Further history will often elicit the 
underlying cause (i.e., parathyroid agenesis vs. destruc-
tion). By contrast, an elevated PTH level (secondary 
hyperparathyroidism) should direct attention to the vita-
min D axis as the cause of the hypocalcemia. Nutritional 
vitamin D deficiency is best assessed by obtaining serum 
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, which reflect vitamin D 
stores. In the setting of renal insufficiency or suspected 
vitamin D resistance, serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are 
informative.
Treatment	
Hypocalcemia
The approach to treatment depends on the severity of the 
hypocalcemia, the rapidity with which it develops, and 
the accompanying complications (e.g., seizures, laryngo-
spasm). Acute, symptomatic hypocalcemia is initially man-
aged with calcium gluconate, 10 mL 10% wt/vol (90 mg or 
2.2 mmol) intravenously, diluted in 50 mL of 5% dextrose 
or 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 5 min. 
Continuing hypocalcemia often requires a constant intra-
venous infusion (typically 10 ampuls of calcium gluconate 
or 900 mg of calcium in 1 L of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium 
chloride administered over 24 h). Accompanying hypo-
magnesemia, if present, should be treated with appropri-
ate magnesium supplementation.
Chronic hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism is 
treated with calcium supplements (1000–1500 mg/d ele-
mental calcium in divided doses) and either vitamin D2 
or D3 (25,000–100,000 U daily) or calcitriol [1,25(OH)2D, 
0.25–2 μg/d]. Other vitamin D metabolites (dihydrotachys-
terol, alfacalcidiol) are now used less frequently. Vitamin D 
deficiency, however, is best treated using vitamin D sup-
plementation, with the dose depending on the severity 
of the deficit and the underlying cause. Thus, nutritional 
vitamin D deficiency generally responds to relatively low 
doses of vitamin D (50,000 U, 2–3 times per week for sev-
eral months), while vitamin D deficiency due to malab-
sorption may require much higher doses (100,000 U/d or 
more). The treatment goal is to bring serum calcium into 
the low normal range and to avoid hypercalciuria, which 
may lead to nephrolithiasis.
 John T. Potts, Jr.  I   Harald Jüppner 
406
 The four parathyroid glands are located posterior to the 
thyroid gland. They produce parathyroid hormone (PTH), 
which is the primary regulator of calcium physiology.
PTH acts directly on bone, where it induces calcium re-
sorption, and on the kidney, where it enhances calcium 
reabsorption and synthesis of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
[1,25(OH) 2 D], a hormone that increases gastrointesti-
nal calcium absorption. Serum PTH levels are tightly 
regulated by a negative feedback loop. Calcium, acting 
through the calcium-sensing receptor, and vitamin D, 
acting through its nuclear receptor, reduce PTH release
and synthesis. Additional evidence indicates that fi bro-
blast growth factor 23 (FGF23), a phosphaturic hormone, 
can suppress PTH secretion. Understanding the hor-
monal pathways that regulate calcium levels and bone 
metabolism is essential for effective diagnosis and man-
agement of a wide array of hyper- and hypocalcemic 
disorders. 
 Hyperparathyroidism (HPT), characterized by excess 
production of PTH, is a common cause of hypercalce-
mia and is usually the result of autonomously function-
ing adenomas or hyperplasia. Surgery for this disorder is 
highly effective and has been shown to reverse some of 
the deleterious effects of long-standing PTH excess on 
bone density. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy is 
also common and is usually due to the overproduction of 
parathyroid hormone–related peptide (PTHrP) by can-
cer cells. The similarities in the biochemical characteris-
tics of hyperparathyroidism and humoral hypercalcemia 
of malignancy, fi rst noted by Albright in 1941, are now 
known to refl ect the actions of PTH and PTHrP through 
the same G protein–coupled PTH/PTHrP receptor. 
 The genetic basis of multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN) types 1 and 2, familial hypocalciuric hypercalce-
mia (FHH), different forms of pseudohypoparathyroid-
ism (PHP), Jansen’s syndrome, disorders of vitamin D
synthesis and action, and the molecular events associ-
ated with parathyroid gland neoplasia have provided 
new insights into the regulation of calcium homeostasis.
PTH and  possibly some of its analogues are promising 
therapeutic agents for the treatment of postmenopausal 
or senile osteoporosis, and calcimimetic agents, which 
activate the calcium-sensing receptor, have provided new 
approaches for PTH suppression. 
 Parathyroid hormone 
 PhySioloGy 
 The primary function of PTH is to maintain the extra-
cellular fl uid (ECF) calcium concentration within a nar-
row normal range. The hormone acts directly on bone 
and kidney and indirectly on the intestine through its 
effects on the synthesis of 1,25(OH) 2 D to increase serum 
calcium concentrations; in turn, PTH production is 
closely regulated by the concentration of serum ionized 
calcium. This feedback system is the critical homeostatic 
mechanism for maintenance of ECF calcium. Any ten-
dency toward hypocalcemia, as might be induced by 
calcium-defi cient diets, is counteracted by an increased 
secretion of PTH. This in turn (1) increases the rate of 
dissolution of bone mineral, thereby increasing the fl ow 
of calcium from bone into blood; (2) reduces the renal 
clearance of calcium, returning more of the calcium 
fi ltered at the glomerulus into ECF; and (3) increases 
the effi ciency of calcium absorption in the intestine by 
stimulating the production of 1,25(OH) 2 D. Immedi-
ate control of blood calcium is due to PTH effects on 
bone and, to a lesser extent, on renal calcium clear-
ance. Maintenance of steady-state calcium balance, 
on the other hand, probably results from the effects 
 DISORDERS OF THE PARATHYROID GLAND 
AND CALCIUM HOMEOSTASIS 
 ChaPter 27 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
407
of 1,25(OH)2D on calcium absorption (Chap. 25). 
The renal actions of the hormone are exerted at mul-
tiple sites and include inhibition of phosphate transport 
(proximal tubule), augmentation of calcium reabsorp-
tion (distal tubule), and stimulation of the renal 25(OH)
D-1α-hydroxylase. As much as 12 mmol (500 mg) cal-
cium is transferred between the ECF and bone each 
day (a large amount in relation to the total ECF cal-
cium pool), and PTH has a major effect on this transfer. 
The homeostatic role of the hormone can preserve 
calcium concentration in blood at the cost of bone 
demineralization.
PTH has multiple actions on bone, some direct and 
some indirect. PTH-mediated changes in bone calcium 
release can be seen within minutes. The chronic effects 
of PTH are to increase the number of bone cells, both 
osteoblasts and osteoclasts, and to increase the remodel-
ing of bone; these effects are apparent within hours after 
the hormone is given and persist for hours after PTH is 
withdrawn. Continuous exposure to elevated PTH (as 
in hyperparathyroidism or long-term infusions in ani-
mals) leads to increased osteoclast-mediated bone resorp-
tion. However, the intermittent administration of PTH, 
elevating hormone levels for 1–2 h each day, leads to 
a net stimulation of bone formation rather than bone 
breakdown. Striking increases, especially in trabecular 
bone in the spine and hip, have been reported with the 
use of PTH in combination with estrogen. PTH(1–34) 
as monotherapy caused a highly significant reduction in 
fracture incidence in a worldwide placebo-controlled trial.
Osteoblasts (or stromal cell precursors), which 
have PTH/PTHrP receptors, are crucial to this bone-
forming effect of PTH; osteoclasts, which mediate bone 
breakdown, lack such receptors. PTH-mediated stimu-
lation of osteoclasts is indirect, acting in part, through 
cytokines released from osteoblasts to activate osteo-
clasts; in experimental studies of bone resorption in 
vitro, osteoblasts must be present for PTH to activate 
osteoclasts to resorb bone (Chap. 25).
Structure
PTH is an 84-amino-acid single-chain peptide. The 
amino-terminal portion, PTH(1–34), is highly conserved 
and is critical for the biologic actions of the molecule. 
Modified synthetic fragments of the amino-terminal se-
quence as small as PTH(1–11) are sufficient to activate the 
PTH/PTHrP receptor (see “Metabolism”). The carboxyl-
terminal regions of the full-length PTH(1–84) molecule 
also can bind to a separate binding protein/receptor 
(cPTH-R), but this receptor has been incompletely char-
acterized. Fragments shortened at the amino terminus 
possibly by binding to cPTH can inhibit some of the bio-
logic actions of full-length PTH(1–84) and of PTH(1–34).
Biosynthesis, Secretion, and 
Metabolism
Synthesis
Parathyroid cells have multiple methods of adapting 
to increased needs for PTH production. Most rapid 
(within minutes) is secretion of preformed hormone in 
response to hypocalcemia. Second, within hours, PTH 
mRNA expression is induced by sustained hypocalce-
mia. Finally, protracted challenge leads within days to 
cellular replication to increase gland mass.
PTH is initially synthesized as a larger molecule 
(preproparathyroid hormone, consisting of 115 amino 
acids). After a first cleavage step to remove the “pre” 
sequence of 25 amino acid residues, a second cleavage 
step removes the “pro” sequence of 6 amino acid resi-
dues before secretion of the mature peptide comprising 
84 residues. In one kindred with hypoparathyroidism, a 
mutation in the preprotein region of the gene interferes 
with hormone transport and secretion.
Transcriptional suppression of the PTH gene by cal-
cium is nearly maximal at physiologic calcium concen-
trations. Hypocalcemia increases transcriptional activity 
within hours. 1,25(OH)2D3 strongly suppresses PTH 
gene transcription. In patients with renal failure, IV 
administration of supraphysiologic levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 
or analogues of this active metabolite can dramatically 
suppress PTH overproduction, which is sometimes dif-
ficult to control due to severe secondary HPT. Regu-
lation of proteolytic destruction of preformed hormone 
(posttranslational regulation of hormone production) is 
an important mechanism for mediating rapid (minutes) 
changes in hormone availability. High calcium increases 
and low calcium inhibits the proteolytic destruction of 
hormone stores.
Regulation of PTH secretion
PTH secretion increases steeply to a maximum value of 
about five times the basal rate of secretion as calcium con-
centration falls from normal to the range of 1.9–2 mmol/L 
(7.5–8 mg/dL) (measured as total calcium). The ionized 
fraction of blood calcium is the important determinant 
of hormone secretion. Severe intracellular magnesium 
deficiency impairs PTH secretion (see below).
ECF calcium controls PTH secretion by interaction 
with a calcium sensor, a G protein–coupled receptor 
(GPCR) for which Ca2+ ions act as the primary ligand 
(see later). This receptor is a member of a distinctive 
subgroup of the GPCR superfamily that is characterized 
by a large extracellular domain suitable for “clamping” 
the small-molecule ligand. Stimulation of the recep-
tor by high calcium levels suppresses PTH secretion. 
The receptor is present in parathyroid glands and the 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
408
calcitonin-secreting cells of the thyroid (C cells), as well as 
in other sites such as brain and kidney. Genetic evi-
dence has revealed a key biologic role for the calcium-
sensing receptor in parathyroid gland responsiveness to 
calcium and in renal calcium clearance. Heterozygous 
point mutations associated with loss of function cause 
the syndrome of FHH, in which the blood calcium 
abnormality resembles that observed in hyperparathy-
roidism but with hypocalciuria. On the other hand, 
heterozygous gain-of-function mutations cause a form 
of hypocalcemia resembling hypoparathyroidism (see 
later in the chapter).
Metabolism
The secreted form of PTH is indistinguishable by 
immunologic criteria and by molecular size from the 
84-amino-acid peptide [PTH(1–84)] extracted from 
glands. However, much of the immunoreactive material 
found in the circulation is smaller than the extracted or 
secreted hormone. The principal circulating fragments 
of immunoreactive hormone lack a portion of the 
critical amino-terminal sequence required for biologic 
activity and, hence, are biologically inactive fragments 
(so-called middle and carboxyl-terminal fragments). 
Much of the proteolysis of hormone occurs in the liver 
and kidney. Peripheral metabolism of PTH does not 
appear to be regulated by physiologic states (high 
versus low calcium, etc.); hence, peripheral metabolism 
of hormone, although responsible for rapid clearance of 
secreted hormone, appears to be a high-capacity, meta-
bolically invariant catabolic process.
The rate of clearance of the secreted 84-amino-acid 
peptide from blood is more rapid than the rate of clear-
ance of the biologically inactive fragment(s) corresponding 
to the middle and carboxyl-terminal regions of PTH. 
Consequently, the interpretation of results obtained 
with earlier PTH radioimmunoassays is influenced by 
the nature of the peptide fragments detected by the 
antibodies.
Although the problems inherent in PTH measurements 
have been largely circumvented by the use of double- 
antibody immunometric assays, it is now known that 
some of these assays detect, besides the intact molecule, 
large amino-terminally truncated forms of PTH, which 
are present in normal and uremic individuals in addi-
tion to PTH(1–84). The concentration of these frag-
ments relative to that of intact PTH(1–84) is higher 
with induced hypercalcemia than in eucalcemic or 
hypocalcemic conditions and is higher in patients with 
renal failure. These fragments have limited portions of 
the amino-terminal portion of the hormone removed; 
PTH(7–84) has been identified as a major component 
of these amino-terminally truncated fragments. Grow-
ing evidence suggests that the PTH(7–84) (and probably 
related amino-terminally truncated fragments) can act, 
through yet undefined mechanisms, as an inhibitor of 
PTH action and may be of clinical significance, particularly 
in renal failure. In this group of patients, efforts to pre-
vent secondary HPT by a variety of measures (vitamin D 
analogues, higher calcium intake, higher dialysate cal-
cium, and phosphate-lowering strategies) may have led 
to oversuppression of biologically active, intact PTH 
since some amino-terminally truncated PTH fragments 
such as PTH(7–84), react in many immunometric PTH 
assays (now termed second-generation assays; see later 
under “Diagnosis”). Excessive parathyroid gland suppres-
sion due to overly aggressive treatment with vitamin D 
analogues and calcium-containing phosphate binders or 
inaccurate PTH measurements can lead to adynamic 
bone disease in renal failure (see below). Adynamic bone 
disease has been associated in children with further 
impaired growth and increased bone fracture rates in 
adults, and can furthermore lead to significant hyper-
calcemia. The measurement of PTH with newer third-
generation immunometric assays, which use detection 
antibodies directed against extreme amino-terminal PTH 
epitopes and thus detect only full-length PTH(1–84), 
may provide some advantage to prevent bone disease in 
chronic kidney disease.
Parathyroid Hormone–Related 
Protein (PTHrP)
PTHrP is responsible for most instances of hypercalce-
mia of malignancy (Chap. 24), a syndrome that resem-
bles HPT but without elevated PTH levels. Most cell 
types produce PTHrP, including brain, pancreas, heart, 
lung, mammary tissue, placenta, endothelial cells, and 
smooth muscle. In fetal animals, PTHrP directs trans-
placental calcium transfer, and high concentrations of 
PTHrP are produced in mammary tissue and secreted 
into milk, but the biologic significance of the very 
high concentrations of this hormone in breast milk is 
unknown. PTHrP also plays an essential role in endo-
chondral bone formation and in branching morpho-
genesis of the breast, and possibly in uterine contraction 
and other biologic functions.
PTH and PTHrP, although distinctive products of 
different genes, exhibit considerable functional and 
structural homology (Fig. 27-1) and have evolved from 
a shared ancestral gene. The structure of the gene for 
human PTHrP, however, is more complex than that of 
PTH, containing multiple additional exons, which can 
undergo alternate splicing patterns during formation 
of the mature mRNA. Protein products of 141, 139, 
and 173 amino acids are produced, and other molecu-
lar forms may result from tissue-specific degradation at 
accessible internal cleavage sites. The biologic roles of 
these various molecular species and the nature of the 
circulating forms of PTHrP are unclear. It is uncertain 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
409
whether PTHrP circulates at any significant level in 
adults. As a paracrine factor, PTHrP may be produced, 
act, and be destroyed locally within tissues. In adults, 
PTHrP appears to have little influence on calcium 
homeostasis, except in disease states, when large tumors, 
especially of the squamous cell type as well as renal cell 
carcinomas, lead to massive overproduction of the hor-
mone and hypercalcemia.
PTH and PTHrP Hormone Action
Both PTH and PTHrP bind to and activate the PTH/
PTHrP receptor. The PTH/PTHrP receptor (also known 
as the PTH-1 receptor, PTH1R) belongs to a subfamily 
of GPCRs that includes the receptors for calcitonin, glu-
cagon, secretin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, and other 
peptides. Although both ligands activate the PTH1R, 
the two peptides induce distinct responses in the recep-
tor, which explains how a single receptor without iso-
forms can serve two biologic roles. The extracellular 
regions of the receptor are involved in hormone binding, 
and the intracellular domains, after hormone activation, 
bind G-protein subunits to transduce hormone signaling 
into cellular responses through the stimulation of sec-
ond messenger formation. A second receptor that binds 
PTH, originally termed the PTH-2 receptor (PTH2R), is 
primarily expressed in brain, pancreas, and testis. Differ-
ent mammalian PTH1Rs respond equivalently to PTH 
and PTHrP, whereas only the human PTH2R responds 
efficiently to PTH (but not to PTHrP); PTH2Rs from 
other species show little or no stimulation of second-
messenger formation in response to PTH or PTHrP. 
The endogenous ligand of the PTH2R was shown to be 
a hypothalamic peptide referred to as tubular infundibular 
peptide of 39 residues, TIP39, that is distantly related to 
PTH. The PTH1R and the PTH2R can be traced back-
ward in evolutionary time to fish; in fact, the zebrafish 
genome contains, in addition to the PTH1R and the 
hPTHrP
1
30
84
144
Amino acid residues
hPTH
1
30
84
Amino acid residues
hPTH  H-SER  VAL  SER  GLU  ILE  GLN  LEU  MET  HIS  ASN  LEU  GLY  LYS  HIS  LEU  –ASN  SER  MET  GLU  ARG  VAL  GLU  TRP  LEU  ARG  LYS  LYS  LEU  GLN  ASP
hPTHrp H-ALA    –       –         –    HIS     –       –     LEU     –   ASP  LYS     –       –    SER   ILE    GLN            LEU  ARG          
ASP
–
–
 ARG  PHE PHE          HIS   HIS   LEU   ILE   ALA   GLU
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 27-1
Schematic diagram to illustrate similarities and differ-
ences in structure of human parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
and human PTH-related peptide (PTHrP). Close structural 
(and functional) homology exists between the first 30 amino 
acids of hPTH and hPTHrP. The PTHrP sequence may be 
≥144 amino acid residues in length. PTH is only 84 residues
long; after residue 30, there is little structural homology 
between the two. Dashed lines in the PTHrP sequence indi-
cate identity; underlined residues, although different from 
those of PTH, still represent conservative changes (charge or 
polarity preserved). Ten amino acids are identical, and a total 
of 20 of 30 are homologues.
PTH2R orthologs, a third receptor, the PTH3R, that 
is more closely related to the fish PTH1R than the fish 
PTH2R. The evolutionary conservation of structure and 
function suggests important biologic roles for these recep-
tors, even in fish, which lack discrete parathyroid glands 
but produce two molecules that are closely related to 
mammalian PTH.
Studies using the cloned PTH1R confirm that it can 
be coupled to more than one G protein and second-
messenger pathway, apparently explaining the multiplicity 
of pathways stimulated by PTH. Stimulation of pro-
tein kinases (A and C) and calcium transport channels 
is associated with a variety of hormone-specific tissue 
responses. These responses include inhibition of phos-
phate and bicarbonate transport, stimulation of calcium 
transport, and activation of renal 1α-hydroxylase in the
kidney. The responses in bone include effects on col-
lagen synthesis, alkaline phosphatase, ornithine decar-
boxylase, citrate decarboxylase, and glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase activities, and phospholipid synthesis, as well 
as calcium and phosphate transport. Ultimately, these 
biochemical events lead to an integrated hormonal 
response in bone turnover and calcium homeostasis. 
PTH also activates Na+/Ca2+ exchangers at renal distal 
tubular sites and stimulates translocation of preformed 
calcium transport channels, moving them from the 
interior to the apical surface to increase tubular uptake 
of calcium. PTH-dependent stimulation of phosphate 
excretion (reducing reabsorption—the opposite effect 
from actions on calcium in the kidney) involves the 
downregulation of two sodium-dependent phosphate 
co-transporters, NPT2a and NPT2c, and expression at 
the apical membrane, thereby reducing phosphate reab-
sorption. Similar mechanisms may be involved in other 
renal tubular transporters that are influenced by PTH.
PTHrP exerts important developmental influences 
on fetal bone development and in adult physiology. 
A homozygous ablation of the gene encoding PTHrP 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
410
(or disruption of the gene encoding the PTH/PTHrP 
receptor) in mice causes a lethal phenotype in which 
animals are born with pronounced acceleration of chon-
drocyte maturation that resembles a lethal form of 
chondrodysplasia in humans (Fig. 27-2). Mice that are 
heterozygous for ablation of the PTHrP gene display 
reduced mineral density consistent with osteoporosis. 
Experiments with these mouse models point to a hith-
erto unappreciated role of PTHrP as a paracrine/auto-
crine factor that modulates bone metabolism in adults 
as well as during bone development.
Calcitonin
(See also Chap. 23.) Calcitonin is a hypocalcemic pep-
tide hormone that in several mammalian species acts as 
an antagonist to PTH. Calcitonin seems to be of limited 
physiologic significance in humans, at least with regard 
to calcium homeostasis. It is of medical significance 
because of its role as a tumor marker in sporadic and 
hereditary cases of medullary carcinoma and its medical 
use as an adjunctive treatment in severe hypercalcemia 
and in Paget’s disease of bone.
The hypocalcemic activity of calcitonin is accounted 
for primarily by inhibition of osteoclast-mediated bone 
resorption and secondarily by stimulation of renal cal-
cium clearance. These effects are mediated by recep-
tors on osteoclasts and renal tubular cells. Calcitonin 
exerts additional effects through receptors present in the 
brain, the gastrointestinal tract, and the immune sys-
tem. The hormone, for example, exerts analgesic effects 
directly on cells in the hypothalamus and related struc-
tures, possibly by interacting with receptors for related 
peptide hormones such as calcitonin gene–related pep-
tide (CGRP) or amylin. The latter ligands have specific 
high-affinity receptors and can also bind to and trigger 
calcitonin receptors. The calcitonin receptor shares con-
siderable structural similarity with the PTH1R.
The thyroid is the major source of the hormone, 
and the cells involved in calcitonin synthesis arise from 
neural crest tissue. During embryogenesis, these cells 
migrate into the ultimobranchial body, derived from 
the last branchial pouch. In submammalian vertebrates, the 
ultimobranchial body constitutes a discrete organ, ana-
tomically separate from the thyroid gland; in mammals, 
the ultimobranchial gland fuses with and is incorporated 
into the thyroid gland.
The naturally occurring calcitonins consist of a peptide 
chain of 32 amino acids. There is considerable sequence 
variability among species. Calcitonin from salmon, which 
is used therapeutically, is 10–100 times more potent than 
mammalian forms in lowering serum calcium.
There are two calcitonin genes, α and β; the tran-
scriptional control of these genes is complex. Two 
different mRNA molecules are transcribed from the 
α gene; one is translated into the precursor for calcito-
nin, and the other message is translated into an alterna-
tive product, CGRP. CGRP is synthesized wherever the 
calcitonin mRNA is expressed (e.g., in medullary car-
cinoma of the thyroid). The β, or CGRP-2, gene is 
transcribed into the mRNA for CGRP in the central 
nervous system (CNS); this gene does not produce cal-
citonin, however. CGRP has cardiovascular actions and 
may serve as a neurotransmitter or play a developmental 
role in the CNS.
The circulating level of calcitonin in humans is 
lower than that in many other species. In humans, even 
extreme variations in calcitonin production do not 
change calcium and phosphate metabolism; no definite 
effects are attributable to calcitonin deficiency (totally 
thyroidectomized patients receiving only replacement 
thyroxine) or excess (patients with medullary carcinoma 
of the thyroid, a calcitonin-secreting tumor) (Chap. 23). 
Calcitonin has been a useful pharmacologic agent to 
suppress bone resorption in Paget’s disease (Chap. 29) 
and osteoporosis (Chap. 28) and in the treatment of 
hypercalcemia of malignancy (see “Hypercalcemia”). 
However, the physiologic role, if any, of calcitonin in 
humans is uncertain. On the other hand, a knockout of 
the calcitonin gene in mice leads to reduced bone min-
eral density, suggesting that its biologic role in mammals 
is still not fully understood.
Hypercalcemia
(See also Chap. 26.) Hypercalcemia can be a manifes-
tation of a serious illness such as malignancy or can be 
detected coincidentally by laboratory testing in a patient 
Many
organs
Parathyroids
Calcium Homeostasis
Paracrine Actions
PTHrP
Brain
Growth Plate
Breast
Smooth muscle
Skin
Kidney
Bone
PTH
Ca21
Figure 27-2
Dual role for the actions of the PTH/PTHrP receptor 
(PTH1R). Parathyroid hormone (PTH; endocrine-calcium 
homeostasis) and PTH-related peptide (PTHrP; paracrine–
multiple tissue actions including growth plate cartilage in 
developing bone) use the single receptor for their disparate 
functions mediated by the amino-terminal 30 residues of 
either peptide. Other regions of both ligands interact with 
other receptors (not shown).
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
411
with no obvious illness. The number of patients recog-
nized with asymptomatic hypercalcemia, usually hyper-
parathyroidism, increased in the late twentieth century.
Whenever hypercalcemia is confirmed, a definitive 
diagnosis must be established. Although hyperparathy-
roidism, a frequent cause of asymptomatic hypercal-
cemia, is a chronic disorder in which manifestations, 
if any, may be expressed only after months or years, 
hypercalcemia can also be the earliest manifestation of 
malignancy, the second most common cause of hyper-
calcemia in the adult. The causes of hypercalcemia are 
numerous (Table 27-1), but hyperparathyroidism and 
cancer account for 90% of all cases.
Before undertaking a diagnostic workup, it is essen-
tial to be sure that true hypercalcemia, not a false-positive 
laboratory test, is present. A false-positive diagnosis of 
hypercalcemia is usually the result of inadvertent hemo-
concentration during blood collection or elevation in 
serum proteins such as albumin. Hypercalcemia is a 
chronic problem, and it is cost-effective to obtain sev-
eral serum calcium measurements; these tests need not 
be in the fasting state.
Clinical features are helpful in differential diagnosis. 
Hypercalcemia in an adult who is asymptomatic is usu-
ally due to primary hyperparathyroidism. In malignancy- 
associated hypercalcemia, the disease is usually not occult; 
rather, symptoms of malignancy bring the patient to the 
Table 27-1
Classification of Causes of Hypercalcemia
	 I.	 Parathyroid Related
	
	 A.	Primary hyperparathyroidism
	
	 	
1.	Adenoma(s)
	
	 	
2.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia
	
	 	
3.	Carcinoma
	
	 B.	Lithium therapy
	
	 C.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
	II.	 Malignancy Related
	
	 A.	Solid tumor with metastases (breast)
	
	 B.	Solid tumor with humoral mediation of hypercalcemia 
(lung, kidney)
	
	 C.	Hematologic malignancies (multiple myeloma,  
lymphoma, leukemia)
	III.	Vitamin D Related
	
	 A.	Vitamin D intoxication
	
	 B.	↑ 1,25(OH)2D; sarcoidosis and other granulomatous 
diseases
	
	 C.	Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy
	IV.	 Associated with High Bone Turnover
	
	 A.	Hyperthyroidism
	
	 B.	Immobilization
	
	 C.	Thiazides
	
	 D.	Vitamin A intoxication
	V.	 Associated with Renal Failure
	
	 A.	Severe secondary hyperparathyroidism
	
	 B.	Aluminum intoxication
	
	 C.	Milk-alkali syndrome
physician, and hypercalcemia is discovered during the 
evaluation. In such patients, the interval between detec-
tion of hypercalcemia and death, especially without vig-
orous treatment, is often <6 months. Accordingly, if an 
asymptomatic individual has had hypercalcemia or some 
manifestation of hypercalcemia such as kidney stones for 
>1 or 2 years, it is unlikely that malignancy is the cause. 
Nevertheless, differentiating primary hyperparathyroid-
ism from occult malignancy can occasionally be difficult, 
and careful evaluation is required, particularly when the 
duration of the hypercalcemia is unknown. Hypercal-
cemia not due to hyperparathyroidism or malignancy 
can result from excessive vitamin D action, high bone 
turnover from any of several causes, or from renal fail-
ure (Table 27-1). Dietary history and a history of inges-
tion of vitamins or drugs are often helpful in diagnosing 
some of the less frequent causes. Immunometric PTH 
assays serve as the principal laboratory test in establish-
ing the diagnosis.
Hypercalcemia from any cause can result in fatigue, 
depression, mental confusion, anorexia, nausea, vom-
iting, constipation, reversible renal tubular defects, 
increased urination, a short QT interval in the electro-
cardiogram, and, in some patients, cardiac arrhythmias. 
There is a variable relation from one patient to the next 
between the severity of hypercalcemia and the symp-
toms. Generally, symptoms are more common at cal-
cium levels >2.9–3 mmol/L (11.5–12 mg/dL), but some 
patients, even at this level, are asymptomatic. When the 
calcium level is >3.2 mmol/L (13 mg/dL), calcification 
in kidneys, skin, vessels, lungs, heart, and stomach occurs 
and renal insufficiency may develop, particularly if blood 
phosphate levels are normal or elevated due to impaired 
renal function. Severe hypercalcemia, usually defined 
as ≥3.7–4.5 mmol/L (15–18 mg/dL), can be a medical 
emergency; coma and cardiac arrest can occur.
Acute management of the hypercalcemia is usually 
successful. The type of treatment is based on the sever-
ity of the hypercalcemia and the nature of associated 
symptoms, as outlined below.
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
Natural history and incidence
Primary hyperparathyroidism is a generalized disorder 
of calcium, phosphate, and bone metabolism due to an 
increased secretion of PTH. The elevation of circulating 
hormone usually leads to hypercalcemia and hypophos-
phatemia. There is great variation in the manifestations. 
Patients may present with multiple signs and symptoms, 
including recurrent nephrolithiasis, peptic ulcers, mental 
changes, and, less frequently, extensive bone resorption. 
However, with greater awareness of the disease and 
wider use of multiphasic screening tests, including mea-
surements of blood calcium, the diagnosis is frequently 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
412
made in patients who have no symptoms and minimal, 
if any, signs of the disease other than hypercalcemia and 
elevated levels of PTH. The manifestations may be sub-
tle, and the disease may have a benign course for many 
years or a lifetime. This milder form of the disease is 
usually termed asymptomatic HPT. Rarely, hyperpara-
thyroidism develops or worsens abruptly and causes 
severe complications such as marked dehydration and 
coma, so-called hypercalcemic parathyroid crisis.
The annual incidence of the disease is calculated to be 
as high as 0.2% in patients >60, with an estimated preva-
lence, including undiscovered asymptomatic patients, of 
≥1%; some reports suggest the incidence may be declin-
ing. If confirmed, these changing estimates may reflect 
less frequent routine testing of serum calcium in recent 
years, earlier overestimates in incidence, or unknown 
factors. The disease has a peak incidence between the 
third and fifth decades but occurs in young children and 
in the elderly.
Etiology
Parathyroid tumors are most often encountered as iso-
lated adenomas without other endocrinopathy. They 
may also arise in hereditary syndromes such as MEN 
syndromes. Parathyroid tumors may also arise second-
arily to underlying disease (excessive stimulation in sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism, especially chronic renal 
failure), or after other forms of excessive stimulation 
such as lithium therapy. These etiologies are discussed 
below.
Solitary adenomas
A single abnormal gland is the cause in ∼80% of 
patients; the abnormality in the gland is usually a benign 
neoplasm or adenoma and rarely a parathyroid carci-
noma. Some surgeons and pathologists report that the 
enlargement of multiple glands is common; double 
adenomas are reported. In ∼15% of patients, all glands 
are hyperfunctioning; chief cell parathyroid hyperplasia is 
usually hereditary and frequently associated with other 
endocrine abnormalities.
Hereditary syndromes and multiple parathyroid 
tumors
Hereditary hyperparathyroidism can occur without 
other endocrine abnormalities but is usually part of a 
multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome (Chap. 23). MEN 1
(Wermer’s syndrome) consists of hyperparathyroidism 
and tumors of the pituitary and pancreas, often associ-
ated with gastric hypersecretion and peptic ulcer disease 
(Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). MEN 2A is characterized 
by pheochromocytoma and medullary carcinoma of 
the thyroid, as well as hyperparathyroidism; MEN 2B 
has additional associated features such as multiple neu-
romas but usually lacks hyperparathyroidism. Each of 
these MEN syndromes is transmitted in an apparent 
autosomal dominant manner, although, as noted below, 
the genetic basis of MEN 1 involves biallelic loss of a 
tumor suppressor.
The hyperparathyroidism jaw tumor (HPT-JT) syndrome 
occurs in families with parathyroid tumors (sometimes 
carcinomas) in association with benign jaw tumors. 
Some kindreds exhibit hereditary hyperparathyroidism 
without other endocrinopathies. This disorder is often 
termed nonsyndromic familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 
(FIHP). There is speculation that these families may be 
examples of variable expression of the other syndromes 
such as MEN 1, MEN 2, or the HPT-JT syndrome, but 
they may also have distinctive, still unidentified genetic 
causes.
Pathology
Adenomas are most often located in the inferior para-
thyroid glands, but in 6–10% of patients, parathyroid 
adenomas may be located in the thymus, the thyroid, 
the pericardium, or behind the esophagus. Adenomas 
are usually 0.5–5 g in size but may be as large as 10–20 g 
(normal glands weigh 25 mg on average). Chief cells are 
predominant in both hyperplasia and adenoma. With 
chief cell hyperplasia, the enlargement may be so asym-
metric that some involved glands appear grossly normal. 
If generalized hyperplasia is present, however, histologic 
examination reveals a uniform pattern of chief cells and 
disappearance of fat even in the absence of an increase 
in gland weight. Thus, microscopic examination of biopsy 
specimens of several glands is essential to interpret find-
ings at surgery.
Parathyroid carcinoma is often not aggressive. Long-
term survival without recurrence is common if at initial 
surgery the entire gland is removed without rupture of 
the capsule. Recurrent parathyroid carcinoma is usu-
ally slow-growing with local spread in the neck, and 
surgical correction of recurrent disease may be feasible. 
Occasionally, however, parathyroid carcinoma is more 
aggressive, with distant metastases (lung, liver, and bone) 
found at the time of initial operation. It may be difficult 
to appreciate initially that a primary tumor is carcinoma; 
increased numbers of mitotic figures and increased 
fibrosis of the gland stroma may precede invasion. The 
diagnosis of carcinoma is often made in retrospect. 
Hyperparathyroidism from a parathyroid carcinoma may 
be indistinguishable from other forms of primary hyper-
parathyroidism but is usually more severe clinically. A 
potential clue to the diagnosis is offered by the degree 
of calcium elevation. Calcium values of 3.5–3.7 mmol/L 
(14–15 mg/dL) are frequent with carcinoma and may 
alert the surgeon to remove the abnormal gland with 
care to avoid capsular rupture. Recent findings concern-
ing the genetic basis of parathyroid carcinoma (distinct 
from that of benign adenomas) indicate the need, in 
these kindreds, for family screening (see later).
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
413
Genetic Defects Associated with 
Hyperparathyroidism
As in many other types of neoplasia, two funda-
mental types of genetic defects have been identi-
fied in parathyroid gland tumors: (1) overactivity 
of protooncogenes and (2) loss of function of tumor-
suppressor genes. The former, by definition, can lead 
to uncontrolled cellular growth and function by acti-
vation (gain-of-function mutation) of a single allele of 
the responsible gene, whereas the latter requires loss of 
function of both allelic copies. Biallelic loss of function 
of a tumor-suppressor gene is usually characterized by 
a germ-line defect (all cells) and an additional somatic 
deletion/mutation in the tumor (Fig. 27-3).
Mutations in the MEN1 gene locus, encoding the 
protein MENIN, on chromosome 11q13 are respon-
sible for causing MEN 1; the normal allele of this gene 
fits the definition of a tumor-suppressor gene. Inheri-
tance of one mutated allele in this hereditary syndrome, 
followed by loss of the other allele via somatic cell 
mutation, leads to monoclonal expansion and tumor 
development. Also, in ∼15–20% of sporadic parathyroid 
adenomas, both alleles of the MEN1 locus on chromo-
some 11 are somatically deleted, implying that the same 
defect responsible for MEN 1 can also cause the spo-
radic disease (Fig. 27-3A). Consistent with the Knudson 
hypothesis for two-step neoplasia in certain inherited 
cancer syndromes, the earlier onset of hyperparathy-
roidism in the hereditary syndromes reflects the need 
for only one mutational event to trigger the monoclo-
nal outgrowth. In sporadic adenomas, typically occur-
ring later in life, two different somatic events must occur 
before the MEN1 gene is silenced.
Other presumptive anti-oncogenes involved in hyper­
parathyroidism include a still unidentified gene mapped 
to chromosome 1p seen in 40% of sporadic parathyroid 
adenomas and a gene mapped to chromosome Xp11 in 
patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism and renal 
failure, who progressed to “tertiary” hyperparathyroid-
ism, now known to reflect monoclonal outgrowths 
within previously hyperplastic glands.
A more complex pattern, still incompletely resolved, 
arises with genetic defects and carcinoma of the parathy-
roids. This appears to be due to biallelic loss of a func-
tioning copy of a gene, HRPT2 (or CDC73), originally
Normal
 copy
Mutant
 copy
Somatic
 deletion/mutation
 of remaining
 normal allele
Benign
 tumor
Clonal progenitor cell lacks
 functional gene product
Chromosome 1
Somatic
 deletion/mutation
 of remaining
 normal allele
Parathyroid
 carcinoma
Somatic mutation of one copy of the 
 HRPT2 tumor suppressor gene on 
 1q21–31 no adverse consequences 
 to parathyroid cell
Clonal progenitor cell lacks
 functional HRPT2 gene product
Mutant copy of putative tumor
 suppressor gene on 11q13 is
 inherited in MEN-1 and present
 in all parathyroid cells
Mutation of one allele of same
 gene may occur somatically in
 other patients, present in specific
 parathyroid cell(s)
Normal
 copy
Mutant
 copy
PTH
  Coding
Break
PTH 
 Coding
PTH 5'
  Regulatory
Centromere
Break
PRAD1
Normal
PTH 5'
  Regulatory
PRAD1
Inverted
A
B
Figure 27-3
A: Schematic diagram indicating molecular events in tumor 
susceptibility. The patient with the hereditary abnormality (mul-
tiple endocrine neoplasia, or MEN) is envisioned as having one 
defective gene inherited from the affected parent on chromo-
some 11, but one copy of the normal gene is present from 
the other parent. In the monoclonal tumor (benign tumor), a 
somatic event (here, partial chromosomal deletion) removes the 
remaining normal gene from a cell. In nonhereditary tumors, 
two successive somatic mutations must occur, a process that 
takes a longer time. By either pathway, the cell, deprived of 
growth-regulating influence from this gene, has unregulated 
growth and becomes a tumor. A different genetic locus also 
involving loss of a tumor-suppressor gene termed HRPT2 is 
involved in the pathogenesis of parathyroid carcinoma. (From 
A Arnold: J Clin Endocrine Metab 77:1108, 1993. harrsion  
1993, The Endocrine Society.) B: Schematic illustration of the 
mechanism and consequences of gene rearrangement and 
overexpression of the PRAD 1 protooncogene (pericentromeric 
inversion of chromosome 11) in parathyroid adenomas. The 
excessive expression of PRAD 1 (a cell cycle control protein, 
cyclin D1) by the highly active PTH gene promoter in the para-
thyroid cell contributes to excess cellular proliferation. (From 
J Habener et al, in L DeGroot, JL Jameson [eds]: Endocrinology, 
4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2001; with permission.)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
414
identified as the cause of the HPT-JT syndrome. Several 
inactivating mutations have been identified in HRPT2 
(located on chromosome 1q21-31), which encodes a 
531-amino-acid protein called parafibromin. The respon-
sible genetic mutations in HRPT2 appear to be neces-
sary, but not sufficient, for parathyroid cancer.
In general, the detection of additional genetic defects 
in these parathyroid tumor–related syndromes and the 
variations seen in phenotypic expression/penetrance 
indicate the multiplicity of the genetic factors respon-
sible. Nonetheless, the ability to detect the presence of 
the major genetic contributors has greatly aided a more 
informed management of family members of patients 
identified in the hereditary syndromes such as MEN 1, 
MEN 2, and HPT-JT.
An important contribution from studies on the ge-
netic origin of parathyroid carcinoma has been the 
realization that the mutations involve a different path-
way than that involved with the benign gland enlarge-
ments. Unlike the pathogenesis of genetic alterations 
seen in colon cancer, where lesions evolve from benign 
adenomas to malignant disease by progressive genetic 
changes, the alterations commonly seen in most para-
thyroid cancers (HRPT2 mutations) are infrequently 
seen in sporadic parathyroid adenomas.
Abnormalities at the Rb gene were the first to be 
noted in parathyroid cancer. The Rb gene, a tumor-
suppressor gene located on chromosome 13q14, was 
initially associated with retinoblastoma but has since 
been implicated in other neoplasias, including parathy-
roid carcinoma. Early studies implicated allelic deletions 
of the Rb gene in many parathyroid carcinomas and 
decreased or absent expression of the Rb protein. How-
ever, because there are often large deletions in chromo-
some 13 that include many genes in addition to the Rb 
locus (with similar findings in some pituitary carcino-
mas), it remains possible that other tumor-suppressor 
genes on chromosome 13 may be playing a role in para-
thyroid carcinoma.
Study of the parathyroid cancers found in some 
patients with the HPT-JT syndrome has led to identifi-
cation of a much larger role for mutations in the HRPT2 
gene in most parathyroid carcinomas, including those 
that arise sporadically, without apparent association with 
the HPT-JT syndrome. Mutations in the coding region 
have been identified in 75–80% of all parathyroid can-
cers analyzed, leading to the conclusion that, with addi-
tion of presumed mutations in the noncoding regions, 
this genetic defect may be seen in essentially all parathy-
roid carcinomas. Of special importance was the discov-
ery that, in some sporadic parathyroid cancers, germ-
line mutations have been found; this, in turn, has led 
to careful investigation of the families of these patients 
and a new clinical indication for genetic testing in this 
setting.
Hypercalcemia occurring in family members (who 
are also found to have the germ-line mutations) can lead 
to the finding, at parathyroid surgery, of premalignant 
parathyroid tumors.
Overall, it seems there are multiple factors in parathy-
roid cancer, in addition to the HRPT2 and Rb genes, 
although the HRPT2 gene mutation is the most invari-
ant abnormality. RET encodes a tyrosine kinase type 
receptor; specific inherited germ-line mutations lead to a 
constitutive activation of the receptor, thereby explain-
ing the autosomal dominant mode of transmission and 
the relatively early onset of neoplasia. In the MEN 2 
syndrome, the RET protooncogene may be responsible 
for the earliest disorder detected, the polyclonal disor-
der (C-cell hyperplasia, which then is transformed into a 
clonal outgrowth—a medullary carcinoma with the par-
ticipation of other, still uncharacterized genetic defects).
In some parathyroid adenomas, activation of a proto-
oncogene has been identified (Fig. 27-3B). A reciprocal 
translocation involving chromosome 11 has been iden-
tified that juxtaposes the PTH gene promoter upstream 
of a gene product termed PRAD-1, encoding a cyclin D
protein that plays a key role in normal cell division. 
This translocation plus other mechanisms that cause an 
equivalent overexpression of cyclin D1 are found in 
20–40% of parathyroid adenomas.
Mouse models have confirmed the role of several of 
the major identified genetic defects in parathyroid dis-
ease and the MEN syndromes. Loss of the MEN1 gene 
locus or overexpression of the PRAD-1 protoonco-
gene or the mutated RET protooncogene have been 
analyzed by genetic manipulation in mice, with the 
expected onset of parathyroid tumors or medullary car-
cinoma, respectively.
Signs and symptoms
One-half or more of patients with hyperparathyroidism 
are asymptomatic. In series in which patients are fol-
lowed without operation, as many as 80% are classified 
as without symptoms. Manifestations of hyperparathy-
roidism involve primarily the kidneys and the skeletal 
system. Kidney involvement, due either to deposition 
of calcium in the renal parenchyma or to recurrent 
nephrolithiasis, was present in 60–70% of patients prior 
to 1970. With earlier detection, renal complications 
occur in <20% of patients in many large series. Renal 
stones are usually composed of either calcium oxalate 
or calcium phosphate. In occasional patients, repeated 
episodes of nephrolithiasis or the formation of large cal-
culi may lead to urinary tract obstruction, infection, and 
loss of renal function. Nephrocalcinosis may also cause 
decreased renal function and phosphate retention.
The distinctive bone manifestation of hyperpara-
thyroidism is osteitis fibrosa cystica, which occurred in 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
415
10–25% of patients in series reported 50 years ago. His-
tologically, the pathognomonic features are an increase 
in the giant multinucleated osteoclasts in scalloped areas 
on the surface of the bone (Howship’s lacunae) and a 
replacement of the normal cellular and marrow elements 
by fibrous tissue. X-ray changes include resorption of 
the phalangeal tufts and replacement of the usually sharp 
cortical outline of the bone in the digits by an irregular 
outline (subperiosteal resorption). In recent years, osteitis 
fibrosa cystica is very rare in primary hyperparathyroid-
ism, probably due to the earlier detection of the disease.
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) of the 
spine provides reproducible quantitative estimates 
(within a few percent) of spinal bone density. Simi-
larly, bone density in the extremities can be quanti-
fied by densitometry of the hip or of the distal radius 
at a site chosen to be primarily cortical. CT is a very 
sensitive technique for estimating spinal bone density, 
but reproducibility of standard CT is no better than 
5%. Newer CT techniques (spiral, “extreme” CT) are 
more reproducible but are currently available in a lim-
ited number of medical centers. Cortical bone density is 
reduced while cancellous bone density, especially in the 
spine, is relatively preserved. In symptomatic patients, 
dysfunctions of the CNS, peripheral nerve and muscle, 
gastrointestinal tract, and joints also occur. It has been 
reported that severe neuropsychiatric manifestations may 
be reversed by parathyroidectomy. When present in 
symptomatic patients, neuromuscular manifestations may 
include proximal muscle weakness, easy fatigability, and 
atrophy of muscles and may be so striking as to suggest a 
primary neuromuscular disorder. The distinguishing fea-
ture is the complete regression of neuromuscular disease 
after surgical correction of the hyperparathyroidism.
Gastrointestinal manifestations are sometimes subtle 
and include vague abdominal complaints and disorders 
of the stomach and pancreas. Again, cause and effect are 
unclear. In MEN 1 patients with hyperparathyroidism, 
duodenal ulcer may be the result of associated pancre-
atic tumors that secrete excessive quantities of gastrin 
(Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). Pancreatitis has been reported 
in association with hyperparathyroidism, but the inci-
dence and the mechanism are not established.
Much attention has been paid in recent years to the 
manifestations of and optimum management strategies 
for asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism. This is now 
the most prevalent form of the disease. Asymptomatic 
primary hyperparathyroidism is defined as biochemically 
confirmed hyperparathyroidism (elevated or inappro-
priately normal PTH levels despite hypercalcemia) with 
the absence of signs and symptoms typically associated 
with more severe hyperparathyroidism such as features 
of renal or bone disease.
Three conferences on the topic have been held in 
the United States over the past two decades, with the 
most recent in 2008. The published proceedings include 
discussion of more subtle manifestations of disease, its 
natural history (without parathyroidectomy), and guide-
lines both for indications for surgery and medical moni-
toring in nonoperated patients.
Issues of concern include the potential for cardiovas-
cular deterioration, the presence of subtle neuropsychi-
atric symptoms, and the longer-term status of skeletal 
integrity in patients not treated surgically. The current 
consensus is that medical monitoring rather than surgi-
cal correction of hyperparathyroidism may be justified 
in certain patients. The current recommendation is that 
patients who show mild disease, as defined by specific 
criteria (Table 27-2), can be safely followed under 
management guidelines (Table 27-3). There is, how-
ever, growing uncertainty about subtle disease mani-
festations and whether surgery is therefore indicated 
in most patients. Among the issues is the evidence of 
eventual (>8 years) deterioration in bone mineral den-
sity after a decade of relative stability. There is con-
cern that this late-onset deterioration in bone density 
Table 27-2
Guidelines for Surgery in Asymptomatic 
Primary Hyperparathyroidisma
Parameter
Guideline
Serum calcium (above  
normal)
>1 mg/dL
24-h urinary Ca
No indication
Creatinine clearance  
(calculated)
If <60 mL/min
Bone density
T score <−2.5 at any of 
3 sitesb
Age
<50
aJP Bilezikian et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:335, 2009.
bSpine, distal radius, hip.
Table 27-3
Guidelines for Monitoring in Asymptomatic 
Primary Hyperparathyroidisma
Parameter
Guideline
Serum calcium
Annually
24-h urinary calcium
Not recommended
Creatinine clearance
Not recommended
Serum creatinineb
Annually
Bone density
Annually (3 sites)a
aUpdated guidelines (JP Bilezikian et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
94:335, 2009).
bCreatinine clearance calculated by Cockcroft-Gault equation or 
MDRD equation.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
416
in nonoperated patients could contribute significantly 
to the well-known age-dependent fracture risk (osteo-
porosis). One study reported significant and sustained 
improvements in bone mineral density after success-
ful parathyroidectomy, again raising the issue regarding 
benefits of surgery. Other randomized studies, however, 
did not report major gains post-surgery.
Cardiovascular disease including left ventricular hyper-
trophy, cardiac functional defects, and endothelial dys-
function have been reported as reversible in European 
patients with more severe symptomatic disease after 
surgery, leading to numerous studies of these cardio-
vascular features in those with milder disease. There are 
reports of endothelial dysfunction in patients with mild 
asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism, but more observa-
tion is needed, the expert panels concluded, especially 
whether there is reversibility with surgery.
A topic of considerable interest and some debate is 
assessment of neuropsychiatric status and health-related 
quality of life (QOL) status in hyperparathyroid patients 
both before surgery and in response to parathyroidec-
tomy. Several observational studies suggest considerable 
improvements in symptom score after surgery. Ran-
domized studies of surgery versus observation, however, 
have yielded inconclusive results, especially regarding 
benefits of surgery. Most studies report that hyperpara-
thyroidism is associated with increased neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, so the issue remains a significant factor in 
decisions regarding the impact of surgery in this disease.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is typically made by detecting an elevated 
immunoreactive PTH level in a patient with asymp-
tomatic hypercalcemia (see “Differential Diagnosis: Spe-
cial Tests,” below). Serum phosphate is usually low but 
may be normal, especially if renal failure has developed.
Several modifications in PTH assays have been intro-
duced in efforts to improve their utility in light of infor-
mation about metabolism of PTH (as discussed above). 
First-generation assays were based on displacement of 
radiolabeled PTH from antibodies that reacted with 
PTH (often also PTH fragments). Double-antibody or 
immunometric assays (one antibody that is usually directed 
against the carboxyl-terminal portion of intact PTH to 
capture the hormone and a second radio- or enzyme-
labeled antibody that is usually directed against the 
amino-terminal portion of intact PTH) greatly improved 
the diagnostic discrimination of the tests by eliminating 
interference from circulating biologically inactive frag-
ments, detected by the original first-generation assays. 
Double-antibody assays are now referred to as second 
generation. Such PTH assays have in some centers and 
testing laboratories been replaced by third-generation 
assays after it was discovered that large PTH fragments, 
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia of malignancy
Hypoparathyroidism
1000
800
600
500
400
300
200
100
20
1
Parathyroid hormone 1–84 (pg/mL)
0
0 6 7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
19
18
Calcium (mg/dL)
Figure 27-4
Levels of immunoreactive parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
detected in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism, hyper­
calcemia of malignancy, and hypoparathyroidism. Boxed area 
represents the upper and normal limits of blood calcium and/
or immunoreactive PTH. (From SR Nussbaum, JT Potts, Jr, 
in L DeGroot, JL Jameson [eds]: Endocrinology, 4th ed. 
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2001; with permission.)
devoid of only the extreme amino-terminal portion of the 
PTH molecule, are also present in blood and are detected, 
incorrectly, as intact PTH. These amino-terminally trun-
cated PTH fragments were prevented from registering in 
the newer third-generation assays by use of a detection 
antibody directed against the extreme amino-terminal 
epitope. These assays may be useful for clinical research 
studies as in management of chronic renal disease, but 
the consensus is that either second- or third-generation 
assays are useful in the diagnosis of primary hyperpara-
thyroidism and for the diagnosis of high-turnover bone 
disease in chronic kidney disease.
Many tests based on renal responses to excess PTH 
(renal calcium and phosphate clearance; blood phos-
phate, chloride, magnesium; urinary or nephrogenous 
cyclic AMP) were used in earlier decades. These tests 
have low specificity for hyperparathyroidism and are 
therefore not cost-effective; they have been replaced by 
PTH immunometric assays combined with simultane-
ous blood calcium measurements (Fig. 27-4).
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
417
Treatment	
Hyperparathyroidism
Surgical excision of the abnormal parathyroid tissue is 
the definitive therapy for this disease. As noted above, 
medical surveillance without operation for patients with 
mild, asymptomatic disease is, however, still preferred 
by some physicians and patients, particularly when the 
patients are elderly. Evidence favoring surgery, if medi-
cally feasible, is growing because of concerns about 
skeletal, cardiovascular, and neuropsychiatric disease, 
even in mild hyperparathyroidism.
Two surgical approaches are generally practiced. The 
conventional parathyroidectomy procedure was neck 
exploration with general anesthesia; this procedure is 
being replaced in many centers, whenever feasible, by 
an outpatient procedure with local anesthesia, termed 
minimally invasive parathyroidectomy.
Parathyroid exploration is challenging and should 
be undertaken by an experienced surgeon. Certain fea-
tures help in predicting the pathology (e.g., multiple 
abnormal glands in familial cases). However, some criti-
cal decisions regarding management can be made only 
during the operation.
With conventional surgery, one approach is still 
based on the view that typically only one gland (the 
adenoma) is abnormal. If an enlarged gland is found, a 
normal gland should be sought. In this view, if a biopsy 
of a normal-sized second gland confirms its histologic 
(and presumed functional) normality, no further explora-
tion, biopsy, or excision is needed. At the other extreme 
is the minority viewpoint that all four glands be sought 
and that most of the total parathyroid tissue mass be 
removed. The concern with the former approach is 
that the recurrence rate of hyperparathyroidism may 
be high if a second abnormal gland is missed; the lat-
ter approach could involve unnecessary surgery and an 
unacceptable rate of hypoparathyroidism. When normal 
glands are found in association with one enlarged gland, 
excision of the single adenoma usually leads to cure or 
at least years free of symptoms. Long-term follow-up 
studies to establish true rates of recurrence are limited.
Recently, there has been growing experience with 
new surgical strategies that feature a minimally invasive 
approach guided by improved preoperative localization 
and intraoperative monitoring by PTH assays. Preopera-
tive 99m Tc sestamibi scans with single-photon emission 
CT (SPECT) are used to predict the location of an abnor-
mal gland and intraoperative sampling of PTH before 
and at 5-minute intervals after removal of a suspected 
adenoma to confirm a rapid fall (>50%) to normal levels 
of PTH. In several centers, a combination of preoperative 
sestamibi imaging, cervical block anesthesia, minimal 
surgical incision, and intraoperative PTH measurements 
has allowed successful outpatient surgical management
with a clear-cut cost benefit compared to general anes-
thesia and more extensive neck surgery. The use of 
these minimally invasive approaches requires clinical 
judgment to select patients unlikely to have multiple 
gland disease (e.g., MEN or secondary hyperparathy-
roidism). The growing acceptance of the technique and 
its relative ease for the patient has lowered the thresh-
old for surgery.
Usually the severity of the hypercalcemia provides 
a preoperative clue to parathyroid carcinoma. In such 
cases, when neck exploration is undertaken, the tissue 
should be widely excised; care is taken to avoid rupture 
of the capsule to prevent local seeding of tumor cells.
Multiple-gland hyperplasia, as predicted in familial 
cases, poses more difficult questions of surgical man-
agement. Once a diagnosis of hyperplasia is established, 
all the glands must be identified. Two schemes have 
been proposed for surgical management. One is to 
totally remove three glands with partial excision of the 
fourth gland; care is taken to leave a good blood supply 
for the remaining gland. Other surgeons advocate total 
parathyroidectomy with immediate transplantation of 
a portion of a removed, minced parathyroid gland into 
the muscles of the forearm, with the view that surgical 
excision is easier from the ectopic site in the arm if there 
is recurrent hyperfunction.
In a minority of cases, if no abnormal parathyroid 
glands are found in the neck, the issue of further explo-
ration must be decided. There are documented cases of 
five or six parathyroid glands and of unusual locations 
for adenomas such as in the mediastinum.
When a second parathyroid exploration is indicated, 
the minimally invasive techniques for preoperative 
localization such as ultrasound, CT scan, and isotope 
scanning are combined with venous sampling and/or 
selective digital arteriography in one of the centers spe-
cializing in these procedures. Intraoperative monitoring 
of PTH levels by rapid PTH immunoassays may be useful 
in guiding the surgery. At one center, long-term cures 
have been achieved with selective embolization or 
injection of large amounts of contrast material into the 
end-arterial circulation feeding the parathyroid tumor.
A decline in serum calcium occurs within 24 h after 
successful surgery; usually blood calcium falls to 
low-normal values for 3–5 days until the remain-
ing parathyroid tissue resumes full hormone secre-
tion. Acute postoperative hypocalcemia is likely only 
if severe bone mineral deficits are present or if injury 
to all the normal parathyroid glands occurs during sur-
gery. In general, there are few problems encountered 
in patients with uncomplicated disease such as a single 
adenoma (the clear majority), who do not have symp-
tomatic bone disease nor a large deficit in bone min-
eral, who are vitamin D and magnesium sufficient, and 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
418
who have good renal and gastrointestinal function. The 
extent of postoperative hypocalcemia varies with the 
surgical approach. If all glands are biopsied, hypocal-
cemia may be transiently symptomatic and more pro-
longed. Hypocalcemia is more likely to be symptomatic 
after second parathyroid explorations, particularly when 
normal parathyroid tissue was removed at the initial 
operation and when the manipulation and/or biopsy of 
the remaining normal glands are more extensive in the 
search for the missing adenoma.
Patients with hyperparathyroidism have efficient 
intestinal calcium absorption due to the increased lev-
els of 1,25(OH)2D stimulated by PTH excess. Once hypo-
calcemia signifies successful surgery, patients can be 
put on a high-calcium intake or be given oral calcium 
supplements. Despite mild hypocalcemia, most patients 
do not require parenteral therapy. If the serum calcium 
falls to <2 mmol/L (8 mg/dL), and if the phosphate level 
rises simultaneously, the possibility that surgery has 
caused hypoparathyroidism must be considered. With 
unexpected hypocalcemia, coexistent hypomagnesemia 
should be considered, as it interferes with PTH secretion 
and causes functional hypoparathyroidism (Chap. 25).
Signs of hypocalcemia include symptoms such as 
muscle twitching, a general sense of anxiety, and posi-
tive Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s signs coupled with 
serum calcium consistently <2 mmol/L (8 mg/dL). Par-
enteral calcium replacement at a low level should be 
instituted when hypocalcemia is symptomatic. The rate 
and duration of IV therapy are determined by the sever-
ity of the symptoms and the response of the serum cal-
cium to treatment. An infusion of 0.5–2 mg/kg per hour 
or 30–100 mL/h of a 1-mg/mL solution usually suffices to 
relieve symptoms. Usually, parenteral therapy is required 
for only a few days. If symptoms worsen or if parenteral 
calcium is needed for >2–3 days, therapy with a 
vitamin D analogue and/or oral calcium (2–4 g/d) should 
be started (see below). It is cost-effective to use calcitriol 
(doses of 0.5–1 μg/d) because of the rapidity of onset of 
effect and prompt cessation of action when stopped, in 
comparison to other forms of vitamin D. A rise in blood 
calcium after several months of vitamin D replacement 
may indicate restoration of parathyroid function to nor-
mal. It is also appropriate to monitor serum PTH serially 
to estimate gland function in such patients.
If magnesium deficiency is present, it can compli-
cate the postoperative course since magnesium defi-
ciency impairs the secretion of PTH. Hypomagnesemia 
should be corrected whenever detected. Magnesium 
replacement can be effective orally (e.g., MgCl2, MgOH2), 
but parenteral repletion is usual to ensure postopera-
tive recovery, if magnesium deficiency is suspected due 
to low blood magnesium levels. Because the depressant 
effect of magnesium on central and peripheral nerve
functions does not occur at levels <2 mmol/L (normal 
range 0.8–1.2 mmol/L), parenteral replacement can be 
given rapidly. A cumulative dose as great as 0.5–1 mmol/kg 
of body weight can be administered if severe hypo-
magnesemia is present; often, however, total doses of 
20–40 mmol are sufficient.
Medical Management  The guidelines for rec-
ommending surgical intervention, if feasible (Table 27-2), 
as well as for monitoring patients with asymptomatic 
hyperparathyroidism who elect not to undergo para-
thyroidectomy (Table 27-3), reflect the changes over 
time since the first conference on the topic in 1990. 
Medical monitoring rather than corrective surgery is still 
acceptable, but it is clear that surgical intervention is the 
more frequently recommended option for the reasons 
noted above. Tightened guidelines favoring surgery 
include lowering the recommended level of serum cal-
cium elevation, more careful attention to skeletal integ-
rity through reference to peak skeletal mass at baseline  
(T scores) rather than age-adjusted bone density (Z scores),
as well as the presence of any fragility fracture. The other 
changes noted in the two guidelines (Tables 27-2 and  
27-3) reflect accumulated experience and practical con-
sideration, such as a difficulty in quantity of urine col-
lections. Despite the usefulness of the guidelines, the 
importance of individual patient and physician judgment 
and preference are clear in all recommendations.
When surgery is not selected, or not medically fea-
sible, there is interest in the potential value of specific 
medical therapies. There is no long-term experience 
regarding specific clinical outcomes such as fracture 
prevention, but it has been established that bisphos-
phonates increase bone mineral density significantly 
without changing serum calcium (as does estrogen, but 
the latter is not favored because of reported adverse 
effects in other organ systems). Calcimimetics that lower 
PTH secretion lower calcium but do not affect bone 
mass density (BMD).
Other Parathyroid-Related Causes 
of Hypercalcemia
Lithium therapy
Lithium, used in the management of bipolar depres-
sion and other psychiatric disorders, causes hypercalce-
mia in ∼10% of treated patients. The hypercalcemia is 
dependent on continued lithium treatment, remitting 
and recurring when lithium is stopped and restarted. 
The parathyroid adenomas reported in some hyper-
calcemic patients with lithium therapy may reflect the 
presence of an independently occurring parathyroid tu- 
mor; a permanent effect of lithium on parathyroid 
gland growth need not be implicated as most patients 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
419
have complete reversal of hypercalcemia when lithium 
is stopped. However, long-standing stimulation of para-
thyroid cell replication by lithium may predispose to the 
development of adenomas (as is documented in second-
ary hyperparathyroidism and renal failure).
At the levels achieved in blood in treated patients, 
lithium can be shown in vitro to shift the PTH secre-
tion curve to the right in response to calcium; i.e., 
higher calcium levels are required to lower PTH secre-
tion, probably acting at the calcium sensor (see below). 
This effect can cause elevated PTH levels and conse-
quent hypercalcemia in otherwise normal individuals. 
Fortunately, there are usually alternative medications for 
the underlying psychiatric illness. Parathyroid surgery 
should not be recommended unless hypercalcemia and 
elevated PTH levels persist after lithium is discontinued.
Genetic Disorders Causing 
Hyperparathyroid-Like Syndromes
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
FHH (also called familial benign hypercalcemia) is inher-
ited as an autosomal dominant trait. Affected individuals 
are discovered because of asymptomatic hypercalcemia. 
FHH, which is caused by an inactivating mutation in a 
single allele of the calcium sensing receptor (see below), 
involves inappropriately normal or even increased secre-
tion of PTH, whereas another hypercalcemic disorder, 
namely the exceedingly rare Jansen’s disease, is caused 
by a constitutively active PTH/PTHrP receptor in tar-
get tissues. Neither FHH nor Jansen’s disease, however, 
is a growth disorder of the parathyroids.
The pathophysiology of FHH is now understood. 
The primary defect is abnormal sensing of the blood cal-
cium by the parathyroid gland and renal tubule, caus-
ing inappropriate secretion of PTH and excessive renal 
reabsorption of calcium. The calcium-sensing receptor is 
a member of the third family of GPCRs (type C, or III). 
The receptor responds to increased ECF calcium concen-
tration by suppressing PTH secretion through second- 
messenger signaling, thereby providing negative-feedback 
regulation of PTH secretion. Many different inactivat-
ing mutations in the calcium-sensing receptor have 
been identified in patients with FHH. These mutations 
lower the capacity of the sensor to bind calcium, and the 
mutant receptors function as though blood calcium lev-
els were low; excessive secretion of PTH occurs from 
an otherwise normal gland. Approximately two-thirds of 
patients with FHH have mutations within the protein-
coding region of the gene. The remaining one-third of 
kindreds may have mutations in the gene promoter or 
may involve still unknown mechanisms in other regions 
of the genome identified through mapping studies (e.g., 
chromosomes 19p and 19q).
Even before elucidation of the pathophysiology of 
FHH, abundant clinical evidence served to separate the 
disorder from primary hyperparathyroidism; these clini-
cal features are still useful in differential diagnosis. Patients 
with primary hyperparathyroidism have <99% renal cal-
cium reabsorption, whereas most patients with FHH have 
>99% reabsorption. The hypercalcemia in FHH is often 
detectable in affected members of the kindreds in the first 
decade of life, whereas hypercalcemia rarely occurs in 
patients with primary hyperparathyroidism or the MEN 
syndromes who are aged <10 years. PTH may be ele-
vated in FHH, but the values are usually normal or lower 
for the same degree of calcium elevation that is observed 
in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism. Parathyroid 
surgery performed in a few patients with FHH before the 
nature of the syndrome was understood led to permanent 
hypoparathyroidism; nevertheless, hypocalciuria persisted, 
establishing that hypocalciuria is not PTH dependent 
(now known to be due to the abnormal calcium-sensing 
receptor in the kidney).
Few clinical signs or symptoms are present in patients 
with FHH, and other endocrine abnormalities are not 
present. Most patients are detected as a result of fam-
ily screening after hypercalcemia is detected in a pro-
band. In those patients inadvertently operated upon, the 
parathyroids appeared normal or moderately hyperplas-
tic. Parathyroid surgery is not appropriate, nor, in view 
of the lack of symptoms, does medical treatment seem 
needed to lower the calcium. One striking exception 
to the rule against parathyroid surgery in this syndrome 
is the occurrence, usually in consanguineous marriages 
(due to the rarity of the gene mutation), of a homozy-
gous or compound heterozygote state, resulting in severe 
impairment of calcium-sensing receptor function. In this 
condition, neonatal severe hypercalcemia, total parathy-
roidectomy is mandatory. Rare but well-documented 
cases of acquired hypocalciuric hypercalcemia are reported 
due to antibodies against the calcium-sensing receptor. 
They appear to be a complication of an underlying auto-
immune disorder and respond to therapies directed against 
the underlying disorder.
Jansen’s disease
Activating mutations in the PTH/PTHrP receptor (PTH1R) 
have been identified as the cause of this rare autosomal 
dominant syndrome. Because the mutations lead to con-
stitutive receptor function, one abnormal copy of the 
mutant receptor is sufficient to cause the disease, thereby 
accounting for its dominant mode of transmission. The 
disorder leads to short-limbed dwarfism due to abnormal 
regulation of chondrocyte maturation in the growth plates 
of the bone that are formed through an endochondral 
process. In adult life, there are numerous abnormalities in 
bone, including multiple cystic resorptive areas resembling 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
420
those seen in severe hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalcemia 
and hypophosphatemia with undetectable or low PTH 
levels are typically seen. The pathogenesis of the growth 
plate abnormalities in Jansen’s disease has been confirmed 
by transgenic experiments in which targeted expression 
of the mutant PTH/PTHrP receptor to the proliferating 
chondrocyte layer of growth plate emulated several fea-
tures of the human disorder. Figure 27-5 illustrates some 
of these genetic mutations in the parathyroid gland or 
PTH target cells that affect Ca2+ metabolism.
Malignancy-Related Hypercalcemia
Clinical syndromes and mechanisms of 
hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia due to malignancy is common (occur-
ring in as many as 20% of cancer patients, especially with 
certain types of tumor such as lung carcinoma), often 
severe and difficult to manage, and, on rare occasions, 
difficult to distinguish from primary hyperparathyroid-
ism. Although malignancy is often clinically obvious 
or readily detectable by medical history, hypercalcemia 
can occasionally be due to an occult tumor. Previously, 
hypercalcemia associated with malignancy was thought 
to be due to local invasion and destruction of bone by 
tumor cells; many cases are now known to result from 
the elaboration by the malignant cells of humoral media-
tors of hypercalcemia. PTHrP is the responsible humoral 
agent in most solid tumors that cause hypercalcemia.
The histologic character of the tumor is more impor-
tant than the extent of skeletal metastases in predict-
ing hypercalcemia. Small cell carcinoma (oat cell) and 
adenocarcinoma of the lung, though the most common 
lung tumors associated with skeletal metastases, rarely 
cause hypercalcemia. By contrast, many patients with 
squamous cell carcinoma of the lung develop hypercal-
cemia. Histologic studies of bone in patients with squa-
mous cell or epidermoid carcinoma of the lung, in sites 
AC
PLC
Gs
Gq
Loss of function
Gain of function
ADHH 
FBHH,
NSHPT
McCune-Albright
syndrome
Pseudo-
hypoparathyroidism
PARATHYROID CELL
TARGET CELL
(e.g., kidney, bone, or cartilage)
ATP 
PTH/PTHrP
receptor
Proto-oncogenes and
tumor-supressor genes
CaSR
Ca2+
Transcription factors, e.g.,
GATA3, GCMB, AIRE
PIP2
IP3 + DAG
cAMP 
PTH
Jansen’s metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia
Blomstrand’s lethal
chondrodysplasia
PTHrP
Figure 27-5
Illustration of some genetic mutations that alter calcium 
metabolism by effects on the parathyroid cell or target cells of 
PTH action. Alterations in PTH production by the parathyroid 
cell can be caused by changes in the response to extracellular 
fluid calcium (Ca2+) that are detected by the calcium-sensing
receptor (CaSR). Furthermore, PTH (or PTHrP) can show 
altered efficacy in target cells such as in proximal tubular cells, 
by altered function of its receptor (PTH/PTHrP receptor) or the 
signal transduction proteins, G proteins such as Gsα that is 
linked to adenylate cyclase (AC), the enzyme responsible for 
producing cyclic AMP (cAMP) [also illustrated is Gq, which 
activates an alternate pathway of receptor signal transmission 
involving the generation of inositol triphosphate (IP3) or dia­
cylglycerol (DAG)]. Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in 
the CaSR cause familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia 
(FBHH) and homozygous mutations (both alleles mutated) 
and severe neonatal hyperparathyroidism (NSHPT); hetero-
zygous gain of function causes autosomal dominant hyper-
calciuric hypocalcemia (ADHH). Other defects in parathyroid 
cell function that occur at the level of gene regulation (onco-
genes or tumor suppressor genes) or transcription factors are 
discussed in the text. Blomstrand’s lethal chondrodysplasia 
is due to homozygous or compound heterozygous loss-of-
function mutations in the PTH/PTHrP receptor, a neonatally 
lethal disorder, while pseudohypoparathyroidism involves 
inactivation at the level of the G proteins, specifically muta-
tions that eliminate or reduce Gsα activity in the kidney (see 
text for details). Jansen’s metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and 
McCune-Albright syndrome represent gain-of-function muta-
tions in the PTH/PTHrP receptor and Gsα protein, respectively.
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
421
invaded by tumor as well as areas remote from tumor 
invasion, reveal increased bone resorption.
Two main mechanisms of hypercalcemia are opera-
tive in cancer hypercalcemia. Many solid tumors associ-
ated with hypercalcemia, particularly squamous cell and 
renal tumors, produce and secrete PTHrP that causes 
increased bone resorption and mediates the hypercalcemia 
through systemic actions on the skeleton. Alternatively, 
direct bone marrow invasion occurs with hematologic 
malignancies such as leukemia, lymphoma, and multiple 
myeloma. Lymphokines and cytokines (including PTHrP) 
produced by cells involved in the marrow response to 
the tumors promote resorption of bone through local 
destruction. Several hormones, hormone analogues, 
cytokines, and growth factors have been implicated as 
the result of clinical assays, in vitro tests, or chemical iso-
lation. The etiologic factor produced by activated nor-
mal lymphocytes and by myeloma and lymphoma cells, 
originally termed osteoclast activation factor, now appears 
to represent the biologic action of several different cyto-
kines, probably interleukin 1 and lymphotoxin or tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF). In some lymphomas, there is a 
third mechanism, caused by an increased blood level of 
1,25(OH)2D, produced by the abnormal lymphocytes.
In the more common mechanism, usually termed 
humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, solid tumors (cancers
of the lung and kidney, in particular), in which bone 
metastases are absent, minimal, or not detectable clinically, 
secrete PTHrP measurable by immunoassay. Secretion 
by the tumors of the PTH-like factor, PTHrP, activates 
the PTH1R, resulting in a pathophysiology closely resem-
bling hyperparathyroidism. The clinical picture resem-
bles primary hyperparathyroidism (hypophosphatemia 
accompanies hypercalcemia), and elimination or regres-
sion of the primary tumor leads to disappearance of the 
hypercalcemia.
As in hyperparathyroidism, patients with the humoral 
hypercalcemia of malignancy have elevated urinary nephro­
genous cyclic AMP excretion, hypophosphatemia, and 
increased urinary phosphate clearance. However, in 
humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, immunoreactive 
PTH is undetectable or suppressed, making the differen-
tial diagnosis easier. Other features of the disorder differ 
from those of true hyperparathyroidism. Although the 
biologic actions of PTH and PTHrP are exerted through 
the same receptor, subtle differences in receptor activa-
tion by the two ligands must account for some of the 
discordance in pathophysiology, when an excess of one 
or the other peptide occurs. Other cytokines elaborated 
by the malignancy may contribute to the variations from 
hyperparathyroidism in these patients as well. Patients 
with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy may have 
low to normal levels of 1,25(OH)2D instead of elevated 
levels as in true hyperparathyroidism. In some patients 
with the humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, osteo-
clastic resorption is unaccompanied by an osteoblastic or 
bone-forming response, implying inhibition of the nor-
mal coupling of bone formation and resorption.
Several different assays (single- or double-antibody, 
different epitopes) have been developed to detect PTHrP. 
Most data indicate that circulating PTHrP levels are 
undetectable (or low) in normal individuals except per-
haps in pregnancy (high in human milk) and elevated 
in most cancer patients with the humoral syndrome. 
The etiologic mechanisms in cancer hypercalcemia may 
be multiple in the same patient. For example, in breast 
carcinoma (metastatic to bone) and in a distinctive type of 
T-cell lymphoma/leukemia initiated by human T-cell lym-
photropic virus I, hypercalcemia is caused by direct local 
lysis of bone as well as by a humoral mechanism involving 
excess production of PTHrP. Hyperparathyroidism has 
been reported to coexist with the humoral cancer syn-
drome and, rarely, ectopic hyperparathyroidism due to 
tumor elaboration of true PTH is reported.
Diagnostic issues
Levels of PTH measured by the double-antibody tech-
nique are undetectable or extremely low in tumor 
hypercalcemia, as would be expected with the media-
tion of the hypercalcemia by a factor other than PTH 
(the hypercalcemia suppresses the normal parathyroid 
glands). In a patient with minimal symptoms referred for 
hypercalcemia, low or undetectable PTH levels would 
focus attention on a possible occult malignancy (except 
for very rare cases of ectopic hyperparathyroidism).
Ordinarily, the diagnosis of cancer hypercalcemia is not 
difficult because tumor symptoms are prominent when 
hypercalcemia is detected. Indeed, hypercalcemia may be 
noted incidentally during the workup of a patient with 
known or suspected malignancy. Clinical suspicion that 
malignancy is the cause of the hypercalcemia is heightened 
when there are other signs or symptoms of a paraneoplas-
tic process such as weight loss, fatigue, muscle weakness, 
or unexplained skin rash, or when symptoms specific for 
a particular tumor are present. Squamous cell tumors are 
most frequently associated with hypercalcemia, particularly 
tumors of the lung, kidney, head and neck, and urogenital 
tract. Radiologic examinations can focus on these areas 
when clinical evidence is unclear. Bone scans with 
technetium-labeled bisphosphonate are useful for detec-
tion of osteolytic metastases; the sensitivity is high, but 
specificity is low; results must be confirmed by conventional 
x-rays to be certain that areas of increased uptake are due to 
osteolytic metastases per se. Bone marrow biopsies are helpful 
in patients with anemia or abnormal peripheral blood smears.
Treatment	
Malignancy-Related Hypercalcemia
Treatment of the hypercalcemia of malignancy is first 
directed to control of tumor; reduction of tumor mass 
usually corrects hypercalcemia. If a patient has severe
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
422
hypercalcemia yet has a good chance for effective 
tumor therapy, treatment of the hypercalcemia should 
be vigorous while awaiting the results of definitive 
therapy. If hypercalcemia occurs in the late stages of a 
tumor that is resistant to antitumor therapy, the treat-
ment of the hypercalcemia should be judicious as high 
calcium levels can have a mild sedating effect. Standard 
therapies for hypercalcemia (discussed later) are appli-
cable to patients with malignancy.
Vitamin D–Related Hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia caused by vitamin D can be due to 
excessive ingestion or abnormal metabolism of the vita-
min. Abnormal metabolism of the vitamin is usually 
acquired in association with a widespread granulomatous 
disorder. Vitamin D metabolism is carefully regulated, 
particularly the activity of renal 1α-hydroxylase, the 
enzyme responsible for the production of 1,25(OH)2D 
(Chap. 25). The regulation of 1α-hydroxylase and the 
normal feedback suppression by 1,25(OH)2D seem to 
work less well in infants than in adults and to operate 
poorly, if at all, in sites other than the renal tubule; these 
phenomena may explain the occurrence of hypercal-
cemia secondary to excessive 1,25(OH)2D3 production 
in infants with Williams’ syndrome (see below) and in 
adults with sarcoidosis or lymphoma.
Vitamin D intoxication
Chronic ingestion of 40–100 times the normal physi-
ologic requirement of vitamin D (amounts >40,000–
100,000 U/d) is usually required to produce significant 
hypercalcemia in normal individuals. The stated upper 
limit of safe dietary intake is 2000 U/d (50 μg/d) in 
adults because of concerns about potential toxic effects 
of cumulative supraphysiologic doses. These recom-
mendations are now regarded as too restrictive, since 
some estimates are that in elderly individuals in north-
ern latitudes, 2000 U/daily or more may be necessary to 
avoid vitamin D insufficiency.
Hypercalcemia in vitamin D intoxication is due to 
an excessive biologic action of the vitamin, perhaps 
the consequence of increased levels of 25(OH)D rather 
than merely increased levels of the active metabolite 
1,25(OH)2D (the latter may not be elevated in vitamin D
intoxication). 25(OH)D has definite, if low, biologic 
activity in the intestine and bone. The production of 
25(OH)D is less tightly regulated than is the production 
of 1,25(OH)2D. Hence concentrations of 25(OH)D are 
elevated severalfold in patients with excess vitamin D 
intake.
The diagnosis is substantiated by documenting ele-
vated levels of 25(OH)D >100 mg/mL. Hypercalcemia 
is usually controlled by restriction of dietary calcium 
intake and appropriate attention to hydration. These 
measures, plus discontinuation of vitamin D, usually lead 
to resolution of hypercalcemia. However, vitamin D 
stores in fat may be substantial, and vitamin D intoxica-
tion may persist for weeks after vitamin D ingestion is 
terminated. Such patients are responsive to glucocorti-
coids, which in doses of 100 mg/d of hydrocortisone 
or its equivalent usually return serum calcium levels 
to normal over several days; severe intoxication may 
require intensive therapy.
Sarcoidosis and other granulomatous diseases
In patients with sarcoidosis and other granulomatous dis-
eases, such as tuberculosis and fungal infections, excess 
1,25(OH)2D is synthesized in macrophages or other 
cells in the granulomas. Indeed, increased 1,25(OH)2D 
levels have been reported in anephric patients with sar-
coidosis and hypercalcemia. Macrophages obtained from 
granulomatous tissue convert 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D 
at an increased rate. There is a positive correlation in patients 
with sarcoidosis between 25(OH)D levels (reflecting 
vitamin D intake) and the circulating concentrations 
of 1,25(OH)2D, whereas normally there is no increase 
in 1,25(OH)2D with increasing 25(OH)D levels due 
to multiple feedback controls on renal 1α-hydroxylase 
(Chap. 25). The usual regulation of active metabolite 
production by calcium and phosphate or by PTH does 
not operate in these patients. Clearance of 1,25(OH)2D 
from blood may be decreased in sarcoidosis as well. PTH 
levels are usually low and 1,25(OH)2D levels are ele-
vated, but primary hyperparathyroidism and sarcoidosis 
may coexist in some patients.
Management of the hypercalcemia can often be 
accomplished by avoiding excessive sunlight exposure 
and limiting vitamin D and calcium intake. Presum-
ably, however, the abnormal sensitivity to vitamin D 
and abnormal regulation of 1,25(OH)2D synthesis will 
persist as long as the disease is active. Alternatively, glu-
cocorticoids in the equivalent of 100 mg/d of hydro-
cortisone or equivalent doses of glucorticoids may help 
control hypercalcemia. Glucocorticoids appear to act by 
blocking excessive production of 1,25(OH)2D, as well as 
the response to it in target organs.
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy
This rare disorder, usually referred to as Williams’ syndrome, 
is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multi-
ple congenital development defects, including supravalvu-
lar aortic stenosis, mental retardation, and an elfin facies, 
in association with hypercalcemia due to abnormal sen-
sitivity to vitamin D. The hypercalcemia associated with 
the syndrome was first recognized in England after fortifi-
cation of milk with vitamin D. The cardiac and develop-
mental abnormalities were independently described, but 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
423
the connection between these defects and hypercalcemia 
were not described until later. Levels of 1,25(OH)2D 
can be elevated, ranging from 46 to 120 nmol/L 
(150–500 pg/mL). The mechanism of the abnormal 
sensitivity to vitamin D and of the increased circulating 
levels of 1,25(OH)2D is still unclear. Studies suggest that 
genetic mutations involving microdeletions at the elas-
tin locus and perhaps other genes on chromosome 7 may 
play a role in the pathogenesis.
Hypercalcemia Associated with High 
Bone Turnover
Hyperthyroidism
As many as 20% of hyperthyroid patients have high-
normal or mildly elevated serum calcium concentrations; 
hypercalciuria is even more common. The hypercal-
cemia is due to increased bone turnover, with bone 
resorption exceeding bone formation. Severe calcium 
elevations are not typical, and the presence of such sug-
gests a concomitant disease such as hyperparathyroidism. 
Usually, the diagnosis is obvious, but signs of hyper-
thyroidism may occasionally be occult, particularly in 
the elderly (Chap. 4). Hypercalcemia is managed by 
treatment of the hyperthyroidism. Reports that thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) itself normally has a bone-
protective effect suggest that suppressed TSH levels also 
play a role in hypercalcemia.
Immobilization
Immobilization is a rare cause of hypercalcemia in adults 
in the absence of an associated disease but may cause 
hypercalcemia in children and adolescents, particularly 
after spinal cord injury and paraplegia or quadriplegia. 
With resumption of ambulation, the hypercalcemia in 
children usually returns to normal.
The mechanism appears to involve a disproportion 
between bone formation and bone resorption: the for-
mer decreased and the latter increased. Hypercalci-
uria and increased mobilization of skeletal calcium can 
develop in normal volunteers subjected to extensive bed 
rest, although hypercalcemia is unusual. Immobiliza-
tion of an adult with a disease associated with high bone 
turnover, however, such as Paget’s disease, may cause 
hypercalcemia.
Thiazides
Administration of benzothiadiazines (thiazides) can cause 
hypercalcemia in patients with high rates of bone turn-
over such as patients with hypoparathyroidism treated 
with high doses of vitamin D. Traditionally, thiazides 
are associated with aggravation of hypercalcemia in pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism, but this effect can be seen in 
other high-bone-turnover states as well. The mecha-
nism of thiazide action is complex. Chronic thiazide 
administration leads to reduction in urinary calcium; 
the hypocalciuric effect appears to reflect the enhance-
ment of proximal tubular resorption of sodium and cal-
cium in response to sodium depletion. Some of this renal 
effect is due to augmentation of PTH action and is more 
pronounced in individuals with intact PTH secretion. 
However, thiazides cause hypocalciuria in hypoparathy-
roid patients on high-dose vitamin D and oral calcium 
replacement if sodium intake is restricted. This finding 
is the rationale for the use of thiazides as an adjunct to 
therapy in hypoparathyroid patients, as discussed later. 
Thiazide administration to normal individuals causes a 
transient increase in blood calcium (usually within the 
high-normal range) that reverts to preexisting levels after 
a week or more of continued administration. If hormonal 
function and calcium and bone metabolism are normal, 
homeostatic controls are reset to counteract the cal-
cium-elevating effect of the thiazides. In the presence of 
hyperparathyroidism or increased bone turnover from 
another cause, homeostatic mechanisms are ineffective. 
The abnormal effects of the thiazide on calcium metabo-
lism disappear within days of cessation of the drug.
Vitamin A intoxication
Vitamin A intoxication is a rare cause of hypercalcemia 
and is most commonly a side effect of dietary faddism. 
Calcium levels can be elevated into the 3–3.5-mmol/L 
(12–14 mg/dL) range after the ingestion of 50,000–
100,000 units of vitamin A daily (10–20 times the minimum 
daily requirement). Typical features of severe hypercalce-
mia include fatigue, anorexia, and, in some, severe muscle 
and bone pain. Excess vitamin A intake is presumed to 
increase bone resorption.
The diagnosis can be established by history and by 
measurement of vitamin A levels in serum. Occasion-
ally, skeletal x-rays reveal periosteal calcifications, par-
ticularly in the hands. Withdrawal of the vitamin is 
usually associated with prompt disappearance of the 
hypercalcemia and reversal of the skeletal changes. As 
in vitamin D intoxication, administration of 100 mg/d 
hydrocortisone or its equivalent leads to a rapid return 
of the serum calcium to normal.
Hypercalcemia Associated with 
Renal Failure
Severe secondary hyperparathyroidism
The pathogenesis of secondary hyperparathyroidism 
in chronic kidney disease is incompletely understood. 
Resistance to the normal level of PTH is a major fac-
tor contributing to the development of hypocalce-
mia, which, in turn, is a stimulus to parathyroid gland 
enlargement. However, recent findings have indicated 
that an increase of FGF23 production by osteocytes 
(and possibly osteoblasts) in bone occurs well before an 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
424
elevation in PTH is detected. FGF23 is a potent inhibi-
tor of the renal 1-alpha hydroxylase, and the FGF23-
dependent reduction in 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D may be 
an important stimulus for the development of secondary 
hyperparathyroidism.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism occurs not only in 
patients with renal failure but also in those with osteo-
malacia due to multiple causes (Chap. 25), including 
deficiency of vitamin D action and PHP (deficient 
response to PTH at the level of the receptor). For both 
disorders, hypocalcemia seems to be the common 
denominator in initiating the development of secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. Primary (1°) and secondary (2°) 
hyperparathyroidism can be distinguished conceptually 
by the autonomous growth of the parathyroid glands in 
primary hyperparathyroidism (presumably irreversible) 
and the adaptive response of the parathyroids in secondary 
hyperparathyroidism (typically reversible). In fact, reversal 
over weeks from an abnormal pattern of secretion, pre-
sumably accompanied by involution of parathyroid gland 
mass to normal, occurs in patients with osteomalacia who 
have been treated effectively with calcium and vitamin D. 
However, it is now recognized that a true clonal out-
growth (irreversible) can arise in long-standing, inad-
equately treated chronic renal failure [e.g., tertiary (3°) 
hyperparathyroidism; see Treatment section below].
Patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism may 
develop bone pain, ectopic calcification, and pruritus. 
The bone disease seen in patients with secondary hyper-
parathyroidism and chronic kidney disease is termed renal 
osteodystrophy and affects primarily bone turnover. How-
ever, osteomalacia is frequently encountered as well and 
may be related to the circulating levels of FGF23.
Two other skeletal disorders have been frequently 
associated in the past with CKD patients treated by 
long-term dialysis who received aluminum-containing 
phosphate binders. Aluminum deposition in bone (see 
“Aluminum Intoxication”) leads to an osteomalacia-like 
picture. The other entity is a low-bone-turnover state 
termed “aplastic” or “adynamic” bone disease; PTH 
levels are lower than typically observed in CKD patients 
with secondary hyperparathyroidism. It is believed that 
the condition is caused, at least in part, by excessive PTH 
suppression, which may be even greater than previously 
appreciated in light of evidence that some of the immu-
noreactive PTH detected by most commercially available 
PTH assays is not the full-length biologically active molecule 
(as discussed above) but may consist of amino-terminally 
truncated fragments that do not activate the PTH1R.
Treatment	
Secondary Hyperparathyroidism
Medical therapy to reverse secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism in CKD includes reduction of excessive blood phos-
phate by restriction of dietary phosphate, the use of
nonabsorbable antacids, and careful, selective addition 
of calcitriol (0.25–2 μg/d) or related analogues. Calcium 
carbonate became preferred over aluminum-containing 
antacids to prevent aluminum-induced bone disease. 
However, synthetic gels that also bind phosphate (such 
as sevelamer are now widely used, with the advantage 
of avoiding not only aluminum retention but excess 
calcium elevation. Intravenous calcitriol (or related ana-
logues), administered as several pulses each week, helps 
control secondary hyperparathyroidism. Aggressive but 
carefully administered medical therapy can often, but 
not always, reverse hyperparathyroidism and its symp-
toms and manifestations.
Occasional patients develop severe manifestations 
of secondary hyperparathyroidism, including hypercal-
cemia, pruritus, extraskeletal calcifications, and painful 
bones, despite aggressive medical efforts to suppress 
the hyperparathyroidism. PTH hypersecretion no lon-
ger responsive to medical therapy, a state of severe 
hyperparathyroidism in patients with renal failure that 
requires surgery, has been referred to as tertiary hyper-
parathyroidism. Parathyroid surgery is necessary to 
control this condition. Based on genetic evidence from 
examination of tumor samples in these patients, the 
emergence of autonomous parathyroid function is due 
to a monoclonal outgrowth of one or more previously 
hyperplastic parathyroid glands. The adaptive response 
has become an independent contributor to disease; this 
finding seems to emphasize the importance of opti-
mal medical management to reduce the proliferative 
response of the parathyroid cells that enables the irre-
versible genetic change.
Aluminum intoxication
Aluminum intoxication (and often hypercalcemia as a 
complication of medical treatment) in the past occurred 
in patients on chronic dialysis; manifestations included 
acute dementia and unresponsive and severe osteoma-
lacia. Bone pain; multiple nonhealing fractures, parti­
cularly of the ribs and pelvis; and a proximal myopa-
thy occur. Hypercalcemia develops when these patients 
are treated with vitamin D or calcitriol because of 
impaired skeletal responsiveness. Aluminum is present 
at the site of osteoid mineralization, osteoblastic activ-
ity is minimal, and calcium incorporation into the skel-
eton is impaired. The disorder is now rare because of 
the avoidance of aluminum-containing antacids or alu-
minum excess in the dialysis regimen.
Milk-alkali syndrome
The milk-alkali syndrome is due to excessive ingestion of 
calcium and absorbable antacids such as milk or calcium car-
bonate. It occurs much less frequently since proton-pump 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
425
inhibitors and other treatments became available for pep-
tic ulcer disease. For a time, the increased use of calcium 
carbonate in the management of secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism led to reappearance of the syndrome. Several 
clinical presentations—acute, subacute, and chronic—
have been described, all of which feature hypercalcemia, 
alkalosis, and renal failure. The chronic form of the dis-
ease, termed Burnett’s syndrome, is associated with irre-
versible renal damage. The acute syndromes reverse if the 
excess calcium and absorbable alkali are stopped.
Individual susceptibility is important in the patho-
genesis, as some patients are treated with calcium car-
bonate and alkali regimens without developing the 
syndrome. One variable is the fractional calcium absorption 
as a function of calcium intake. Some individuals absorb 
a high fraction of calcium, even with intakes ≥2 g of 
elemental calcium per day, instead of reducing calcium 
absorption with high intake, as occurs in most normal 
individuals. Resultant mild hypercalcemia after meals in 
such patients is postulated to contribute to the genera-
tion of alkalosis. Development of hypercalcemia causes 
increased sodium excretion and some depletion of total-
body water. These phenomena and perhaps some sup-
pression of endogenous PTH secretion due to mild 
hypercalcemia lead to increased bicarbonate resorption 
and to alkalosis in the face of continued calcium car-
bonate ingestion. Alkalosis per se selectively enhances 
calcium resorption in the distal nephron, thus aggravating 
the hypercalcemia. The cycle of mild hypercalcemia → 
bicarbonate retention → alkalosis → renal calcium reten-
tion → severe hypercalcemia perpetuates and aggravates 
hypercalcemia and alkalosis as long as calcium and 
absorbable alkali are ingested.
Differential Diagnosis: Special Tests
Differential diagnosis of hypercalcemia is best achieved 
by using clinical criteria, but immunometric assays to 
measure PTH is especially useful in distinguishing among 
major causes (Fig. 27-6). The clinical features that deserve 
emphasis are the presence or absence of symptoms or 
signs of disease and evidence of chronicity. If one discounts 
fatigue or depression, >90% of patients with primary 
hyper­parathyroidism have asymptomatic hypercalcemia; symp-
toms of malignancy are usually present in cancer-associated 
hypercalcemia. Disorders other than hyperparathyroidism 
and malignancy cause <10% of cases of hypercalcemia, 
and some of the nonparathyroid causes are associated 
with clear-cut manifestations such as renal failure.
Hyperparathyroidism is the likely diagnosis in patients 
with chronic hypercalcemia. If hypercalcemia has been man-
ifest for >1 year, malignancy can usually be excluded as 
the cause. A striking feature of malignancy-associated 
hypercalcemia is the rapidity of the course, whereby 
signs and symptoms of the underlying malignancy are 
evident within months of the detection of hypercal-
cemia. Although clinical considerations are helpful in 
arriving at the correct diagnosis of the cause of hyper-
calcemia, appropriate laboratory testing is essential for 
definitive diagnosis. The immunoassay for PTH usu-
ally separates hyperparathyroidism from all other causes 
of hypercalcemia. There are very rare reports of ectopic 
Hypercalcemia
Key historical considerations
  • Confirm if ↑Ca2 chronic
  • Clues from history and physical findings
Acute (or unknown) duration
Chronic duration (months)
1˚ Hyperpara-
  thyroidism
  Consider MEN
    syndromes
Consider
  malignancy
  PTHrP assay
  Clinical evaluation
Other causes
  Granulomatous
    disease
  FHH
  Milk-alkali syndrome
  Medications
    (lithium, thiazides)
  Immobilization
  Vit D or vit A
    intoxication
  Adrenal insufficiency
  Hyperthyroidism
Screen
negative
PTH high
PTH high
PTH low
PTH low
Hyperpara-
  thyroidism:
  1˚, 2˚, 3˚
  Consider MEN
  syndromes
EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH HYPERCALCEMIA
Figure 27-6
Algorithm for the evaluation of patients with hypercalcemia. 
See text for details. FHH, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; 
MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; PTH, parathyroid hor-
mone; PTHrP, parathyroid hormone–related peptide.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
426
production of excess PTH by nonparathyroid tumors. 
Patients with hyperparathyroidism have elevated PTH 
levels despite hypercalcemia, whereas patients with 
malignancy and the other causes of hypercalcemia 
(except for disorders mediated by PTH such as lithium-
induced hypercalcemia) have levels of hormone below 
normal or undetectable. Assays based on the double-
antibody method for PTH exhibit very high sensitivity 
(especially if serum calcium is simultaneously evaluated) 
and specificity for the diagnosis of primary hyperparathy-
roidism (Fig. 27-4).
In summary, PTH values are elevated in >90% of 
parathyroid-related causes of hypercalcemia, undetect-
able or low in malignancy-related hypercalcemia, and 
undetectable or normal in vitamin D–related and high-
bone-turnover causes of hypercalcemia. In view of 
the specificity of the PTH immunoassay and the high 
frequency of hyperparathyroidism in hypercalcemic 
patients, it is cost-effective to measure the PTH level in 
all hypercalcemic patients unless malignancy or a spe-
cific nonparathyroid disease is obvious. False-positive 
PTH assay results are rare. Immunoassays for PTHrP 
are helpful in diagnosing certain types of malignancy- 
associated hypercalcemia. Although FHH is parathyroid 
related, the disease should be managed distinctively from 
hyperparathyroidism. Clinical features and the low uri-
nary calcium excretion can help make the distinction. 
Because the incidence of malignancy and hyperparathy-
roidism both increase with age, they can coexist as two 
independent causes of hypercalcemia.
1,25(OH)2D levels are elevated in many (but not all) 
patients with primary hyperparathyroidism. In other dis-
orders associated with hypercalcemia, concentrations of 
1,25(OH)2D are low or, at the most, normal. However, 
this test is of low specificity and is not cost-effective, as 
not all patients with hyperparathyroidism have elevated 
1,25(OH)2D levels and not all nonparathyroid hypercal-
cemic patients have suppressed 1,25(OH)2D. Measure-
ment of 1,25(OH)2D is, however, critically valuable in 
establishing the cause of hypercalcemia in sarcoidosis 
and certain lymphomas.
A useful general approach is outlined in Fig. 27-6. 
If the patient is asymptomatic and there is evidence of 
chronicity to the hypercalcemia, hyperparathyroidism is 
almost certainly the cause. If PTH levels (usually mea-
sured at least twice) are elevated, the clinical impression 
is confirmed and little additional evaluation is neces-
sary. If there is only a short history or no data as to the 
duration of the hypercalcemia, occult malignancy must be 
considered; if the PTH levels are not elevated, then a 
thorough workup must be undertaken for malignancy, 
including chest x-ray, CT of chest and abdomen, and 
bone scan. Immunoassays for PTHrP may be especially 
useful in such situations. Attention should also be paid 
to clues for underlying hematologic disorders such as 
anemia, increased plasma globulin, and abnormal serum 
immunoelectrophoresis; bone scans can be negative 
in some patients with metastases such as in multiple 
myeloma. Finally, if a patient with chronic hypercal-
cemia is asymptomatic and malignancy therefore seems 
unlikely on clinical grounds, but PTH values are not 
elevated, it is useful to search for other chronic causes of 
hypercalcemia such as occult sarcoidosis. A careful his-
tory of dietary supplements and drug use may suggest 
intoxication with vitamin D or vitamin A or the use of 
thiazides.
Treatment	
Hypercalcemic States
The approach to medical treatment of hypercalcemia 
varies with its severity (Table 27-4). Mild hypercalcemia, 
<3 mmol/L (12 mg/dL), can be managed by hydration. 
More severe hypercalcemia [levels of 3.2–3.7 mmol/L 
(13–15 mg/dL)] must be managed aggressively; above 
that level, hypercalcemia can be life threatening and 
requires emergency measures. By using a combina-
tion of approaches in severe hypercalcemia, the serum 
calcium concentration can be decreased by 0.7–2.2 
mmol/L (3–9 mg/dL) within 24–48 h in most patients, 
enough to relieve acute symptoms, prevent death from 
hypercalcemic crisis, and permit diagnostic evaluation. 
Therapy can then be directed at the underlying disor-
der—the second priority.
Hypercalcemia 
develops 
because 
of 
excessive 
skeletal calcium release, increased intestinal calcium 
absorption, or inadequate renal calcium excretion. 
Understanding the particular pathogenesis helps guide 
therapy. For example, hypercalcemia in patients with 
malignancy is primarily due to excessive skeletal cal-
cium release and is therefore minimally improved 
by restriction of dietary calcium. On the other hand, 
patients with vitamin D hypersensitivity or vitamin D 
intoxication have excessive intestinal calcium absorp-
tion, and restriction of dietary calcium is beneficial. 
Decreased renal function or ECF depletion decreases 
urinary calcium excretion. In such situations, rehydra-
tion may rapidly reduce or reverse the hypercalcemia, 
even though increased bone resorption persists. As out-
lined in the sections that follow, the more severe the 
hypercalcemia, the greater the number of combined 
therapies that should be used. Rapid acting (hours) 
approaches—rehydration, forced diuresis, and calcitonin—  
can be used with the most effective antiresorptive agents 
such as bisphosphonates (since severe hypercalcemia 
usually involves excessive bone resorption).
Hydration, 
Increased 
Salt 
Intake, 
Mild and Forced Diuresis  The first prin-
ciple of treatment is to restore normal hydration. Many 
hypercalcemic patients are dehydrated because of vom-
iting, inanition, and/or hypercalcemia-induced defects
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
427
in urinary concentrating ability. The resultant drop in glo-
merular filtration rate is accompanied by an additional 
decrease in renal tubular sodium and calcium clearance. 
Restoring a normal ECF volume corrects these abnor-
malities and increases urine calcium excretion by 2.5–7.5 
mmol/d (100–300 mg/d). Increasing urinary sodium 
excretion to 400–500 mmol/d increases urinary calcium 
excretion even further than simple rehydration. After 
rehydration has been achieved, saline can be adminis-
tered or furosemide or ethacrynic acid can be given twice 
daily to depress the tubular reabsorptive mechanism for 
calcium (care must be taken to prevent dehydration). The 
combined use of these therapies can increase urinary 
calcium excretion to ≥12.5 mmol/d (500 mg/d) in most 
hypercalcemic patients. Since this is a substantial percent-
age of the exchangeable calcium pool, the serum calcium 
concentration usually falls 0.25–0.75 mmol/L (1–3 mg/dL) 
within 24 h. Precautions should be taken to prevent 
potassium and magnesium depletion; calcium-containing 
renal calculi are a potential complication.
Under life-threatening circumstances, the preceding 
approach can be pursued more aggressively, but the 
availability of effective agents to block bone resorption
Table 27-4
Therapies for Severe Hypercalcemia
Treatment
Onset of 
Action
Duration of 
Action
Advantages
Disadvantages
Most Useful Therapies
Hydration with saline
Hours
During infusion
Rehydration invariably needed
Volume overload
Forced diuresis; saline 
plus loop diuretic
Hours
During treat-
ment
Rapid action
Volume overload, cardiac 
decompensation, intensive 
monitoring, electrolyte distur-
bance, inconvenience
Bisphosphonates
Pamidronate
1–2 days
10–14 days to 
weeks
High potency; intermediate 
onset of action
Fever in 20%, hypophosphate-
mia, hypocalcemia, hypomag-
nesemia, rarely jaw necrosis
Zolendronate
1–2 days
>3 weeks
Same as for pamidronate (may 
last longer)
Same as pamidronate above
Calcitonin
Hours
1–2 days
Rapid onset of action; useful as 
adjunct in severe hypercalcemia
Rapid tachyphylaxis
Special Use Therapies
Phosphate, 
oral
24 h
During use
Chronic management (with 
hypophosphatemia); low  
toxicity if P < 4 mg/dL
Limited use except as adjuvant 
or chronic therapy
Glucocorticoids
Days
Days, weeks
Oral therapy, antitumor agent
Active only in certain malignan-
cies, vitamin D excess and 
sarcoidosis; glucocorticoid 
side effects
Dialysis
Hours
During use  
and 24–48 h 
afterward
Useful in renal failure; onset of 
effect in hours; can immedi-
ately reverse life-threatening 
hypercalcemia
Complex procedure, reserved 
for extreme or special circum-
stances
(such as bisphosphonates) has reduced the need for 
extreme diuresis regimens (Table 27-5). Depletion of 
potassium and magnesium is inevitable unless replace-
ments are given; pulmonary edema can be precipitated. 
The potential complications can be reduced by careful 
monitoring of central venous pressure and plasma or 
urine electrolytes; catheterization of the bladder may 
be necessary. Dialysis treatment may be needed when 
renal function is compromised.
Bisphosphonates  The bisphosphonates are
analogues of pyrophosphate, with high affinity for 
bone, especially in areas of increased bone turnover, 
where they are powerful inhibitors of bone resorp-
tion. These bone-seeking compounds are stable in vivo 
because phosphatase enzymes cannot hydrolyze the 
central carbon-phosphorus-carbon bond. The bisphos-
phonates are concentrated in areas of high bone turn-
over and are taken up by and inhibit osteoclast action; 
the mechanism of action is complex. The bisphospho-
nate molecules that contain amino groups in the side 
chain structure (see later) interfere with prenylation of 
proteins and can lead to cellular apoptosis. The highly
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
428
active nonamino group–containing bisphosphonates 
are also metabolized to cytotoxic products.
The initial bisphosphonate widely used in clinical 
practice, etidronate, was effective but had several dis-
advantages, including the capacity to inhibit bone for-
mation as well as blocking resorption. Subsequently, 
a number of second- or third-generation compounds 
have become the mainstays of antiresorptive therapy 
for treatment of hypercalcemia and osteoporosis. The 
newer bisphosphonates have a highly favorable ratio 
of blocking resorption versus inhibiting bone forma-
tion; they inhibit osteoclast-mediated skeletal resorp-
tion yet do not cause mineralization defects at ordinary 
doses. Though the bisphosphonates have similar struc-
tures, the routes of administration, efficacy, toxicity, and 
side effects vary. The potency of the compounds for 
inhibition of bone resorption varies more than 10,000-
fold, increasing in the order of etidronate, tiludronate, 
pamidronate, alendronate, risedronate, and zolendro-
nate. The IV use of pamidronate and zolendronate is 
approved for the treatment of hypercalcemia; between 
30 and 90 mg pamidronate, given as a single IV dose 
over a few hours, returns serum calcium to normal 
within 24–48 h with an effect that lasts for weeks in 
80–100% of patients. Zolendronate given in doses of 4 
or 8 mg/5-minute infusion has a more rapid and more 
sustained effect than pamidronate in direct comparison.
These drugs are used extensively in cancer patients. 
Absolute survival improvements are noted with pamidro-
nate and zolendronate in multiple myeloma, for example.
However, though still rare, there are increasing reports 
of jaw necrosis, especially after dental surgery, mainly in 
cancer patients treated with multiple doses of the more 
potent bisphosphonates.
Calcitonin  Calcitonin acts within a few hours of 
its administration, principally through receptors on osteo-
clasts, to block bone resorption. Calcitonin, after 24 h 
of use, is no longer effective in lowering calcium. Tachy-
phylaxis, a known phenomenon with this drug, seems to 
explain the results, since the drug is often effective in the 
first 24 h of use. Therefore, in life-threatening hypercalce-
mia, calcitonin can be used effectively within the first 24 h 
in combination with rehydration and saline diuresis while 
waiting for more sustained effects from a simultaneously 
administered bisphosphonate such as pamidronate. Usual 
doses of calcitonin are 2–8 U/kg of body weight IV, SC, or 
IM every 6–12 h.
Other Therapies  Plicamycin (formerly mithra-
mycin), which inhibits bone resorption, has been a use-
ful therapeutic agent but is now seldom used because 
of its toxicity and the effectiveness of bisphosphonates. 
Plicamycin must be given IV, either as a bolus or by slow 
infusion; the usual dose is 25 μg/kg body weight. Gallium 
nitrate exerts a hypocalcemic action by inhibiting bone 
resorption and altering the structure of bone crystals. It is 
not often used now because of superior alternatives.
Glucocorticoids have utility, especially in hypercalce-
mia complicating certain malignancies. They increase 
urinary calcium excretion and decrease intestinal calcium 
absorption when given in pharmacologic doses, but they 
also cause negative skeletal calcium balance. In normal 
individuals and in patients with primary hyperparathy-
roidism, glucocorticoids neither increase nor decrease 
the serum calcium concentration. In patients with hyper-
calcemia due to certain osteolytic malignancies, however, 
glucocorticoids may be effective as a result of antitu-
mor effects. The malignancies in which hypercalcemia 
responds to glucocorticoids include multiple myeloma, 
leukemia, Hodgkin’s disease, other lymphomas, and car-
cinoma of the breast, at least early in the course of the 
disease. Glucocorticoids are also effective in treating 
hypercalcemia due to vitamin D intoxication and sarcoid-
osis. Glucocorticoids are also useful in the rare form of 
hypercalcemia, now recognized in certain autoimmune 
disorders in which inactivating antibodies against the 
receptor imitate FHH. Elevated PTH and calcium levels 
are effectively lowered by the glucocorticoids. In all the 
preceding situations, the hypocalcemic effect develops 
over several days, and the usual glucocorticoid dosage 
is 40–100 mg prednisone (or its equivalent) daily in four 
divided doses. The side effects of chronic glucocorticoid 
therapy may be acceptable in some circumstances.
Table 27-5 
Functional Classification of Hypocalcemia 
(Excluding Neonatal Conditions)
PTH Absent
Hereditary hypoparathyroidism
Hypomagnesemia
Acquired hypoparathyroidism
PTH Ineffective
Chronic renal failure
Active vitamin D ineffective
Active vitamin D lacking
Intestinal malabsorption
  ↓ Dietary intake or sunlight
Vitamin D–dependent 
rickets type II
  Defective metabolism:
  Anticonvulsant therapy
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Vitamin D–dependent  
rickets type I
PTH Overwhelmed
Severe, acute  
hyperphosphatemia
Osteitis fibrosa after para-
thyroidectomy
Tumor lysis
Acute renal failure
Rhabdomyolysis
Abbreviation: PTH, parathyroid hormone.
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
429
Dialysis is often the treatment of choice for severe 
hypercalcemia complicated by renal failure, which is 
difficult to manage medically. Peritoneal dialysis with 
calcium-free dialysis fluid can remove 5–12.5 mmol 
(200–500 mg) of calcium in 24–48 h and lower the 
serum calcium concentration by 0.7–3 mmol/L (3–12 
mg/dL). Large quantities of phosphate are lost during 
dialysis, and serum inorganic phosphate concentration 
usually falls, potentially aggravating hypercalcemia. 
Therefore, the serum inorganic phosphate concentra-
tion should be measured after dialysis, and phosphate 
supplements should be added to the diet or to dialysis 
fluids if necessary.
Phosphate therapy, PO or IV, has a limited role in cer-
tain circumstances (Chap. 25). Correcting hypophos-
phatemia lowers the serum calcium concentration by 
several mechanisms, including bone/calcium exchange. 
The usual oral treatment is 1–1.5 g phosphorus per 
day for several days, given in divided doses. It is gener-
ally believed, but not established, that toxicity does not 
occur if therapy is limited to restoring serum inorganic 
phosphate concentrations to normal.
Raising the serum inorganic phosphate concentra-
tion above normal decreases serum calcium levels, 
sometimes strikingly. Intravenous phosphate is one of 
the most dramatically effective treatments available for 
severe hypercalcemia but is toxic and even dangerous 
(fatal hypocalcemia). For these reasons, it is used rarely 
and only in severely hypercalcemic patients with cardiac 
or renal failure where dialysis, the preferable alternative, 
is not feasible or is unavailable.
Summary  The various therapies for hypercalce-
mia are listed in Table 27-4. The choice depends on the 
underlying disease, the severity of the hypercalcemia, 
the serum inorganic phosphate level, and the renal, 
hepatic, and bone marrow function. Mild hypercalcemia  
[≤3 mmol/L (12 mg/dL)] can usually be managed by 
hydration. Severe hypercalcemia [≥3.7 mmol/L (15 mg/dL)]
requires rapid correction. Calcitonin should be given 
for its rapid, albeit short-lived, blockade of bone resorp-
tion, and IV pamidronate or zolendronate should be 
administered, although its onset of action is delayed for 
1–2 days. In addition, for the first 24–48 h, aggressive 
sodium-calcium diuresis with IV saline should be given 
and, following rehydration, large doses of furosemide 
or ethacrynic acid, but only if appropriate monitoring is 
available and cardiac and renal function are adequate. 
Otherwise, dialysis may be necessary. Intermediate 
degrees of hypercalcemia between 3 and 3.7 mmol/L 
(12 and 15 mg/dL) should be approached with vigorous 
hydration and then the most appropriate selection 
for the patient of the combinations used with severe 
hypercalcemia.
Hypocalcemia
(See also Chap. 26)
Pathophysiology of Hypocalcemia: 
Classification Based on Mechanism
Chronic hypocalcemia is less common than hypercalce-
mia; causes include chronic renal failure, hereditary and 
acquired hypoparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, PHP, 
and hypomagnesemia.
Acute rather than chronic hypocalcemia is seen 
in critically ill patients or as a consequence of certain 
medications and often does not require specific treat-
ment. Transient hypocalcemia is seen with severe sepsis, 
burns, acute renal failure, and extensive transfusions with 
citrated blood. Although as many as one-half of patients 
in an intensive care setting are reported to have calcium 
concentrations <2.1 mmol/L (8.5 mg/dL), most do 
not have a reduction in ionized calcium. Patients with 
severe sepsis may have a decrease in ionized calcium 
(true hypocalcemia), but in other severely ill individuals, 
hypoalbuminemia is the primary cause of the reduced 
total calcium concentration. Alkalosis increases calcium 
binding to proteins, and in this setting direct measure-
ments of ionized calcium should be made.
Medications such as protamine, heparin, and gluca-
gon may cause transient hypocalcemia. These forms of 
hypocalcemia are usually not associated with tetany and 
resolve with improvement in the overall medical con-
dition. The hypocalcemia after repeated transfusions of 
citrated blood usually resolves quickly.
Patients with acute pancreatitis have hypocalcemia 
that persists during the acute inflammation and var-
ies in degree with the severity of the pancreatitis. The 
cause of hypocalcemia remains unclear. PTH values are 
reported to be low, normal, or elevated, and both resis-
tance to PTH and impaired PTH secretion have been 
postulated. Occasionally, a chronic low total calcium 
and low ionized calcium concentration are detected 
in an elderly patient without obvious cause and with a 
paucity of symptoms; the pathogenesis is unclear.
Chronic hypocalcemia, however, is usually symp-
tomatic and requires treatment. Neuromuscular and neu-
rologic manifestations of chronic hypocalcemia include 
muscle spasms, carpopedal spasm, facial grimacing, and, in 
extreme cases, laryngeal spasm and convulsions. Respi-
ratory arrest may occur. Increased intracranial pressure 
occurs in some patients with long-standing hypocal-
cemia, often in association with papilledema. Mental 
changes include irritability, depression, and psychosis. 
The QT interval on the electrocardiogram is prolonged, 
in contrast to its shortening with hypercalcemia. Arrhyth-
mias occur, and digitalis effectiveness may be reduced. 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
430
Intestinal cramps and chronic malabsorption may occur. 
Chvostek’s or Trousseau’s sign can be used to confirm 
latent tetany.
The classification of hypocalcemia shown in Table 27-5  
is based on an organizationally useful premise that PTH 
is responsible for minute-to-minute regulation of plasma 
calcium concentration, and therefore that the occurrence 
of hypocalcemia must mean a failure of the homeostatic 
action of PTH. Failure of the PTH response can occur if 
there is hereditary or acquired parathyroid gland failure, 
if PTH is ineffective in target organs, or if the action of 
the hormone is overwhelmed by the loss of calcium from 
the ECF at a rate faster than it can be replaced.
PTH Absent
Whether hereditary or acquired, hypoparathyroidism 
has a number of common components. Symptoms of un- 
treated hypocalcemia are shared by both types of 
hypoparathyroidism, although the onset of hereditary 
hypoparathyroidism is more gradual and is often asso-
ciated with other developmental defects. Basal ganglia 
calcification and extrapyramidal syndromes are more 
common and earlier in onset in hereditary hypoparathy-
roidism. In earlier decades, acquired hypoparathyroid-
ism secondary to surgery in the neck was more common 
than hereditary hypoparathyroidism, but the frequency 
of surgically induced parathyroid failure has diminished 
as a result of improved surgical techniques that spare 
the parathyroid glands and increased use of nonsurgical 
therapy for hyperthyroidism. PHP, an example of inef-
fective PTH action rather than a failure of parathyroid 
gland production, may share several features with hypo-
parathyroidism, including extraosseous calcification and 
extrapyramidal manifestations such as choreoathetotic 
movements and dystonia.
Papilledema and raised intracranial pressure may occur 
in both hereditary and acquired hypoparathyroidism, as 
do chronic changes in fingernails and hair and lenticu-
lar cataracts, the latter usually reversible with treatment 
of hypocalcemia. Certain skin manifestations, including 
alopecia and candidiasis, are characteristic of hereditary 
hypoparathyroidism associated with autoimmune poly-
glandular failure (Chap. 23).
Hypocalcemia associated with hypomagnesemia is 
associated with both deficient PTH release and impaired 
responsiveness to the hormone. Patients with hypo-
calcemia secondary to hypomagnesemia have absent 
or low levels of circulating PTH, indicative of dimin-
ished hormone release despite a maximum physiologic 
stimulus by hypocalcemia. Plasma PTH levels return 
to normal with correction of the hypomagnesemia. 
Thus hypoparathyroidism with low levels of PTH in 
blood can be due to hereditary gland failure, acquired 
gland failure, or acute but reversible gland dysfunction 
(hypomagnesemia).
Genetic abnormalities and hereditary 
hypoparathyroidism
Hereditary hypoparathyroidism can occur as an isolated 
entity without other endocrine or dermatologic mani-
festations. More typically, it occurs in association with 
other abnormalities such as defective development of 
the thymus or failure of other endocrine organs such as 
the adrenal, thyroid, or ovary (Chap. 23). Hereditary 
hypoparathyroidism is often manifest within the first 
decade but may appear later.
Genetic defects associated with hypoparathyroidism 
serve to illuminate the complexity of organ development, 
hormonal biosynthesis and secretion, and tissue-specific 
patterns of endocrine effector function (Fig. 27-5). Often, 
hypoparathyroidism is isolated, signifying a highly spe-
cific functional disturbance. When hypoparathyroidism 
is associated with other developmental or organ defects, 
treatment of the hypocalcemia can still be effective.
A rare form of hypoparathyroidism associated with 
defective development of both the thymus and the para-
thyroid glands is termed the DiGeorge syndrome, or the 
velocardiofacial syndrome. Congenital cardiovascular, facial, 
and other developmental defects are present, and patients 
may die in early childhood with severe infections, hypo-
calcemia and seizures, or cardiovascular complications. 
Patients can survive into adulthood, and milder, incom-
plete forms occur. Most cases are sporadic, but an 
autosomal dominant form involving microdeletions of 
chromosome 22q11.2 has been described. Smaller dele-
tions in chromosome 22 are seen in incomplete forms 
of the DiGeorge syndrome, appearing in childhood or 
adolescence, that are manifest primarily by parathyroid 
gland failure. The chromosome 22 defect is now termed 
DSG1; more recently, a defect in chromosome 10p is 
also recognized—now called DSG2. The phenotypes 
seem similar. Studies on the chromosome 22 defect have 
pinpointed a transcription factor, TBX1. Deletions of 
the orthologous mouse gene show a phenotype similar 
to the human syndrome.
Another autosomal dominant developmental defect, 
featuring hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia 
(HDR) has been studied at a genetic level. Cytogenic 
abnormalities in some, but not all, kindred point to 
translocation defects on chromosome 10, as in DiGeorge 
syndrome. However, the lack of immunodeficiency and 
heart defects distinguishes the two syndromes. Mouse 
models, as well as deletional analysis in some HDR 
patients, has pointed to transcription factor GATA3, 
which is important in embryonic development and is 
expressed in developing kidney, ear structures, and the 
parathyroids.
Another pair of linked developmental disorders involv-
ing the parathyroids is recognized. Kenney-Caffey syndrome 
features hypoparathyroidism, short stature, osteosclerosis, 
and thick cortical bones. A defect seen in Middle Eastern 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
431
patients, particularly in Saudi Arabia, termed Sanjad-
Sakati syndrome, also exhibits growth failure and other 
dysmorphic features. This syndrome, which is clearly 
autosomal recessive, involves a gene on chromosome 
1q42-q43. Both syndromes apparently involve a chaper-
one protein, called TBCE, relevant to tubulin function.
Hypoparathyroidism can occur in association with 
a complex hereditary autoimmune syndrome involv-
ing failure of the adrenals, the ovaries, the immune sys-
tem, and the parathyroids in association with recurrent 
mucocutaneous candidiasis, alopecia, vitiligo, and per-
nicious anemia (Chap. 23). The responsible gene on 
chromosome 21q22.3 has been identified. The protein 
product, which resembles a transcription factor, has 
been termed the autoimmune regulator, or AIRE. A stop 
codon mutation occurs in many Finnish families with 
the disorder, commonly referred to as polyglandular auto-
immune type 1 deficiency.
Hypoparathyroidism is seen in two disorders associ-
ated with mitochondrial dysfunction and myopathy, 
one termed the Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS), with oph-
thalmoplegia and pigmentary retinopathy, and the other 
termed the MELAS syndrome, mitochondrial encephalop-
athy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes. Mutations 
or deletions in mitochondrial genes have been identified.
Several forms of hypoparathyroidism, each rare in fre-
quency, are seen as isolated defects; the genetic mecha-
nisms are varied. The inheritance includes autosomal 
dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked modes. 
Three separate autosomal defects involving the parathy-
roid gene have been recognized: one is dominant and 
the other two are recessive. The dominant form has a 
point mutation in the signal sequence, a critical region 
involved in intracellular transport of the hormone pre-
cursor. An Arg for Cys mutation interferes with pro-
cessing of the precursor and is believed to trigger an 
apoptotic cellular response, hence acting as a dominant 
negative. The other two forms are recessive. One point 
mutation also blocks cleavage of the PTH precursor 
but requires both alleles to cause hypoparathyroidism. 
The third involves a single-nucleotide base change that 
results in an exon splicing defect; the lost exon contains 
the promoter—hence, the gene is silenced. An X-linked 
recessive form of hypoparathyroidism has been described 
in males and the defect has been localized to chromo-
some Xq26-q27, perhaps involving the SOX3 gene.
Abnormalities in the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) 
are detected in three distinctive hypocalcemic disorders. 
All are rare but more than 10 different gain-of-function 
mutations have been found in one form of hypocalce-
mia termed autosomal dominant hypocalcemic hypercalciuria
(ADHH). The receptor senses the ambient calcium 
level as excessive and suppresses PTH secretion, lead-
ing to hypocalcemia. The hypocalcemia is aggravated 
by constitutive receptor activity in the renal tubule 
causing excretion of inappropriate amounts of calcium. 
Recognition of the syndrome is important because efforts 
to treat the hypocalcemia with vitamin D analogues and 
increased oral calcium exacerbate the already excessive 
urinary calcium excretion (several grams or more per 
24 h), leading to irreversible renal damage from stones 
and ectopic calcification.
Other causes of isolated hypoparathyroidism include 
homozygous, inactivating mutations in the parathyroid-
specific transcription factor GCMB, which lead to an 
autosomal recessive form of the disease, or heterozygous 
point mutations in GCMB, which have a dominant 
negative effect on the wild-type protein and thus lead 
to an autosomal dominant form of hypoparathyroidism.
Bartter’s syndrome is a group of disorders associated with 
disturbances in electrolyte and acid/base balance, some-
times with nephrocalcinosis and other features. Sev-
eral types of ion channels or transporters are involved. 
Curiously, Bartter’s syndrome type V has the electrolyte 
and pH disturbances seen in the other syndromes but 
appears to be due to a gain of function in the CaSR. 
The defect may be more severe than in ADHH and 
explains the additional features seen beyond hypocalce-
mia and hypercalciuria.
As with autoimmune disorders that block the CaSR 
(discussed above under hypercalcemic conditions), there 
are autoantibodies that at least transiently activate the 
CaSR, leading to suppressed PTH secretion and hypocal-
cemia. This disorder, which may wax and wane, could be 
classified as an acquired form of hypoparathyroidism but 
is listed here with other disorders involving the CaSR.
Acquired hypoparathyroidism
Acquired chronic hypoparathyroidism is usually the result 
of inadvertent surgical removal of all the parathyroid 
glands; in some instances, not all the tissue is removed, 
but the remainder undergoes vascular supply compro-
mise secondary to fibrotic changes in the neck after sur-
gery. In the past, the most frequent cause of acquired 
hypoparathyroidism was surgery for hyperthyroidism. 
Hypoparathyroidism now usually occurs after surgery 
for hyperparathyroidism when the surgeon, facing the 
dilemma of removing too little tissue and thus not cur-
ing the hyperparathyroidism, removes too much. Para-
thyroid function may not be totally absent in all patients 
with postoperative hypoparathyroidism.
Even rarer causes of acquired chronic hypoparathy-
roidism include radiation-induced damage subsequent 
to radioiodine therapy of hyperthyroidism and glandu-
lar damage in patients with hemochromatosis or hemo-
siderosis after repeated blood transfusions. Infection 
may involve one or more of the parathyroids but usu-
ally does not cause hypoparathyroidism because all four 
glands are rarely involved.
Transient hypoparathyroidism is frequent following sur-
gery for hyperparathyroidism. After a variable period of 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
432
hypoparathyroidism, normal parathyroid function may 
return due to hyperplasia or recovery of remaining tis-
sue. Occasionally, recovery occurs months after surgery.
Treatment	
Acquired and Hereditary 
Hypoparathyroidism
Treatment involves replacement with vitamin D or 
1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol) combined with a high oral cal-
cium intake. In most patients, blood calcium and phos-
phate levels are satisfactorily regulated, but some 
patients show resistance and a brittleness, with a ten-
dency to alternate between hypocalcemia and hyper-
calcemia. For many patients, vitamin D in doses of 
40,000–120,000 U/d (1–3 mg/d) combined with ≥1 g
elemental calcium is satisfactory. The wide dosage range 
reflects the variation encountered from patient to 
patient; precise regulation of each patient is required. 
Compared to typical daily requirements in euparathy-
roid patients of 200 U/d (or in older patients as high as 
800 U/d), the high dose of vitamin D (as much as 100-
fold higher) reflects the reduced conversion of vitamin D 
to 1,25(OH)2D. Many physicians now use 0.5–1 μg of cal-
citriol in the management of such patients, especially if 
they are difficult to control. Because of its storage in fat, 
when vitamin D is withdrawn, weeks are required for the 
disappearance of the biologic effects, compared with a 
few days for calcitriol, which has a rapid turnover.
Oral calcium and vitamin D restore the overall cal-
cium-phosphate balance but do not reverse the lowered 
urinary calcium reabsorption typical of hypoparathy-
roidism. Therefore, care must be taken to avoid excessive 
urinary calcium excretion after vitamin D and calcium 
replacement therapy; otherwise, kidney stones can 
develop. Thiazide diuretics lower urine calcium by as 
much as 100 mg/d in hypoparathyroid patients on vita-
min D, provided they are maintained on a low-sodium 
diet. Use of thiazides seems to be of benefit in mitigat-
ing hypercalciuria and easing the daily management of 
these patients.
There are now trials of parenterally administered PTH 
[either PTH(1–34) or PTH(1–84)] in patients with hypo-
parathyroidism providing greater ease of maintaining 
serum calcium and reducing urinary calcium excretion 
(desirable to protect any renal damage). However, PTH 
therapy is not approved as of yet.
Hypomagnesemia
Severe hypomagnesemia (<0.4 mmol/L; <0.8 meq/L) is 
associated with hypocalcemia (Chap. 25). Restoration of 
the total-body magnesium deficit leads to rapid rever-
sal of hypocalcemia. There are at least two causes of the 
hypocalcemia—impaired PTH secretion and reduced 
responsiveness to PTH. For further discussion of causes 
and treatment of hypomagnesemia, see Chap. 25.
The effects of magnesium on PTH secretion are simi-
lar to those of calcium; hypermagnesemia suppresses and 
hypomagnesemia stimulates PTH secretion. The effects 
of magnesium on PTH secretion are normally of little 
significance, however, because the calcium effects domi-
nate. Greater change in magnesium than in calcium is 
needed to influence hormone secretion. Nonetheless, 
hypomagnesemia might be expected to increase hor-
mone secretion. It is therefore surprising to find that 
severe hypomagnesemia is associated with blunted secre-
tion of PTH. The explanation for the paradox is that 
severe, chronic hypomagnesemia leads to intracellu-
lar magnesium deficiency, which interferes with secre-
tion and peripheral responses to PTH. The mechanism 
of the cellular abnormalities caused by hypomagnesemia 
is unknown, although effects on adenylate cyclase (for 
which magnesium is a cofactor) have been proposed.
PTH levels are undetectable or inappropriately low 
in severe hypomagnesemia despite the stimulus of 
severe hypocalcemia, and acute repletion of magnesium 
leads to a rapid increase in PTH level. Serum phosphate 
levels are often not elevated, in contrast to the situa-
tion with acquired or idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, 
probably because phosphate deficiency is often seen in 
hypomagnesmia. 
Diminished peripheral responsiveness to PTH also 
occurs in some patients, as documented by subnormal 
response in urinary phosphorus and urinary cyclic AMP 
excretion after administration of exogenous PTH to 
patients who are hypocalcemic and hypomagnesemic. 
Both blunted PTH secretion and lack of renal response to 
administered PTH can occur in the same patient. When 
acute magnesium repletion is undertaken, the restoration 
of PTH levels to normal or supranormal may precede res-
toration of normal serum calcium by several days.
Treatment	
Hypomagnesemia
Repletion of magnesium cures the condition. Repletion 
should be parenteral. Attention must be given to restor-
ing the intracellular deficit, which may be considerable. 
After IV magnesium administration, serum magnesium 
may return transiently to the normal range, but unless 
replacement therapy is adequate, serum magnesium 
will again fall. If the cause of the hypomagnesemia is 
renal magnesium wasting, magnesium may have to be 
given long term to prevent recurrence (Chap. 25).
PTH Ineffective
PTH is ineffective when the PTH/PTHrP receptor–guanyl 
nucleotide–binding protein complex is defective (PHP, 
discussed later), when PTH action to promote cal-
cium absorption from the diet is impaired because of 
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
433
vitamin D deficiency or because vitamin D is ineffective 
(defects in vitamin D receptor or vitamin D synthesis), 
or in chronic renal failure in which the calcium-elevating 
action of PTH is impaired.
Typically, hypophosphatemia is more severe than 
hypocalcemia in vitamin D deficiency states because of 
the increased secretion of PTH, which, although only 
partly effective in elevating blood calcium, is capable of 
promoting phosphaturia.
PHP, on the other hand, has a pathophysiology dif-
ferent from the other disorders of ineffective PTH 
action. PHP resembles hypoparathyroidism (in which 
PTH synthesis is deficient) and is manifested by hypo-
calcemia and hyperphosphatemia, yet elevated PTH 
levels. The cause of the disorder is defective PTH-
dependent activation of guanyl nucleotide–binding pro-
teins, resulting in failure of PTH to increase intracellular 
cyclic AMP (see “Pseudohypoparathyroidism”).
Chronic renal failure
Improved medical management of chronic kid-
ney disease now allows many patients to survive for 
decades and hence time enough to develop features 
of renal osteodystrophy, which must be controlled to 
avoid additional morbidity. Impaired production of 
1,25(OH)2D is now thought to be the principal factor 
that causes calcium deficiency, secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism, and bone disease; hyperphosphatemia typi-
cally occurs only in the later stages of CKD. Low levels 
of 1,25(OH)2D due to increased FGF23 production in 
bone are critical in the development of hypocalcemia. 
The uremic state also causes impairment of intestinal 
absorption by mechanisms other than defects in vitamin D 
metabolism. Nonetheless, treatment with supraphysi-
ologic amounts of vitamin D or calcitriol corrects the 
impaired calcium absorption. Since increased FGF23 
levels are seen even in early stages of renal failure in 
some patients, and have been reported to correlate with 
increased mortality, there is current interest in methods 
(lowering phosphate absorption) to lower FGF23 levels 
and concern as to whether vitamin D supplementation 
(known physiologically to increase FGF23) increases 
FGF23 in CKD.
Hyperphosphatemia in renal failure lowers blood cal-
cium levels by several mechanisms, including extraosse-
ous deposition of calcium and phosphate, impairment 
of the bone-resorbing action of PTH, and reduction in 
1,25(OH)2D production by remaining renal tissue.
Treatment	
Chronic Renal Failure
Therapy of chronic renal failure involves appropriate 
management of patients prior to dialysis and adjust-
ment of regimens once dialysis is initiated. Attention 
should be paid to restriction of phosphate in the diet; 
avoidance of aluminum-containing phosphate-binding 
antacids to prevent the problem of aluminum intoxica-
tion; provision of an adequate calcium intake by mouth, 
usually 1–2 g/d; and supplementation with 0.25–1 μg/d 
calcitriol. Each patient must be monitored closely. The 
aim of therapy is to restore normal calcium balance to 
prevent osteomalacia and severe secondary hyper-
parathyroidism (it is usually recommended to main-
tain PTH levels between 100 and 300 pg/mL) and, in 
light of evidence of genetic changes and monoclonal 
outgrowths of parathyroid glands in CKD patients, to 
prevent secondary hyperparathyroidism from becoming 
autonomous hyperparathyroidism. Reduction of hyper-
phosphatemia and restoration of normal intestinal cal-
cium absorption by calcitriol can improve blood calcium 
levels and reduce the manifestations of secondary hyper-
parathyroidism. Since adynamic bone disease can occur 
in association with low PTH levels, it is important to avoid 
excessive suppression of the parathyroid glands while 
recognizing the beneficial effects of controlling the sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism. These patients should prob-
ably be closely monitored with PTH assays that detect 
only the full-length PTH(1–84) to ensure that biologically 
active PTH and not inactive, inhibitory PTH fragments 
are measured. Use of phosphate-binding agents such as 
sevelamer are approved for payment only in end-stage 
renal disease (ESRD).
Vitamin D deficiency due to inadequate diet 
and/or sunlight
Vitamin D deficiency due to inadequate intake of dairy 
products enriched with vitamin D, lack of vitamin 
supplementation, and reduced sunlight exposure in the 
elderly, particularly during winter in northern latitudes, 
is more common in the United States than previously 
recognized. Biopsies of bone in elderly patients with hip 
fracture (documenting osteomalacia) and abnormal levels 
of vitamin D metabolites, PTH, calcium, and phosphate 
indicate that vitamin D deficiency may occur in as many 
as 25% of elderly patients, particularly in northern lati-
tudes in the United States. Concentrations of 25(OH)D 
are low or low-normal in these patients. Quantitative 
histomorphometry of bone biopsy specimens reveals 
widened osteoid seams consistent with osteomalacia 
(Chap. 25). PTH hypersecretion compensates for the 
tendency for the blood calcium to fall but also induces 
renal phosphate wasting and results in osteomalacia.
Treatment involves adequate replacement with 
vitamin D and calcium until the deficiencies are cor-
rected. Severe hypocalcemia rarely occurs in moderately 
severe vitamin D deficiency of the elderly, but vita-
min D deficiency must be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of mild hypocalcemia.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
434
Mild hypocalcemia, secondary hyperparathyroidism, 
severe hypophosphatemia, and a variety of nutritional 
deficiencies occur with gastrointestinal diseases. Hepato-
cellular dysfunction can lead to reduction in 25(OH)D 
levels, as in portal or biliary cirrhosis of the liver, and 
malabsorption of vitamin D and its metabolites, includ-
ing 1,25(OH)2D, may occur in a variety of bowel dis-
eases, hereditary or acquired. Hypocalcemia itself can 
lead to steatorrhea, due to deficient production of 
pancreatic enzymes and bile salts. Depending on the 
disorder, vitamin D or its metabolites can be given par-
enterally, guaranteeing adequate blood levels of active 
metabolites.
Defective vitamin D metabolism
Anticonvulsant therapy
Anticonvulsant therapy with any of several agents 
induces acquired vitamin D deficiency by increasing the 
conversion of vitamin D to inactive compounds and/or 
causing resistance to its action. The more marginal the 
vitamin D intake in the diet, the more likely that anti-
convulsant therapy will lead to abnormal mineral and 
bone metabolism.
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type I
Rickets can be due to resistance to the action of vitamin D 
as well as to vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D–dependent 
rickets type I, previously termed pseudo-vitamin D–resistant
rickets, differs from true vitamin D–resistant rickets 
(vitamin D–dependent rickets type II, see next section) in 
that it is less severe and the biochemical and radiographic 
abnormalities can be reversed with appropriate doses of 
the vitamin’s active metabolite, 1,25(OH)2D3. Physi-
ologic amounts of calcitriol cure the disease (Chap. 25). 
This finding fits with the pathophysiology of the disor-
der, which is autosomal recessive, and is now known to 
be caused by mutations in the gene encoding 25(OH)
D-1α-hydroxylase. Both alleles are inactivated in all 
patients, and compound heterozygotes, harboring distinct 
mutations, are common.
Clinical features include hypocalcemia, often with 
tetany or convulsions, hypophosphatemia, secondary 
hyperparathyroidism, and osteomalacia, often associated 
with skeletal deformities and increased alkaline phos-
phatase. Treatment involves physiologic replacement 
doses of 1,25(OH)2D3 (Chap. 25).
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type II
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type II results from end-
organ resistance to the active metabolite 1,25(OH)2D3. 
The clinical features resemble those of the type I dis-
order and include hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, 
secondary hyperparathyroidism, and rickets but also par-
tial or total alopecia. Plasma levels of 1,25(OH)2D are 
elevated, in keeping with the refractoriness of the end 
organs. This disorder is caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding the vitamin D receptor; treatment is difficult 
and requires regular, usually nocturnal calcium infusions 
(Chap. 25).
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
PHP refers to a group of distinct inherited disor-
ders. Patients are characterized by symptoms and signs 
of hypocalcemia in association with distinctive skel-
etal and developmental defects. The hypocalcemia is 
due to a deficient response to PTH, which is probably 
restricted to the proximal renal tubules. Hyperplasia of 
the parathyroids, a response to hormone-resistant hypo-
calcemia, causes elevation of PTH levels. Studies, both 
clinical and basic, have clarified some aspects of these 
disorders, including the variable clinical spectrum, the 
pathophysiology, the genetic defects, and their mode of 
inheritance.
A working classification of the various forms of 
PHP is given in Table 27-6. The classification scheme 
is based on the signs of ineffective PTH action (low 
calcium and high phosphate), urinary cyclic AMP 
response to exogenous PTH, the presence or absence 
of Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), and assays 
to measure the concentration of the Gsα subunit of the 
adenylate cyclase enzyme. Using these criteria, there are 
four types: PHP types Ia and Ib; pseudopseudohypo-
parathyroidism (PPHP), and the related disorder POH, 
and PHP-II.
Table 27-6
Classification of Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP)
Type
Hypocalcemia, 
Hyperphosphatemia
Response of 
Urinary cAMP 
to PTH
Serum PTH
Gs` Subunit 
Deficiency
AHO
Resistance to 
Hormones in Addition 
to PTH
PHP-Ia
Yes
↓
↑
Yes
Yes
Yes
PHP-Ib
Yes
↓
↑
No
No
Yes (in some patients)
PHP-II
Yes
Normal
↑
No
No
No
PPHP
No
Normal
Normal
Yes
Yes
No
Abbreviations: ↓, decreased; ↑, increased; AHO, Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy; cAMP, cyclic AMP; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
435
PHP-Ia and PHP-Ib
Individuals with PHP-I, the most common of the dis-
orders, show a deficient urinary cyclic AMP response to 
administration of exogenous PTH. Patients with PHP-I 
are divided into type Ia and type Ib. Patients with PHP-Ia 
show evidence for AHO and reduced amounts of Gsα 
protein/activity in readily accessible tissues, such as eryth-
rocytes, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts. Patients with PHP-Ib 
typically lack evidence for AHO and they have normal 
Gsα activity. PHP-Ic, sometimes listed as a third form of 
PHP, is really a variant of PHP-Ia, since the mutant Gsα 
shows normal activity in certain in vitro assays.
Most patients who have PHP-Ia reveal characteristic 
features of AHO, consisting of short stature, round face, 
skeletal anomalies (brachydactyly), and/or heterotopic 
calcification. Patients have low calcium and high phos-
phate levels, as with true hypoparathyroidism. PTH levels, 
however, are elevated, reflecting resistance to hormone 
action.
Amorphous deposits of calcium and phosphate are 
found in the basal ganglia in about one-half of patients. 
The defects in metacarpal and metatarsal bones are 
sometimes accompanied by short phalanges as well, pos-
sibly reflecting premature closing of the epiphyses. The 
typical findings are short fourth and fifth metacarpals and 
metatarsals. The defects are usually bilateral. Exostoses 
and radius curvus are frequent. Impairments in olfaction 
and taste and unusual dermatoglyphic abnormalities have 
been reported.
Inheritance and genetic patterns
Multiple defects at the GNAS locus have now been 
identified in PHP-Ia, PHP-Ib, and PPHP patients. 
This gene, which is located on chromosome 20q13.3, 
encodes the α-subunit of the stimulatory G-protein 
(Gsα), among other products (see below). Mutations 
include abnormalities in splice junctions associated with 
deficient mRNA production, point mutations, inser-
tions, and/or deletion that all result in a protein with 
defective function, i.e., a 50% reduction in Gsα activity 
in erythrocytes or other cells.
Detailed analyses of disease transmission in affected 
kindreds have clarified many features of PHP-Ia, PPHP, 
and PHP-Ib (Fig. 27-7). The former two entities, 
traced through multiple kindreds, have an inheritance 
pattern consistent with gene imprinting—only females, 
not males, can transmit the full disease with hypocal-
cemia—and PHP-Ia and PPHP do not coexist in the 
same generation. The phenomenon of gene imprinting, 
involving methylation of gene loci, independent of any 
mutation, involves selective inactivation of either the 
maternal or the paternal allele. In the case of the Gsα 
transcript, it is paternally imprinted (silenced) in the renal 
cortex (where the disease manifestation is expressed), 
so that the disease PHP-Ia can never be inherited from 
the father carrying the defective allele but only from a 
mother whose allelic product is critical for the PTH-
dependent function in the proximal tubules of the kid-
ney. In the renal cortex, it is postulated that only the 
maternal allele is normally active (independent of any 
mutation), such that lack of activity from a defective 
paternal allele is not of consequence. This explains the 
occurrence in PHP-Ia of hypocalcemia, hyperphosphate-
mia, and resistance to PTH and often to other hormones 
that mediate their actions through a G protein–coupled 
receptor in tissues where imprinting also occurs. Strong 
additional evidence favoring this overall hypothesis 
comes from gene knockout studies in the mouse (ablat-
ing exon 2 of the gene responsible for Gsα synthesis). 
Mice inheriting the mutant allele from the female had 
undetectable Gsα protein in renal cortex and were hypo-
calcemic and resistant to renal actions of PTH. Offspring 
inheriting the mutant allele from the male showed no 
evidence of PTH resistance or hypocalcemia.
Imprinting is tissue selective. Paternal Gsα expression 
is not silenced in most tissues. It seems likely, there-
fore, that the AHO phenotype recognized in PPHP as 
well as PHP-Ia reflects Gsα haploinsufficiency during 
embryonic or postnatal development.
PTH
PHP-Ia
(1AHO)
Urinary
cyclic AMP/
phosphate
PTH
PHPP
(1AHO)
Figure 27-7
Paternal imprinting of renal parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
resistance (GNAS-1 gene for Gsα subunit) in pseudohypo-
parathyroidism (PHP-Ia). An impaired excretion of urinary 
cyclic AMP and phosphate is observed in patients with PHP. 
In the renal cortex, there is selective silencing of the pater-
nal Gsα gene mRNA. The disease becomes manifest only 
in patients who inherit the defective gene from an obligate 
female carrier (left). If the genetic defect is inherited from an 
obligate male gene carrier, there is no biochemical abnormal-
ity; administration of PTH causes an appropriate increase 
in the urinary cyclic AMP and phosphate concentration 
[pseudo-PHP (PPHP); right]. Both patterns of inheritance 
lead to Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), perhaps 
because of haplotype insufficiency—i.e., both copies of Gsα 
must be active in the fetus for normal bone development.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
436
The complex mechanisms that control the GNAS 
gene contribute to challenges involved in unraveling the 
pathogenesis of these disorders, especially that of PHP-
Ib. Much intensive work with families in which multiple 
members are affected by PHP-Ib, as well as studies of the 
complex regulation of the GNAS gene locus, have now 
shown that PHP-Ib is caused by microdeletions within 
or upstream of the GNAS locus, which are associated 
with a loss of DNA methylation at one or several loci of 
the maternal allele (Table 27-6). These abnormalities in 
methylation silence the expression of the gene. This leads 
in the renal cortex—where Gsα appears to be expressed 
exclusively from the maternal allele—to PTH resistance. 
In other tissues, Gsα expression is not imprinted; hence, 
erythrocytes show normal levels of Gsα.
PHP-Ib, lacking the AHO phenotype in most instances, 
shares with PHP-Ia the hypocalcemia and hyperphos-
phatemia caused by PTH resistance, and thus the blunted 
urinary cyclic AMP response to administered PTH, a 
standard test to assess the presence or absence of hormone 
resistance (Table 27-6). Furthermore, these endocrine 
abnormalities become apparent only if the disease-causing 
mutation is inherited maternally. Bone responsiveness 
may be excessive rather than blunted in PHP-Ib (and in 
PHP-Ia) patients, based on case reports that have empha-
sized an osteitis fibrosa–like pattern in several PHP-Ib 
patients.
PHP-II refers to patients with hypocalcemia and 
hyperphosphatemia who have a normal urinary cyclic 
AMP but an impaired urinary phosphaturic response to 
PTH. These patients are assumed to have a defect in the 
response to PTH at a locus distal to cyclic AMP pro-
duction. It remains unclear why the PTH resistance in 
some patients, labeled as PHP-II, can be treated with 
vitamin D supplements.
The diagnosis of these hormone-resistant states can 
usually be made without difficulty when there is a posi-
tive family history for features of AHO, in association 
with the signs and symptoms of hypocalcemia. In both 
categories—PHP-Ia and PHP-Ib—serum PTH levels 
are elevated, particularly when patients are hypocalce-
mic. However, patients with PHP-Ib or PHP-II usually 
do not have phenotypic abnormalities, only hypocal-
cemia with high PTH levels, as evidence for hormone 
resistance. In PHP-Ib, the response of urinary cyclic AMP 
to the administration of exogenous PTH is blunted. 
The diagnosis of PHP-II is more complex, in that 
cyclic AMP responses in urine are, by definition, nor-
mal. Vitamin D deficiency must be excluded before the 
diagnosis of PHP-II can be entertained.
Treatment	
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Treatment of PHP is similar to that of hypoparathy-
roidism, except that calcium and vitamin D doses are 
usually lower. Patients with PHP show no PTH resistance 
in the distal tubules—hence, urinary calcium clearance 
is not affected and they are at less risk of developing 
nephrocalcinosis than patients with true hypoparathy-
roidism. Variability in response makes it necessary to 
establish the optimal regimen for each patient, based 
on maintaining the appropriate blood calcium level and 
urinary calcium excretion.
PTH Overwhelmed
Occasionally, loss of calcium from the ECF is so severe 
that PTH cannot compensate. Such situations include 
acute pancreatitis and severe, acute hyperphosphatemia, 
often in association with renal failure—conditions in 
which there is rapid efflux of calcium from the ECF. 
Severe hypocalcemia can occur quickly; PTH rises in 
response to hypocalcemia but does not return blood 
calcium to normal.
Severe, acute hyperphosphatemia
Severe hyperphosphatemia is associated with extensive 
tissue damage or cell destruction (Chap. 25). The com-
bination of increased release of phosphate from muscle 
and impaired ability to excrete phosphorus because of 
renal failure causes moderate to severe hyperphosphate-
mia, the latter causing calcium loss from the blood and 
mild to moderate hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia is usually 
reversed with tissue repair and restoration of renal func-
tion as phosphorus and creatinine values return to nor-
mal. There may even be a mild hypercalcemic period 
in the oliguric phase of renal function recovery. This 
sequence, severe hypocalcemia followed by mild hyper-
calcemia, reflects widespread deposition of calcium in 
muscle and subsequent redistribution of some of the cal-
cium to the ECF after phosphate levels return to normal.
Other causes of hyperphosphatemia include hypother-
mia, massive hepatic failure, and hematologic malignan-
cies, either because of high cell turnover of malignancy 
or because of cell destruction by chemotherapy.
Treatment	
Severe, Acute Hyperphosphatemia
Treatment is directed toward lowering of blood phos-
phate by the administration of phosphate-binding antac-
ids or dialysis, often needed for the management of renal 
failure. Although calcium replacement may be neces-
sary if hypocalcemia is severe and symptomatic, calcium 
administration during the hyperphosphatemic period 
tends to increase extraosseous calcium deposition and 
aggravate tissue damage. The levels of 1,25(OH)2D may 
be low during the hyperphosphatemic phase and return 
to normal during the oliguric phase of recovery.
 
CHAPTER 27
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis
437
Osteitis fibrosa after parathyroidectomy
Severe hypocalcemia after parathyroid surgery is rare 
now that osteitis fibrosa cystica is an infrequent mani-
festation of hyperparathyroidism. When osteitis fibrosa 
cystica is severe, however, bone mineral deficits can be 
large. After parathyroidectomy, hypocalcemia can per-
sist for days if calcium replacement is inadequate. Treat-
ment may require parenteral administration of calcium; 
addition of calcitriol and oral calcium supplementation 
is sometimes needed for weeks to a month or two until 
bone defects are filled (which, of course, is of therapeu-
tic benefit in the skeleton), making it possible to discon-
tinue parenteral calcium and/or reduce the amount.
Differential Diagnosis of 
Hypocalcemia
Care must be taken to ensure that true hypocalcemia is 
present; in addition, acute transient hypocalcemia can 
be a manifestation of a variety of severe, acute illnesses, 
as discussed above. Chronic hypocalcemia, however, can 
usually be ascribed to a few disorders associated with 
absent or ineffective PTH. Important clinical criteria 
include the duration of the illness, signs or symptoms 
of associated disorders, and the presence of features that 
suggest a hereditary abnormality. A nutritional history 
can be helpful in recognizing a low intake of vitamin D 
and calcium in the elderly, and a history of excessive 
alcohol intake may suggest magnesium deficiency.
Hypoparathyroidism and PHP are typically life-
long illnesses, usually (but not always) appearing by 
adolescence; hence, a recent onset of hypocalcemia in 
an adult is more likely due to nutritional deficiencies, 
renal failure, or intestinal disorders that result in defi-
cient or ineffective vitamin D. Neck surgery, even long 
past, however, can be associated with a delayed onset 
of postoperative hypoparathyroidism. A history of sei-
zure disorder raises the issue of anticonvulsive medica-
tion. Developmental defects may point to the diagnosis 
of PHP. Rickets and a variety of neuromuscular syn-
dromes and deformities may indicate ineffective vitamin 
D action, either due to defects in vitamin D metabolism 
or to vitamin D deficiency.
A pattern of low calcium with high phosphorus in the 
absence of renal failure or massive tissue destruction 
almost invariably means hypoparathyroidism or PHP. A 
low calcium and low phosphorus pattern points to absent or 
ineffective vitamin D, thereby impairing the action of 
PTH on calcium metabolism (but not phosphate clear-
ance). The relative ineffectiveness of PTH in calcium 
homeostasis in vitamin D deficiency, anticonvulsant 
therapy, gastrointestinal disorders, and hereditary defects 
in vitamin D metabolism leads to secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism as a compensation. The excess PTH on renal 
tubule phosphate transport accounts for renal phosphate 
wasting and hypophosphatemia.
Exceptions to these patterns may occur. Most forms 
of hypomagnesemia are due to long-standing nutri-
tional deficiency as seen in chronic alcoholics. Despite 
the fact that the hypocalcemia is principally due to an 
acute absence of PTH, phosphate levels are usually 
low, rather than elevated, as in hypoparathyroidism. 
Chronic renal failure is often associated with hypo-
calcemia and hyperphosphatemia, despite secondary 
hyperparathyroidism.
Diagnosis is usually established by application of the 
PTH immunoassay, tests for vitamin D metabolites, 
and measurements of the urinary cyclic AMP response 
to exogenous PTH. In hereditary and acquired hypo-
parathyroidism and in severe hypomagnesemia, PTH is 
either undetectable or in the normal range (Fig. 27-4). 
This finding in a hypocalcemic patient is supportive of 
hypoparathyroidism, as distinct from ineffective PTH 
action, in which even mild hypocalcemia is associated 
with elevated PTH levels. Hence a failure to detect 
elevated PTH levels establishes the diagnosis of hypo-
parathyroidism; elevated levels suggest the presence of 
secondary hyperparathyroidism, as found in many of the 
situations in which the hormone is ineffective due to 
associated abnormalities in vitamin D action. Assays for 
25(OH)D can be helpful. Low or low-normal 25(OH)D 
indicates vitamin D deficiency due to lack of sunlight, 
inadequate vitamin D intake, or intestinal malabsorption. 
Recognition that mild hypocalcemia, rickets, and hypo-
phosphatemia are due to anticonvulsant therapy is made 
by history.
Treatment	
Hypocalcemic States
The management of hypoparathyroidism, PHP, chronic 
renal failure, and hereditary defects in vitamin D metab-
olism involves the use of vitamin D or vitamin D metabo-
lites and calcium supplementation. Vitamin D itself is 
the least expensive form of vitamin D replacement and 
is frequently used in the management of uncompli-
cated hypoparathyroidism and some disorders associ-
ated with ineffective vitamin D action. When vitamin 
D is used prophylactically, as in the elderly or in those 
with chronic anticonvulsant therapy, there is a wider 
margin of safety than with the more potent metabo-
lites. However, most of the conditions in which vita-
min D is administered chronically for hypocalcemia 
require amounts 50–100 times the daily replacement 
dose because the formation of 1,25(OH)2D is deficient. 
In such situations, vitamin D is no safer than the active 
metabolite because intoxication can occur with high-
dose therapy (because of storage in fat). Calcitriol is 
more rapid in onset of action and also has a short bio-
logic half-life.
Vitamin D [at least 1000 U/d (2–3 μg/d) (higher lev-
els required in older persons)] or calcitriol (0.25–1 μg/d)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
438
is required to prevent rickets in normal individuals. 
In contrast, 40,000–120,000 U (1–3 mg) of vitamin D2 
or D3 is typically required in hypoparathyroidism. The 
dose of calcitriol is unchanged in hypoparathyroidism, 
since the defect is in hydroxylation by the 25(OH)D-1α-
hydroxylase. Calcitriol is also used in disorders of 25(OH)
D-1α-hydroxylase; vitamin D receptor defects are much 
more difficult to treat.
Patients with hypoparathyroidism should be given 2–3 g 
elemental calcium PO each day. The two agents, vitamin D 
or calcitriol and oral calcium, can be varied indepen-
dently. Urinary calcium excretion needs to be monitored 
carefully. If hypocalcemia alternates with episodes of 
hypercalcemia in high-brittleness patients with hypopara-
thyroidism, administration of calcitriol and use of thia-
zides, as discussed earlier, may make management easier.
 Robert Lindsay  I   Felicia Cosman 
 Osteoporosis, a condition characterized by decreased
bone strength, is prevalent among postmenopausal women
but also occurs in men and women with underlying 
conditions or major risk factors associated with bone 
demineralization. Its chief clinical manifestations are 
vertebral and hip fractures, although fractures can occur 
at any skeletal site. Osteoporosis affects >10 million 
individuals in the United States, but only a small pro-
portion are diagnosed and treated. 
 definition 
Osteoporosis is defi ned as a reduction in the strength of 
bone that leads to an increased risk of fractures. Loss 
of bone tissue is associated with deterioration in skel-
etal microarchitecture. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) operationally defi nes osteoporosis as a bone 
density that falls 2.5 standard deviations (SDs) below the 
mean for young, healthy adults of the same sex—also 
referred to as a  T-score of −2.5. Postmenopausal women 
who fall at the lower end of the young normal range 
(a T-score <−1.0) are defi ned as having low bone den-
sity and are also at increased risk of osteoporosis. More 
than 50% of fractures among postmenopausal women, 
including hip fractures, occur in this group with low 
bone density. 
 ePideMiology 
 In the United States, as many as 8 million women and 
2 million men have osteoporosis (T-score <–2.5), and an 
additional 18 million individuals have bone mass levels 
that put them at increased risk of developing osteoporo-
sis (e.g., bone mass T-score <–1.0). Osteoporosis occurs 
more frequently with increasing age as bone tissue is lost 
progressively. In women, the loss of ovarian function 
at menopause (typically about age 50) precipitates rapid 
bone loss so that most women meet the diagnostic crite-
rion for osteoporosis by age 70–80. 
 The epidemiology of fractures follows the trend for 
loss of bone density. Fractures of the distal radius increase 
in frequency before age 50 and plateau by age 60, with 
only a modest age-related increase thereafter. In contrast, 
incidence rates for hip fractures double every 5 years after 
age 70  ( Fig. 28-1 ) . This distinct epidemiology may be 
related to the way people fall as they age, with fewer 
falls on an outstretched hand and more falls directly on 
the hip. At least 1.5 million fractures occur each year 
in the United States as a consequence of osteoporosis. 
As the population continues to age, the total number of 
fractures will continue to escalate. 
 About 300,000 hip fractures occur each year in the 
United States, most of which require hospital admis-
sion and surgical intervention. The probability that a 
50-year-old white individual will have a hip fracture 
during his or her lifetime is 14% for women and 5% for 
 OSTEOPOROSIS 
 chaPter 28 
3,000
Hip
Colles’
Vertebrae
2,000
1,000
35-39
Age group, year
Women
85
Incidence/100,000 person-years
 Figure 28-1  
 epidemiology of vertebral, hip, and colles’ fractures with 
age. ( Adapted from C Cooper, LJ Melton III: Trends Endocrinol
Metab 3:224, 1992; with permission. ) 
439
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
440
men; the risk for blacks is lower (about one-half those 
rates). Hip fractures are associated with a high inci-
dence of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism 
(20–50%) and a mortality rate between 5 and 20% dur-
ing the year after surgery.
There are about 700,000 vertebral crush fractures per 
year in the United States. Only a fraction of them are 
recognized clinically, since many are relatively asymp-
tomatic and are identified incidentally during radiogra-
phy for other purposes (Fig. 28-2). Vertebral fractures 
rarely require hospitalization but are associated with 
long-term morbidity and a slight increase in mortality 
rates, primarily related to pulmonary disease. Multiple 
vertebral fractures lead to height loss (often of several 
inches), kyphosis, and secondary pain and discomfort 
related to altered biomechanics of the back. Thoracic 
fractures can be associated with restrictive lung disease, 
whereas lumbar fractures are associated with abdomi-
nal symptoms that include distention, early satiety, and 
constipation.
Approximately 250,000 wrist fractures occur in the 
United States each year. Fractures of other bones (esti-
mated to be ∼300,000 per year) also occur with osteo-
porosis; this is not surprising in light of the fact that 
bone loss is a systemic phenomenon. Fractures of the 
pelvis and proximal humerus clearly are associated with 
osteoporosis. Although some fractures result from major 
trauma, the threshold for fracture is reduced for an osteo-
porotic bone (Fig. 28-3). In addition to bone density, 
there are a number of risk factors for fracture; the com-
mon ones are summarized in Table 28-1. Age, prior 
fractures, a family history of osteoporosis-related fractures, 
low body weight, cigarette consumption, and excessive 
Figure 28-2 
Lateral spine x-ray showing severe osteopenia and a severe 
wedge-type deformity (severe anterior compression).
Menopause
Aging
Increased
  bone loss
Propensity
  to fall
Poor bone
  quality
Low peak
  bone mass
Other risk
  factors
Low bone
  density
Fractures
FACTORS LEADING TO FRACTURE
Figure 28-3 
Factors leading to osteoporotic fractures.
Table 28-1
Risk Factors for Osteoporosis Fracture
Nonmodifiable
Personal history of frac-
ture as an adult
History of fracture in  
first-degree relative
Female sex
Advanced age
White race
Dementia
Potentially modifiable
Current cigarette smoking
Low body weight  
[<58 kg (127 lb)]
Estrogen deficiency
Early menopause  
(<45 years) or bilateral 
ovariectomy
Prolonged premenstrual 
amenorrhea (>1 year)
Low calcium intake
Alcoholism
Impaired eyesight despite 
adequate correction
Recurrent falls
Inadequate physical activity
Poor health/frailty
alcohol use are all independent predictors of fracture. 
Chronic diseases with inflammatory components that 
increase skeletal remodeling, such as rheumatoid arthritis, 
increase the risk of osteoporosis, as do diseases associated 
with malabsorption. Chronic diseases that increase the 
risk of falling or frailty, including dementia, Parkinson’s 
disease, and multiple sclerosis, also increase fracture risk.
In the United States and Europe, osteoporosis-related 
fractures are more common among women than men, 
presumably due to a lower peak bone mass as well as 
postmenopausal bone loss in women. However, this sex 
difference in bone density and age-related increase in 
hip fractures is not as apparent in some other cultures, 
possibly due to genetics, physical activity level, or diet.
Fractures are themselves risk factors for future frac-
tures (Table 28-1). Vertebral fractures increase the risk 
of other vertebral fractures as well as fractures of the 
peripheral skeleton such as the hip and wrist. Wrist frac-
tures also increase the risk of vertebral and hip fractures. 
Consequently, among individuals over age 50, any frac-
ture should be considered as potentially related to osteo-
porosis regardless of the circumstances of the fracture. 
Osteoporotic bone is more likely to fracture than is nor-
mal bone at any level of trauma, and a fracture in a per-
son over 50 should trigger evaluation for osteoporosis.
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
441
Pathophysiology
Bone Remodeling
Osteoporosis results from bone loss due to age-related 
changes in bone remodeling as well as extrinsic and 
intrinsic factors that exaggerate this process. These 
changes may be superimposed on a low peak bone 
mass. Consequently, understanding the bone remodel-
ing process is fundamental to understanding the patho-
physiology of osteoporosis (Chap. 25). During growth, 
the skeleton increases in size by linear growth and by 
apposition of new bone tissue on the outer surfaces of the 
cortex (Fig. 28-4). The latter process is called modeling,
a process that also allows the long bones to adapt in 
shape to the stresses placed on them. Increased sex 
hormone production at puberty is required for skeletal 
maturation, which reaches maximum mass and density 
in early adulthood. It is around puberty that the sexual 
dimorphism in skeletal size becomes obvious, although 
true bone density remains similar between the sexes. 
Nutrition and lifestyle also play an important role in 
growth, though genetic factors primarily determine 
peak skeletal mass and density. Numerous genes con-
trol skeletal growth, peak bone mass, and body size, as 
well as skeletal structure and density. Heritability esti-
mates of 50–80% for bone density and size have been 
derived on the basis of twin studies. Though peak bone 
mass is often lower among individuals with a family 
history of osteoporosis, association studies of candidate 
genes [vitamin D receptor; type I collagen, the estrogen 
receptor (ER), and interleukin 6 (IL-6); and insulin-like 
growth factor I (IGF-I)] and bone mass, bone turnover, 
and fracture prevalence have been inconsistent. Linkage 
studies suggest that a genetic locus on chromosome 11 
is associated with high bone mass. Families with high 
bone mass and without much apparent age-related 
bone loss have been shown to have a point mutation 
in LRP5, a low-density lipoprotein receptor–related 
protein. The role of this gene in the general popula­- 
tion is not clear, although a nonfunctional mutation 
results in osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome, and LRP5 
signaling appears to be important in controlling bone 
formation.
In adults, bone remodeling, not modeling, is the prin-
cipal metabolic skeletal process. Bone remodeling has 
two primary functions: (1) to repair microdamage within 
the skeleton to maintain skeletal strength and (2) to sup-
ply calcium from the skeleton to maintain serum cal-
cium. Remodeling may be activated by microdamage to 
bone as a result of excessive or accumulated stress. Acute 
demands for calcium involve osteoclast-mediated resorp-
tion as well as calcium transport by osteocytes. Chronic 
demands for calcium result in secondary hyperparathy-
roidism, increased bone remodeling, and overall loss of 
bone tissue.
BMU
Osteoclast
Osteoblasts
Osteoid
Preosteoclast
Preosteoblast
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 28-4 
Mechanism of bone remodeling. The basic molecular unit 
(BMU) moves along the trabecular surface at a rate of about 
10 μm/d. The figure depicts remodeling over ∼120 days. 
A. Origination of BMU-lining cells contracts to expose col-
lagen and attract preosteoclasts. B. Osteoclasts fuse into 
multinucleated cells that resorb a cavity. Mononuclear cells 
continue resorption, and preosteoblasts are stimulated to 
proliferate. C. Osteoblasts align at bottom of cavity and start 
forming osteoid (black). D. Osteoblasts continue formation 
and mineralization. Previous osteoid starts to mineralize (hor-
izontal lines). E. Osteoblasts begin to flatten. F. Osteoblasts 
turn into lining cells; bone remodeling at initial surface (left 
of drawing) is now complete, but BMU is still advancing 
(to the right). (Adapted from SM Ott, in JP Bilezikian et al [eds]: 
Principles of Bone Biology, vol. 18. San Diego, Academic 
Press, 1996, pp 231–241.)
Bone remodeling also is regulated by several 
circulating hormones, including estrogens, androgens, 
vitamin D, and parathyroid hormone (PTH), as well 
as locally produced growth factors such as IGF-I 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
442
and immunoreactive growth hormone II (IGH-II), 
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), parathyroid 
hormone–related peptide (PTHrP), interleukins (ILs), 
prostaglandins, and members of the tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) superfamily. These factors primarily modulate 
the rate at which new remodeling sites are activated, 
a process that results initially in bone resorption by 
osteoclasts, followed by a period of repair during which 
new bone tissue is synthesized by osteoblasts. The 
cytokine responsible for communication between the 
osteoblasts, other marrow cells, and osteoclasts has been 
identified as RANK ligand (RANKL) [receptor activator 
of nuclear factor-kappa-B (NFκB)]. RANKL, a member 
of the TNF family, is secreted by osteoblasts and certain 
cells of the immune system (Chap. 25). The osteoclast 
receptor for this protein is referred to as RANK. 
Activation of RANK by RANKL is a final common 
path in osteoclast development and activation. A humoral 
decoy for RANKL, also secreted by osteoblasts, is referred 
to as osteoprotegerin (Fig. 28-5). Modulation of osteoclast 
recruitment and activity appears to be related to the 
interplay among these three factors. Additional influences 
include nutrition (particularly calcium intake) and physical 
activity level.
In young adults resorbed bone is replaced by an equal 
amount of new bone tissue. Thus, the mass of the skel-
eton remains constant after peak bone mass is achieved 
in adulthood. After age 30–45, however, the resorp-
tion and formation processes become imbalanced, and 
resorption exceeds formation. This imbalance may 
begin at different ages and varies at different skeletal 
sites; it becomes exaggerated in women after meno-
pause. Excessive bone loss can be due to an increase 
in osteoclastic activity and/or a decrease in osteoblastic 
activity. In addition, an increase in remodeling acti-
vation frequency, and thus the number of remodel-
ing sites, can magnify the small imbalance seen at each 
remodeling unit. Increased recruitment of bone remod-
eling sites produces a reversible reduction in bone tis-
sue but also can result in permanent loss of tissue and 
disrupted skeletal architecture. In trabecular bone, if the 
osteoclasts penetrate trabeculae, they leave no template 
for new bone formation to occur, and, consequently, 
rapid bone loss ensues and cancellous connectivity 
becomes impaired. A higher number of remodeling sites 
increases the likelihood of this event. In cortical bone, 
increased activation of remodeling creates more porous 
bone. The effect of this increased porosity on cortical 
bone strength may be modest if the overall diameter of 
the bone is not changed. However, decreased apposi-
tion of new bone on the periosteal surface coupled with 
increased endocortical resorption of bone decreases the 
biomechanical strength of long bones. Even a slight 
exaggeration in normal bone loss increases the risk of 
osteoporosis-related fractures because of the architec-
tural changes that occur.
Calcium Nutrition
Peak bone mass may be impaired by inadequate cal-
cium intake during growth among other nutritional fac-
tors (calories, protein, and other minerals), leading to 
increased risk of osteoporosis later in life. During the 
adult phase of life, insufficient calcium intake contrib-
utes to relative secondary hyperparathyroidism and an 
increase in the rate of bone remodeling to maintain nor-
mal serum calcium levels. PTH stimulates the hydrox-
ylation of vitamin D in the kidney, leading to increased 
levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D] and 
enhanced gastrointestinal calcium absorption. PTH also 
reduces renal calcium loss. Although these are all appro-
priate compensatory homeostatic responses for adjusting 
calcium economy, the long-term effects are detrimental 
to the skeleton because the increased remodeling rates 
and the ongoing imbalance between resorption and for-
mation at remodeling sites combine to accelerate loss of 
bone tissue.
Total daily calcium intakes <400 mg are detrimental 
to the skeleton, and intakes in the range of 600–800 mg, 
which is about the average intake among adults in the 
United States, are also probably suboptimal. The rec-
ommended daily required intake of 1000–1200 mg for 
adults accommodates population heterogeneity in con-
trolling calcium balance.
Vitamin D
(See also Chap. 25) Severe vitamin D deficiency causes 
rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. However, 
there is accumulating evidence that vitamin D insuffi-
ciency may be more prevalent than previously thought, 
particularly among individuals at increased risk such as 
the elderly; those living in northern latitudes; and indi-
viduals with poor nutrition, malabsorption, or chronic 
liver or renal disease. Dark-skinned individuals are also 
at high risk of vitamin D deficiency. An expert con-
sensus panel has suggested that the accepted levels for 
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] have been set 
too low and that optimal targets for serum 25(OH)D 
are >75 nmol/L (30 ng/mL). To achieve this level for 
most adults requires an intake of 800–1000 units/d, par-
ticularly in individuals who avoid sunlight or routinely 
use ultraviolet-blocking lotions. Vitamin D insufficiency 
leads to compensatory secondary hyperparathyroidism 
and is an important risk factor for osteoporosis and frac-
tures. Some studies have shown that >50% of inpatients 
on a general medical service exhibit biochemical fea-
tures of vitamin D deficiency, including increased levels 
of PTH and alkaline phosphatase and lower levels of 
ionized calcium. In women living in northern latitudes, 
vitamin D levels decline during the winter months. This 
is associated with seasonal bone loss, reflecting increased 
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
443
bone turnover. Even among healthy ambulatory indi-
viduals, mild vitamin D deficiency is increasing in prev-
alence. Treatment with vitamin D can return levels to 
normal [>75 μmol/L (30 ng/mL)] and prevent the asso-
ciated increase in bone remodeling, bone loss, and frac-
tures. Reduced fracture rates also have been documented 
among individuals in northern latitudes who have 
greater vitamin D intake and have higher 25(OH)D 
levels (see later in the chapter). Vitamin D adequacy 
also may affect risk and/or severity of other diseases, 
including cancers (colorectal, prostate, and breast), auto-
immune diseases, and diabetes.
Estrogen Status
Estrogen deficiency probably causes bone loss by two 
distinct but interrelated mechanisms: (1) activation of 
new bone remodeling sites and (2) exaggeration of the 
imbalance between bone formation and resorption. The 
change in activation frequency causes a transient bone 
loss until a new steady state between resorption and 
formation is achieved. The remodeling imbalance, how-
ever, results in a permanent decrement in mass. In addi-
tion, the very presence of more remodeling sites in the 
skeleton increases the probability that trabeculae will be 
penetrated, eliminating the template on which new bone 
can be formed and accelerating the loss of bony tissue.
The most common estrogen-deficient state is the 
cessation of ovarian function at the time of meno-
pause, which occurs on average at age 51 (Chap. 12). 
Thus, with current life expectancy, an average woman 
will spend about 30 years without an ovarian supply of 
estrogen. The mechanism by which estrogen deficiency 
causes bone loss is summarized in Fig. 28-5. Marrow cells 
(macrophages, monocytes, osteoclast precursors, mast 
cells) as well as bone cells (osteoblasts, osteocytes, osteo-
clasts) express ERs α and β. Loss of estrogen increases 
production of RANKL and may reduce production of 
osteoprotegerin, increasing osteoclast recruitment. Estro-
gen also may play an important role in determining the 
life span of bone cells by controlling the rate of apoptosis. 
Thus, in situations of estrogen deprivation, the life span 
CFU-GM
Activated T
lymphocytes
Activated
synovial
fibroblasts
Activated
dendritic
cells
RANKL
RANK
OPG
Preosteoclast
Multinucleated
osteoclast
Activated
osteoclast
Bone
T
Osteoblasts or bone
marrow stromal cells
Proresorptive and
calciotropic factors
1,25(OH)2 vitamin D3. PTH, PTHrP, PGE2, IL-1,
IL-6, TNF, prolactin, corticosteroids, oncostatin M, LIF
M-CSF
A
Apoptotic
osteoclast
T
Anabolic or anti-
resorptive factors
Estrogens, calcitonin, BMP 2/4, TGF-β, TPO, IL-17,
PDGF, calcium
M-CSF
B
Figure 28-5 
Hormonal control of bone resorption. A. Proresorptive and 
calciotropic factors. B. Anabolic and antiosteoclastic fac-
tors. RANKL expression is induced in osteoblasts, activated 
T cells, synovial fibroblasts, and bone marrow stromal cells. 
It binds to membrane-bound receptor RANK to promote 
osteoclast differentiation, activation, and survival. Conversely, 
osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression is induced by factors 
that block bone catabolism and promote anabolic effects. 
OPG binds and neutralizes RANKL, leading to a block in 
osteoclastogenesis and decreased survival of preexisting 
osteoclasts. CFU-GM, colony-forming units, granulocyte 
macrophage; IL, interleukin; LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor; 
M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; OPG-L, 
osteoprotegerin-ligand; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; 
PGE2, prostaglandin E2; PTH, parathyroid hormone; RANKL, 
receptor activator of nuclear factor NFκB; TNF, tumor necro-
sis factor; TGF-β, transforming growth factor β; TPO, throm-
bospondin. (From WJ Boyle et al: Nature 423: 337, 2003.)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
444
of osteoblasts may be decreased, whereas the longevity 
and activity of osteoclasts are increased.
Since remodeling is initiated at the surface of bone, 
it follows that trabecular bone—which has a consider-
ably larger surface area (80% of the total) than cortical 
bone—will be affected preferentially by estrogen defi-
ciency. Fractures occur earliest at sites where trabecular 
bone contributes most to bone strength; consequently, 
vertebral fractures are the most common early conse-
quence of estrogen deficiency.
Physical Activity
Inactivity such as prolonged bed rest or paralysis, results 
in significant bone loss. Concordantly, athletes have 
higher bone mass than does the general population. 
These changes in skeletal mass are most marked when 
the stimulus begins during growth and before the age 
of puberty. Adults are less capable than children of 
increasing bone mass after restoration of physical activ-
ity. Epidemiologic data support the beneficial effects 
on the skeleton of chronic high levels of physical activ-
ity. Fracture risk is lower in rural communities and in 
countries where physical activity is maintained into old 
age. However, when exercise is initiated during adult 
life, the effects of moderate exercise on the skeleton 
are modest, with a bone mass increase of 1–2% in short-
term studies of <2 years’ duration. It is argued that more 
active individuals are less likely to fall and are more capa-
ble of protecting themselves upon falling, thereby reduc-
ing fracture risk.
Chronic Disease
Various genetic and acquired diseases are associated with 
an increase in the risk of osteoporosis (Table 28-2). 
Mechanisms that contribute to bone loss are unique for 
each disease and typically result from multiple factors, 
including nutrition, reduced physical activity levels, and 
factors that affect rates of bone remodeling. In most, 
but not all, circumstances the primary diagnosis is made 
before osteoporosis presents clinically.
Medications
A large number of medications used in clinical practice 
have potentially detrimental effects on the skeleton 
(Table 28-3). Glucocorticoids are the most common cause 
of medication-induced osteoporosis. It is often not 
possible to determine the extent to which osteoporosis is 
related to glucocorticoid or to other factors, as treatment 
is superimposed on the effects of the primary disease, 
which in itself may be associated with bone loss (e.g., 
rheumatoid arthritis). Excessive doses of thyroid hormone 
can accelerate bone remodeling and result in bone loss.
Other medications have less detrimental effects on the 
skeleton than pharmacologic doses of glucocorticoids. 
Anticonvulsants are thought to increase the risk of osteopo-
rosis, although many affected individuals have concomi-
tant insufficiency of 1,25(OH)2D, as some anticonvulsants 
induce the cytochrome P450 system and vitamin D 
metabolism. Patients undergoing transplantation are at 
high risk for rapid bone loss and fracture not only from 
glucocorticoids but also from treatment with other 
Table 28-2
Diseases Associated With an Increased Risk 
of Generalized Osteoporosis in Adults
Hypogonadal states
Turner’s syndrome
Klinefelter’s syndrome
Anorexia nervosa
Hypothalamic amenor-
rhea
Hyperprolactinemia
Other primary or second-
ary hypogonadal states
Endocrine disorders
Cushing’s syndrome
Hyperparathyroidism
Thyrotoxicosis
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
Acromegaly
Adrenal insufficiency
Nutritional and gastroin-
testinal disorders
Malnutrition
Parenteral nutrition
Malabsorption syndromes
Gastrectomy
Severe liver disease, 
especially biliary cir-
rhosis
Pernicious anemia
Rheumatologic disorders
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Hematologic disorders/
malignancy
Multiple myeloma
Lymphoma and leukemia
Malignancy-associated  
parathyroid hormone 
(PTHrP) production
Mastocytosis
Hemophilia
Thalassemia
Selected inherited 
disorders
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Marfan’s syndrome
Hemochromatosis
Hypophosphatasia
Glycogen storage diseases
Homocystinuria
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Porphyria
Menkes’ syndrome
Epidermolysis bullosa
Other disorders
Immobilization
Chronic obstructive  
pulmonary disease
Pregnancy and lactation
Scoliosis
Multiple sclerosis
Sarcoidosis
Amyloidosis
Table 28-3
Drugs Associated With an Increased Risk of 
Generalized Osteoporosis in Adults
Glucocorticoids
Excessive thyroxine
Cyclosporine
Aluminum
Cytotoxic drugs
Gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agonists
Anticonvulsants
Heparin
Excessive alcohol
Lithium
Aromatase inhibitors
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
445
immunosuppressants such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus 
(FK506). In addition these patients often have underlying 
metabolic abnormalities, such as hepatic or renal failure, 
that predispose to bone loss.
Aromatase inhibitors, which potently block the aro-
matase enzyme that converts androgens and other adrenal 
precursors to estrogen, reduce circulating postmenopausal 
estrogen levels dramatically. These agents, which are used 
in various stages for breast cancer treatment, also have 
been shown to have a detrimental effect on bone density 
and risk of fracture.
Cigarette Consumption
The use of cigarettes over a long period has detrimental 
effects on bone mass. These effects may be mediated 
directly by toxic effects on osteoblasts or indirectly by 
modifying estrogen metabolism. On average, cigarette 
smokers reach menopause 1–2 years earlier than the 
general population. Cigarette smoking also produces 
secondary effects that can modulate skeletal status, 
including intercurrent respiratory and other illnesses, 
frailty, decreased exercise, poor nutrition, and the need 
for additional medications (e.g., glucocorticoids for 
lung disease).
Measurement of Bone Mass
Several noninvasive techniques are available for estimat-
ing skeletal mass or density. They include dual-energy 
x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), single-energy x-ray absorp-
tiometry (SXA), quantitative CT, and ultrasound (US).
DXA is a highly accurate x-ray technique that 
has become the standard for measuring bone density 
in most centers. Though it can be used for measure-
ment in any skeletal site, clinical determinations usu-
ally are made of the lumbar spine and hip. Portable 
DXA machines have been developed that measure the 
heel (calcaneus), forearm (radius and ulna), or finger 
(phalanges). DXA also can be used to measure body 
composition. In the DXA technique, two x-ray ener-
gies are used to estimate the area of mineralized tissue, 
and the mineral content is divided by the area, which 
partially corrects for body size. However, this correc-
tion is only partial since DXA is a two-dimensional 
scanning technique and cannot estimate the depth or 
posteroanterior length of the bone. Thus, small people 
tend to have lower than average bone mineral den-
sity (BMD). Bone spurs, which are common in osteo-
arthritis, tend to falsely increase bone density of the 
spine and are a particular problem in measuring the 
spine in older individuals. Because DXA instrumenta-
tion is provided by several different manufacturers, the 
output varies in absolute terms. Consequently, it has 
become standard practice to relate the results to “normal” 
values by using T-scores, which compare individual 
results to those in a young population that is matched 
for race and sex. Z-scores compare individual results 
to those of an age-matched population that also is 
matched for race and sex. Thus, a 60-year-old woman 
with a Z-score of −1 (1 SD below mean for age) has 
a T-score of −2.5 (2.5 SD below mean for a young
control group) (Fig. 28.6). A T-score below −2.5 in 
the lumbar spine, femoral neck, or total hip is taken as 
a diagnosis of osteoporosis.
CT is used primarily to measure the spine and, more 
recently, the hip. Peripheral CT is used to measure 
bone in the forearm or tibia. The results obtained from 
CT are different from all others currently available since 
this technique is three dimensional and can provide a 
true density (mass of bone tissue per unit volume). CT 
also can specifically analyze trabecular bone and corti-
cal bone content and volume separately. However, CT 
remains expensive, involves greater radiation exposure, 
and is less reproducible than DXA. A new technique 
employing high-resolution CT scanning called Xtreme 
CT also can provide information on skeletal architec-
ture, including cancellous connectivity.
US is used to measure bone mass by calculating the 
attenuation of the signal as it passes through bone or 
the speed with which it traverses the bone. It is unclear 
whether US assesses properties of bone other than mass 
(e.g., quality), but this is a potential advantage of the 
technique. Because of its relatively low cost and mobil-
ity, US is amenable for use as a screening procedure.
All these techniques for measuring BMD have been 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) on the basis of their capacity to predict fracture 
risk. The hip is the preferred site of measurement in 
most individuals, since it predicts the risk of hip frac-
ture, the most important consequence of osteoporosis, 
better than any other bone density measurement site. 
When hip measurements are performed by DXA, the 
Z- and T-Scores
3
BMD Score
2
1
20
30
40
50
Age
1 SD
1 SD
0
60
T-Score=-2.5
Z-Score=-1
70
80
90
1
2
3
0
Figure 28-6 
Relationship between Z-scores and T-scores in a 60-year-old 
woman. BMD, bone mineral density; SD, standard deviation.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
446
spine can be measured at the same time. In younger 
individuals such as perimenopausal or early postmeno-
pausal women, spine measurements may be the most 
sensitive indicator of bone loss.
When to Measure Bone Mass
Clinical guidelines have been developed for the use 
of bone densitometry in clinical practice. The origi-
nal National Osteoporosis Foundation guidelines rec-
ommend bone mass measurements in postmenopausal 
women, assuming they have one or more risk factors for 
osteoporosis in addition to age, sex, and estrogen defi-
ciency. The guidelines further recommend that bone 
mass measurement be considered in all women by age 65,
a position ratified by the U.S. Preventive Health Services 
Task Force. Criteria approved for Medicare reimburse-
ment of BMD are summarized in Table 28-4.
When to Treat Based on Bone  
Mass Results
Most guidelines suggest that patients be consid-
ered for treatment when BMD is >2.5 SD below the 
mean value for young adults (T-score ≤−2.5), a level 
consistent with the diagnosis of osteoporosis. Treat-
ment also should also be considered in postmenopausal 
women with fracture risk factors even if BMD is not 
in the osteoporosis range. Risk factors (age, prior frac-
ture, family history of hip fracture, low body weight, 
cigarette consumption, excessive alcohol use, steroid 
use, and rheumatoid arthritis) can be combined with 
BMD to assess the likelihood of a fracture over a 5- or 
10-year period. Treatment thresholds depend on cost-
effectiveness analyses but probably is ∼1% per year of 
risk in the United States.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Osteoporosis
The perimenopausal transition is a good opportunity 
to initiate a discussion about risk factors for osteopo-
rosis and consideration of indications for a BMD test. 
A careful history and physical examination should be 
performed to identify risk factors for osteoporosis. A low 
Z-score increases the suspicion of a secondary disease. 
Height loss >2.5–3.8 cm (>1–1.5 in.) is an indication for 
radiography or vertebral fracture assessment by DXA to 
rule out asymptomatic vertebral fractures, as is the pres-
ence of significant kyphosis or back pain, particularly 
if it began after menopause. For patients who present 
with fractures, it is important to ensure that the frac-
tures are not caused by an underlying malignancy. Usu-
ally this is clear on routine radiography, but on occasion, 
CT, MRI, or radionuclide scans may be necessary.
Routine Laboratory Evaluation  There 
is no established algorithm for the evaluation of women 
who present with osteoporosis. A general evaluation 
that includes complete blood count, serum and 24-h 
urine calcium, and renal and hepatic function tests is 
useful for identifying selected secondary causes of low 
bone mass, particularly for women with fractures or very 
low Z-scores. An elevated serum calcium level suggests 
hyperparathyroidism or malignancy, whereas a reduced 
serum calcium level may reflect malnutrition and osteo-
malacia. In the presence of hypercalcemia, a serum 
PTH level differentiates between hyperparathyroidism 
(PTH ↑) and malignancy (PTH ↓), and a high PTHrP level 
can help document the presence of humoral hypercal-
cemia of malignancy (Chap. 27). A low urine calcium 
(<50 mg/24 h) suggests osteomalacia, malnutrition, or 
malabsorption; a high urine calcium (>300 mg/24 h) is 
indicative of hypercalciuria and must be investigated 
further. Hypercalciuria occurs primarily in three situa-
tions: (1) a renal calcium leak, which is more common in 
males with osteoporosis; (2) absorptive hypercalciuria, 
which can be idiopathic or associated with increased 
1,25(OH)2D in granulomatous disease; or (3) hematologic 
malignancies or conditions associated with excessive 
bone turnover such as Paget’s disease, hyperparathy-
roidism, and hyperthyroidism.
Individuals who have osteoporosis-related fractures 
or bone density in the osteoporotic range should have 
a measurement of serum 25(OH)D level, since the intake 
of vitamin D required to achieve a target level >32 ng/mL 
is highly variable. Vitamin D levels should be optimized 
in all individuals being treated for osteoporosis. Hyper-
thyroidism should be evaluated by measuring thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH).
When there is clinical suspicion of Cushing’s syndrome, 
urinary free cortisol levels or a fasting serum cortisol 
should be measured after overnight dexamethasone. 
When bowel disease, malabsorption, or malnutrition is
Table 28-4
FDA-Approved Indications for BMD Testsa
Estrogen-deficient women at clinical risk of osteoporosis
Vertebral abnormalities on x-ray suggestive of  
osteoporosis (osteopenia, vertebral fracture)
Glucocorticoid treatment equivalent to ≥7.5 mg of 
prednisone or duration of therapy >3 months
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Monitoring response to an FDA-approved medication for 
osteoporosis
Repeat BMD evaluations at >23-month intervals or more 
frequently if medically justified
aCriteria adapted from the 1998 Bone Mass Measurement Act.
Abbreviations: BMD, bone mineral density; FDA, U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration.
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
447
suspected, serum albumin, cholesterol, and a complete 
blood count should be checked. Asymptomatic mal-
absorption may be heralded by anemia (macrocytic—
vitamin B12 or folate deficiency; microcytic—iron defi-
ciency) or low serum cholesterol or urinary calcium levels. 
If these or other features suggest malabsorption, further 
evaluation is required. Asymptomatic celiac disease with 
selective malabsorption is being found with increasing 
frequency; the diagnosis can be made by testing for anti-
gliadin, antiendomysial, or transglutaminase antibodies 
but may require endoscopic biopsy. A trial of a gluten-free  
diet can be confirmatory. When osteoporosis is found asso-
ciated with symptoms of rash, multiple allergies, diarrhea, 
or flushing, mastocytosis should be excluded by using 24-h 
urine histamine collection or serum tryptase.
Myeloma can masquerade as generalized osteopo-
rosis, although it more commonly presents with bone 
pain and characteristic “punched-out” lesions on radi-
ography. Serum and urine electrophoresis and evalu-
ation for light chains in urine are required to exclude 
this diagnosis. A bone marrow biopsy may be required 
to rule out myeloma (in patients with equivocal electro-
phoretic results) and also can be used to exclude masto-
cytosis, leukemia, and other marrow infiltrative disorders 
such as Gaucher’s disease.
Bone Biopsy  Tetracycline labeling of the skeleton 
allows determination of the rate of remodeling as well as 
evaluation for other metabolic bone diseases. The cur-
rent use of BMD tests, in combination with hormonal 
evaluation and biochemical markers of bone remodel-
ing, has largely replaced the clinical use of bone biopsy, 
although it remains an important tool in clinical research.
Biochemical Markers  Several biochemical
tests are available that provide an index of the overall 
rate of bone remodeling (Table 28-5). Biochemical mark-
ers usually are characterized as those related primarily to 
bone formation or bone resorption. These tests measure 
the overall state of bone remodeling at a single point in 
time. Clinical use of these tests has been hampered by 
biologic variability (in part related to circadian rhythm)  
as well as analytic variability, although the latter is improving.
For the most part, remodeling markers do not pre-
dict rates of bone loss well enough for this informa-
tion to be used clinically. However, markers of bone 
resorption may help in the prediction of fracture risk, 
independently of bone density, particularly in older 
individuals. In women ≥65 years, when bone density 
results are greater than the usual treatment thresholds 
noted above, a high level of bone resorption should 
prompt consideration of treatment. The primary use 
of biochemical markers is for monitoring the response 
to treatment. With the introduction of antiresorptive 
therapeutic agents, bone remodeling declines rapidly, 
with the fall in resorption occurring earlier than the fall 
in formation. Inhibition of bone resorption is maximal 
within 3–6 months. Thus, measurement of bone resorp-
tion before initiating therapy and 4–6 months after 
starting therapy provides an earlier estimate of patient 
response than does bone densitometry. A decline in 
resorptive markers can be ascertained after treatment 
with bisphosphonates or estrogen; this effect is less 
marked after treatment with either raloxifene or intra-
nasal calcitonin. A biochemical marker response to 
therapy is particularly useful for asymptomatic patients 
and may help ensure long-term adherence to treatment. 
Bone turnover markers are also useful in monitoring 
the effects of 1-34hPTH, or teriparatide, which rapidly 
increases bone formation and later bone resorption.
Treatment	
Osteoporosis
Management of Osteoporotic Frac-
tures  Treatment of a patient with osteoporosis fre-
quently involves management of acute fractures as well as 
treatment of the underlying disease. Hip fractures almost 
always require surgical repair if the patient is to become 
ambulatory again. Depending on the location and 
severity of the fracture, condition of the neighboring 
joint, and general status of the patient, procedures may 
include open reduction and internal fixation with pins 
and plates, hemiarthroplasties, and total arthroplas-
ties. These surgical procedures are followed by intense 
rehabilitation in an attempt to return patients to their 
prefracture functional level. Long bone fractures often 
require either external or internal fixation. Other frac-
tures (e.g., vertebral, rib, and pelvic fractures) usually 
are managed with supportive care, requiring no specific 
orthopedic treatment.
Only ∼25–30% of vertebral compression fractures 
present with sudden-onset back pain. For acutely symp-
tomatic fractures, treatment with analgesics is required, 
including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and/
or acetaminophen, sometimes with the addition of a 
narcotic agent (codeine or oxycodone). A few small, 
randomized clinical trials suggest that calcitonin may 
Table 28-5
Biochemical Markers of Bone Metabolism in 
Clinical Use
Bone formation
Serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase
Serum osteocalcin
Serum propeptide of type I procollagen
Bone resorption
Urine and serum cross-linked N-telopeptide
Urine and serum cross-linked C-telopeptide
Urine total free deoxypyridinoline
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
448
reduce pain related to acute vertebral compression 
fracture. A recently developed technique involves per-
cutaneous injection of artificial cement (polymethyl-
methacrylate) into the vertebral body (vertebroplasty 
or kyphoplasty); this offers significant immediate pain 
relief in the majority of patients. Long-term effects are 
unknown, and conclusions are based on observational 
studies in patients with severe persistent back pain from 
acute or subacute vertebral fractures. There have been 
no long-term randomized controlled trials of either ver-
tebroplasty or kyphoplasty to date. Short periods of bed 
rest may be helpful for pain management, but in gen-
eral, early mobilization is recommended as it helps pre-
vent further bone loss associated with immobilization. 
Occasionally, use of a soft elastic-style brace may facili-
tate earlier mobilization. Muscle spasms often occur 
with acute compression fractures and can be treated 
with muscle relaxants and heat treatments.
Severe pain usually resolves within 6–10 weeks. Chronic 
pain is probably not bony in origin; instead, it is related 
to abnormal strain on muscles, ligaments, and tendons 
and to secondary facet-joint arthritis associated with 
alterations in thoracic and/or abdominal shape. Chronic 
pain is difficult to treat effectively and may require anal-
gesics, sometimes including narcotic analgesics. Frequent 
intermittent rest in a supine or semireclining position 
is often required to allow the soft tissues, which are 
under tension, to relax. Back-strengthening exercises 
(paraspinal) may be beneficial. Heat treatments help 
relax muscles and reduce the muscular component of 
discomfort. Various physical modalities, such as US and 
transcutaneous nerve stimulation, may be beneficial in 
some patients. Pain also occurs in the neck region, not 
as a result of compression fractures (which almost never 
occur in the cervical spine as a result of osteoporosis) 
but because of chronic strain associated with trying 
to elevate the head in a person with a severe thoracic 
kyphosis.
Multiple vertebral fractures often are associated with 
psychological symptoms; this is not always appreci-
ated. The changes in body configuration and back pain 
can lead to marked loss of self-image and a secondary 
depression. Altered balance, precipitated by the kypho-
sis and the anterior movement of the body’s center of 
gravity, leads to a fear of falling, a consequent tendency 
to remain indoors, and the onset of social isolation. 
These symptoms sometimes can be alleviated by family 
support and/or psychotherapy. Medication may be nec-
essary when depressive features are present.
Management of the Underlying  
Disease
Risk 
Factor 
Reduction  Assessment of frac-
ture risk can be estimated by using FRAX calculators 
that are available online (http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/
tool.jsp?locationValue=9) (Fig. 28-7). Patients should be 
thoroughly educated to reduce the impact of modifi-
able risk factors associated with bone loss and falling. 
Medications should be reviewed to ensure that all are 
necessary. Glucocorticoid medication, if present, should 
be evaluated to determine that it is truly indicated and 
is being given in doses that are as low as possible. For 
those on thyroid hormone replacement, TSH testing 
should be performed to determine that an excessive 
dose is not being used, as thyrotoxicosis can be associ-
ated with increased bone loss. In patients who smoke, 
efforts should be made to facilitate smoking cessation. 
Reducing risk factors for falling also include alcohol 
abuse treatment and a review of the medical regimen 
for any drugs that might be associated with orthostatic 
hypotension and/or sedation, including hypnotics and 
anxiolytics. If nocturia occurs, the frequency should be 
reduced, if possible (e.g., by decreasing or modifying 
diuretic use), as arising in the middle of sleep is a com-
mon precipitant of a fall. Patients should be instructed 
about environmental safety with regard to eliminating 
exposed wires, curtain strings, slippery rugs, and mobile 
tables. Avoiding stocking feet on wood floors, check-
ing carpet condition (particularly on stairs), and provid-
ing good light in paths to bathrooms and outside the 
home are important preventive measures. Treatment 
for impaired vision is recommended, particularly a prob-
lem with depth perception, which is specifically associ-
ated with increased falling risk. Elderly patients with 
neurologic impairment (e.g., stroke, Parkinson’s disease, 
Alzheimer’s disease) are particularly at risk of falling and 
require specialized supervision and care.
Nutritional Recommendations
Calcium  A large body of data indicates that optimal 
calcium intake reduces bone loss and suppresses bone 
turnover. Recommended intakes from an Institute of 
Medicine report are shown in Table 28-6. The National 
Health and Nutritional Evaluation Studies (NHANES) 
have consistently documented that average calcium 
intakes fall considerably short of these recommenda-
tions. The preferred source of calcium is dairy products 
and other foods, but many patients require calcium sup-
plementation. Food sources of calcium are dairy prod-
ucts (milk, yogurt, and cheese) and fortified foods such 
as certain cereals, waffles, snacks, juices, and crackers. 
Some of these fortified foods contain as much calcium 
per serving as milk.
If a calcium supplement is required, it should be taken 
in doses ≤600 mg at a time, as the calcium absorption 
fraction decreases at higher doses. Calcium supplements 
should be calculated on the basis of the elemental cal-
cium content of the supplement, not the weight of the 
calcium salt (Table 28-7). Calcium supplements con-
taining carbonate are best taken with food since they 
require acid for solubility. Calcium citrate supplements 
can be taken at any time. To confirm bioavailability, 
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
449
Table 28-6
Adequate Calcium Intake
Life Stage Group
Estimated Adequate 
Daily Calcium Intake, 
mg/d
Young children (1–3 years)
500
Older children (4–8 years)
800
Adolescents and young adults 
(9–18 years)
1300
Men and women (19–50 years)
1000
Men and women (51 and older)
1200
Note: Pregnancy and lactation needs are the same as for nonpreg-
nant women (e.g., 1300 mg/d for adolescents/young adults and 
1000 mg/d for those ≥19 years).
Source: Adapted from the Standing Committee on the Scientific Eval-
uation of Dietary Reference Intakes. Food and Nutrition Board. Institute 
of Medicine. Washington, DC, 1997, National Academy Press.
Table 28-7
Elemental Calcium Content of Various Oral 
Calcium Preparations
Calcium Preparation
Elemental 
Calcium  
Content
Calcium citrate
60 mg/300 mg
Calcium lactate
80 mg/600 mg
Calcium gluconate
40 mg/500 mg
Calcium carbonate
400 mg/g
Calcium carbonate + 5 μg vitamin D2 
(OsCal 250)
250 mg/tablet
Calcium carbonate (Tums 500)
500 mg/tablet
Source: Adapted from SM Krane, MF Holick, Chap. 355, in Harrison’s 
Principles of Internal Medicine, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 
1998.
Figure 28-7 
FRAX calculation tool. When the answers to the indicated 
questions are filled in, the calculator can be used to assess the 
10-year probability of fracture. The calculator (available online at
http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.jsp?locationValue=9) also can 
risk adjust for various ethnic groups.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
450
calcium supplements can be placed in distilled vinegar. 
They should dissolve within 30 min.
Several controlled clinical trials of calcium plus vita-
min D have confirmed reductions in clinical fractures, 
including fractures of the hip (∼20–30% risk reduc-
tion). All recent studies of pharmacologic agents have 
been conducted in the context of calcium replacement 
(± vitamin D). Thus, it is standard practice to ensure an 
adequate calcium and vitamin D intake in patients with 
osteoporosis whether they are receiving additional 
pharmacologic therapy or not. A systematic review con-
firmed a greater BMD response to antiresorptive ther-
apy when calcium intake was adequate.
Although side effects from supplemental calcium 
are minimal (eructation and constipation mostly with 
carbonate salts), individuals with a history of kidney 
stones should have a 24-h urine calcium determination 
before starting increased calcium to avoid significant 
hypercalciuria.
Vitamin D  Vitamin D is synthesized in skin under the 
influence of heat and ultraviolet light (Chap.  25). How-
ever, large segments of the population do not obtain 
sufficient vitamin D to maintain what is now consid-
ered an adequate supply [serum 25(OH)D consistently 
>75 μmol/L (30 ng/mL)]. Since vitamin D supplementa-
tion at doses that would achieve these serum levels is 
safe and inexpensive, the Institute of Medicine recom-
mends daily intakes of 200 IU for adults <50 years of 
age, 400 IU for those 50–70 years, and 600 IU for those 
>70 years. Multivitamin tablets usually contain 400 IU, 
and many calcium supplements also contain vitamin D. 
Some data suggest that higher doses (≥1000 IU) may be 
required in the elderly and chronically ill.
Other Nutrients  Other nutrients such as salt, high 
animal protein intakes, and caffeine may have modest 
effects on calcium excretion or absorption. Adequate 
vitamin K status is required for optimal carboxylation 
of osteocalcin. States in which vitamin K nutrition or 
metabolism is impaired, such as with long-term warfarin 
therapy, have been associated with reduced bone mass. 
Research concerning cola intake is controversial but 
suggests a possible link to reduced bone mass through 
factors that are independent of caffeine.
Magnesium is abundant in foods, and magnesium 
deficiency is quite rare in the absence of a serious 
chronic disease. Magnesium supplementation may be 
warranted in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, 
celiac disease, chemotherapy, severe diarrhea, malnutri-
tion, or alcoholism. Dietary phytoestrogens, which are 
derived primarily from soy products and legumes [e.g., 
garbanzo beans (chickpeas) and lentils], exert some 
estrogenic activity but are insufficiently potent to justify 
their use in place of a pharmacologic agent in the treat-
ment of osteoporosis.
Patients with hip fractures are often frail and rela-
tively malnourished. Some data suggest an improved 
outcome in such patients when they are provided cal-
orie and protein supplementation. Excessive protein 
intake can increase renal calcium excretion, but this can 
be corrected by an adequate calcium intake.
Exercise  Exercise in young individuals increases the 
likelihood that they will attain the maximal genetically 
determined peak bone mass. Meta-analyses of stud-
ies performed in postmenopausal women indicate that 
weight-bearing exercise prevents bone loss but does 
not appear to result in substantial gain of bone mass. 
This beneficial effect wanes if exercise is discontinued. 
Most of the studies are short term, and a more substan-
tial effect on bone mass is likely if exercise is continued 
over a long period. Exercise also has beneficial effects 
on neuromuscular function, and it improves coordina-
tion, balance, and strength, thereby reducing the risk 
of falling. A walking program is a practical way to start. 
Other activities such as dancing, racquet sports, cross-
country skiing, and use of gym equipment, are also 
recommended, depending on the patient’s personal 
preference and general condition. Even women who can-
not walk benefit from swimming or water exercises, not 
so much for the effects on bone, which are quite minimal, 
but because of effects on muscle. Exercise habits should 
be consistent, optimally at least three times a week.
Pharmacologic Therapies  Until fairly recently,
estrogen treatment, either by itself or in concert with a 
progestin, was the primary therapeutic agent for the pre-
vention or treatment of osteoporosis. However, a num-
ber of new drugs have appeared, and more are expected 
in the near future. Some are agents that specifically treat 
osteoporosis (bisphosphonates, calcitonin, PTH); others, 
such as selective estrogen response modulators (SERMs), 
have broader effects. The availability of these drugs allows 
therapy to be tailored to the needs of an individual patient.
Estrogens  A large body of clinical trial data indi-
cates that various types of estrogens (conjugated equine 
estrogens, estradiol, estrone, esterified estrogens, ethinyl 
estradiol, and mestranol) reduce bone turnover, prevent 
bone loss, and induce small increases in bone mass of 
the spine, hip, and total body. The effects of estrogen are 
seen in women with natural or surgical menopause and in 
late postmenopausal women with or without established 
osteoporosis. Estrogens are efficacious when administered 
orally or transdermally. For both oral and transdermal 
routes of administration, combined estrogen/progestin 
preparations are now available in many countries, obvi-
ating the problem of taking two tablets or using a patch 
and oral progestin. One large study, referred to as PEPI 
(Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Intervention Trial), 
indicated that C-21 progestins alone do not augment the 
effect of standard estrogen doses on bone mass.
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
451
Dose of Estrogen  For oral estrogens, the stan-
dard recommended doses have been 0.3 mg/d for 
esterified estrogens, 0.625 mg/d for conjugated equine 
estrogens, and 5 μg/d for ethinyl estradiol. For transder-
mal estrogen, the commonly used dose supplies 50 μg 
estradiol per day, but a lower dose may be appropriate 
for some individuals. Dose-response data for conjugated 
equine estrogens indicate that lower doses (0.3 and  
0.45 mg/d) are effective. Doses even lower have been 
associated with bone mass protection.
Fracture Data  Epidemiologic databases indicate 
that women who take estrogen replacement have a 50% 
reduction, on average, of osteoporotic fractures, including 
hip fractures. The beneficial effect of estrogen is greatest 
among those who start replacement early and continue 
the treatment; the benefit declines after discontinuation 
to the extent that there is no residual protective effect 
against fracture by 10 years after discontinuation. The first 
clinical trial evaluating fractures as secondary outcomes, 
the Heart and Estrogen-Progestin Replacement Study 
(HERS) trial, showed no effect of hormone therapy on hip 
or other clinical fractures in women with established coro-
nary artery disease. These data made the results of the 
Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) exceedingly important 
(Chap. 12). The estrogen-progestin arm of the WHI in 
>16,000 postmenopausal healthy women indicated that 
hormone therapy reduces the risk of hip and clinical spine 
fracture by 34% and that of all clinical fractures by 24%.
A few smaller clinical trials have evaluated spine frac-
ture occurrence as an outcome with estrogen therapy. 
They have consistently shown that estrogen treatment 
reduces the incidence of vertebral compression fracture.
The WHI has provided a vast amount of data on the 
multisystemic effects of hormone therapy. Although 
earlier observational studies suggested that estro-
gen replacement might reduce heart disease, the WHI 
showed that combined estrogen-progestin treatment 
increased risk of fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarc-
tion by ∼29%, confirming data from the HERS study. 
Other important relative risks included a 40% increase 
in stroke, a 100% increase in venous thromboembolic 
disease, and a 26% increase in risk of breast cancer. 
Subsequent analyses have confirmed the increased 
risk of stroke and shown a twofold increase in demen-
tia. Benefits other than the fracture reductions noted 
above included a 37% reduction in the risk of colon can-
cer. These relative risks have to be interpreted in light 
of absolute risk (Fig. 28-8). For example, out of 10,000 
women treated with estrogen-progestin for 1 year, there 
will be 8 excess heart attacks, 8 excess breast cancers,  
18 excess venous thromboembolic events, 5 fewer hip 
fractures, 44 fewer clinical fractures, and 6 fewer colorec-
tal cancers. These numbers must be multiplied by years 
of hormone treatment. There was no effect of hormone 
treatment on the risk of uterine cancer or total mortality.
It is important to note that these WHI findings 
apply specifically to hormone treatment in the form 
of conjugated equine estrogen plus medroxypro-
gesterone acetate. The relative benefits and risks of 
unopposed estrogen in women who had hysterecto-
mies vary somewhat. They still show benefits against 
fracture occurrence and increased risk of venous 
thrombosis and stroke, similar in magnitude to the 
risks for combined hormone therapy. In contrast, 
though, the estrogen-only arm of WHI indicated no 
increased risk of heart attack or breast cancer. The 
data suggest that at least some of the detrimental 
effects of combined therapy are related to the pro-
gestin component.
Mode of Action  Two subtypes of ERs, α and β, 
have been identified in bone and other tissues. Cells 
of monocyte lineage express both ERα and ERβ, as 
do osteoblasts. Estrogen-mediated effects vary with 
the receptor type. Using ER knockout mouse models, 
elimination of ERα produces a modest reduction in 
bone mass, whereas mutation of ERβ has less of an 
effect on bone. A male patient with a homozygous 
mutation of ERα had markedly decreased bone den-
sity as well as abnormalities in epiphyseal closure, 
confirming the important role of ERα in bone biology. 
The mechanism of estrogen action in bone is an area 
of active investigation (Fig. 28-5). Although data are 
conflicting, estrogens may inhibit osteoclasts directly. 
However, the majority of estrogen (and androgen) 
effects on bone resorption are mediated indirectly 
through paracrine factors produced by osteoblasts. 
These actions include (1) increasing IGF-I and TGF-β 
and (2) suppressing IL-1 (α and β), IL-6, TNF-α, and 
osteocalcin synthesis. The indirect estrogen actions 
primarily decrease bone resorption.
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Number of cases
in 10,000 women/year
Risks
7
8
8
6
5
18
CHD
Stroke
Deaths
Breast
cancer
VTE
Hip
fracture
Endometrial
cancer
Colorectal
cancer
Benefits
Reduced
events
Additional events
Neutral
Figure 28-8 
Effects of hormone therapy on event rates: green, placebo; 
purple, estrogen and progestin. CHD, coronary heart disease; 
VTE, venous thromboembolic events. (Adapted from Women’s 
Health Initiative. WHI HRT Update. Available at http://www.
nhlbi.nih.gov/health/women/upd2002.htm.)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
452
Progestins  In women with a uterus, daily progestin 
or cyclical progestins at least 12 days per month are pre-
scribed in combination with estrogens to reduce the risk 
of uterine cancer. Medroxyprogesterone acetate and 
norethindrone acetate blunt the high-density lipopro-
tein response to estrogen, but micronized progesterone 
does not. Neither medroxyprogesterone acetate nor 
micronized progesterone appears to have an indepen-
dent effect on bone; at lower doses of estrogen, noreth-
indrone acetate may have an additive benefit. On breast 
tissue, progestins may increase the risk of breast cancer.
SERMs  Two SERMs are used currently in postmeno-
pausal women: raloxifene, which is approved for the 
prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, and tamoxi-
fen, which is approved for the prevention and treatment 
of breast cancer.
Tamoxifen reduces bone turnover and bone loss 
in postmenopausal women compared with placebo 
groups. These findings support the concept that tamox-
ifen acts as an estrogenic agent in bone. There are lim-
ited data on the effect of tamoxifen on fracture risk, but 
the Breast Cancer Prevention study indicated a possible 
reduction in clinical vertebral, hip, and Colles’ fractures. 
The major benefit of tamoxifen is on breast cancer occur-
rence. The breast cancer prevention trial indicated that 
tamoxifen administration over 4–5 years reduced the 
incidence of new invasive and noninvasive breast can-
cer by ∼45% in women at increased risk of breast cancer. 
The incidence of ER-positive breast cancers was reduced 
by 65%. Tamoxifen increases the risk of uterine cancer in 
postmenopausal women, limiting its use for breast can-
cer prevention in women at low or moderate risk.
Raloxifene (60 mg/d) has effects on bone turnover and 
bone mass that are very similar to those of tamoxifen, 
indicating that this agent is also estrogenic on the skel-
eton. The effect of raloxifene on bone density (+1.4–2.8% 
versus placebo in the spine, hip, and total body) is some-
what less than that seen with standard doses of estrogens. 
Raloxifene reduces the occurrence of vertebral fracture by 
30–50%, depending on the population; however, there 
are no data confirming that raloxifene can reduce the risk 
of nonvertebral fractures over 8 years of observation.
Raloxifene, like tamoxifen and estrogen, has effects in 
other organ systems. The most beneficial effect appears to 
be a reduction in invasive breast cancer (mainly decreased 
ER-positive) occurrence of ∼65% in women who take
raloxifene compared to placebo. In a head-to-head study ral-
oxifene was as effective as tamoxifen in preventing breast 
cancer in high-risk women, but in a separate study it had 
no effect on heart disease in women with increased risk 
for this outcome. In contrast to tamoxifen, raloxifene is not 
associated with an increase in the risk of uterine cancer or 
benign uterine disease. Raloxifene increases the occurrence 
of hot flashes but reduces serum total and low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), and fibrinogen.
Mode of Action of SERMs  All SERMs bind to 
the ER, but each agent produces a unique receptor-drug 
conformation. As a result, specific coactivator or co-
repressor proteins are bound to the receptor (Chap.  1), 
resulting in differential effects on gene transcription 
that vary depending on other transcription factors pres-
ent in the cell. Another aspect of selectivity is the affin-
ity of each SERM for the different ERα and ERβ subtypes, 
which are expressed differentially in various tissues. 
These tissue-selective effects of SERMs offer the possibil-
ity of tailoring estrogen therapy to best meet the needs 
and risk factor profile of an individual patient.
Bisphosphonates  Alendronate, risedronate, and 
ibandronate are approved for the prevention and treat-
ment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Risedronate and 
alendronate are approved for the treatment of steroid-
induced osteoporosis, and risedronate also is approved 
for the prevention of steroid-induced osteoporosis. Both 
alendronate and risedronate are approved for the treat-
ment of osteoporosis in men.
Alendronate has been shown to decrease bone turn-
over and increase bone mass in the spine by up to 8% 
versus placebo and by 6% versus placebo in the hip. 
Multiple trials have evaluated its effect on fracture 
occurrence. The Fracture Intervention Trial provided 
evidence in >2000 women with prevalent vertebral 
fractures that daily alendronate treatment (5 mg/d for 
2 years and 10 mg/d for 9 months afterward) reduces 
vertebral fracture risk by about 50%, multiple vertebral 
fractures by up to 90%, and hip fractures by up to 50%. 
Several subsequent trials have confirmed these findings 
(Figs. 28-9 and 28-10). For example, in a study of >1900 
women with low bone mass treated with alendronate 
(10 mg/d) versus placebo, the incidence of all nonverte-
bral fractures was reduced by ∼47% after only 1 year.
Trials comparing once-weekly alendronate, 70 mg, 
with daily 10-mg dosing have shown equivalence with 
regard to bone mass and bone turnover responses. 
Consequently, once-weekly therapy generally is preferred 
because of the low incidence of gastrointestinal side 
effects and ease of administration. Alendronate should 
be given with a full glass of water before breakfast, 
as bisphosphonates are poorly absorbed. Because of 
the potential for esophageal irritation, alendronate 
is contraindicated in patients who have stricture or 
inadequate emptying of the esophagus. It is recom-
mended that patients remain upright for at least  
30 min after taking the medication to avoid esoph-
ageal irritation. Cases of esophagitis, esophageal 
ulcer, and esophageal stricture have been described, 
but the incidence appears to be low. In clinical trials, 
overall gastrointestinal symptomatology was no dif-
ferent with alendronate than with placebo. Alendro-
nate is also available in a preparation that contains 
vitamin D.
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
453
Vertebral fractures
*
*
PLB
RIS
Risedronate
pooled, post hoc
*
*
*
*
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Percent of patients
PLB
ALN
Alendronate
pooled, post hoc
0
2
4
6
0
1
2
3
PLB
IBAN
49↓*
Ibandronate
preplanned
PLB
ZOL
Zoledronate
preplanned
?
0
0
6
12
12
24
36
0
12
24
36
0
12
24
36
Months
Months
Months
Months
69%↓*
77%↓*
45%↓*
A
*
*
Alendronate pooled, post hoc
0
12
24
36
0
5
10
15
Percent of patients
PLB
ALN
27%↓*
Months
Nonvertebral fractures
Risedronate pooled, post hoc
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
PLB
RIS
0
0
12
24
36
5
10
15
59%↓*
Months
Zoledronate preplanned
0
0
12
24
36
5
10
15
PLB
ZOL
25%↓*
?
Months
B
1
2
3
0
Placebo (n = 3861) 
Zolendronate (n = 3875)
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
Hip fractures
RRR
41%
Cumulative incidence of hip fractures over 3 years
Cumulative incidence (%)
Time to first hip fracture (months)
C
Figure 28-9 
Effects of various bisphosphonates on clinical vertebral frac-
tures (A), nonvertebral fractures (B), and hip fractures (C) Plb, 
placebo; RRR, relative rish reduction. (After DM Black et al:
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 85:4118, 2000; C Roux et al: 
Curr Med Res Opin 4:433, 2004; CH Chesnut et al: J Bone 
Miner Res 19: 1241, 2004; DM Black et al: N Engl J Med 
356:1809, 2007; JT Harrington et al: Calcif Tissue Int 74:129, 
2003.)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
454
Risedronate also reduces bone turnover and increases 
bone mass. Controlled clinical trials have demonstrated 
a 40–50% reduction in vertebral fracture risk over 3 years, 
accompanied by a 40% reduction in clinical nonspine 
fractures. The only clinical trial specifically designed to 
evaluate hip fracture outcome (HIP) indicated that rise-
dronate reduced hip fracture risk in women in their sev-
enties with confirmed osteoporosis by 40%. In contrast, 
risedronate was not effective at reducing hip fracture 
occurrence in older women (80+ years) without proven 
osteoporosis. Studies have shown that 35 mg of rise-
dronate administered once weekly is therapeutically 
equivalent to 5 mg/d. Patients should take risedronate 
with a full glass of plain water to facilitate delivery to the 
stomach and should not lie down for 30 min after taking 
the drug. The incidence of gastrointestinal side effects in 
trials with risedronate was similar to that of placebo.
Etidronate was the first bisphosphonate to be 
approved, initially for use in Paget’s disease and hyper-
calcemia. This agent has also been used in osteoporo-
sis trials of smaller magnitude than those performed 
for alendronate and risedronate but is not approved by 
the FDA for treatment of osteoporosis. Etidronate prob-
ably has some efficacy against vertebral fracture when 
given as an intermittent cyclical regimen (2 weeks on, 
2.5 months off). Its effectiveness against nonvertebral 
fractures has not been studied.
Ibandronate is the third amino-bisphosphonate 
approved in the United States. Ibandronate (2.5 mg/d) 
has been shown in clinical trials to reduce vertebral frac-
ture risk by ∼40% but with no overall effect on nonver-
tebral fractures. In a post hoc analysis of subjects with 
a femoral neck T-score of −3 or below, ibandronate 
reduced the risk of nonvertebral fractures by ∼60%. In 
clinical trials, ibandronate doses of 150 mg/month PO or 
3 mg every 3 months IV had greater effects on turnover 
and bone mass than did 2.5 mg/d. Patients should take 
oral ibandronate in the same way as other bisphospho-
nates, but with 1 h elapsing before other food or drink 
(other than plain water).
Zoledronic acid is a potent bisphosphonate with unique 
administration regimens (once yearly IV). Although 
it has not been approved for use in osteoporosis, the 
data suggest that it is highly effective in fracture risk 
reduction. In a study of >7000 women followed for 
3 years, zoledronic acid (5 mg as a single IV infusion 
annually) reduced the risk of vertebral fractures by 
70%, nonvertebral fractures by 25%, and hip fractures 
by 40%. These results were associated with less height 
loss and disability. In the treated population, there was 
an increased risk of atrial fibrillation (2%) and arthralgia 
and a 15% risk of fever in comparison to placebo.
Mode of Action  Bisphosphonates are structurally 
related to pyrophosphates, compounds that are incor-
porated into bone matrix. Bisphosphonates specifically 
impair osteoclast function and reduce osteoclast num-
ber, in part by inducing apoptosis. Recent evidence sug-
gests that the nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates also 
inhibit protein prenylation, one of the end products in 
the mevalonic acid pathway, by inhibiting the enzyme 
farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase. This effect disrupts 
intracellular protein trafficking and ultimately may lead to 
apoptosis. Some bisphosphonates have very long reten-
tion in the skeleton and may exert long-term effects. The 
consequences of this, if any, are unknown. A phenom-
enon that has been called osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) 
has been described, mostly in patients with cancer who 
are given high doses of zoledronic acid or pamidronate.  
A few cases have been described in patients with osteo-
porosis treated with oral bisphosphonates. The back-
ground incidence of ONJ in this population is not known, 
and thus the attributable risk for bisphosphonates is not 
clear, although it appears to be relatively low.
Calcitonin  Calcitonin is a polypeptide hormone pro-
duced by the thyroid gland (Chap. 27). Its physiologic 
role is unclear as no skeletal disease has been described 
in association with calcitonin deficiency or excess. Calci-
tonin preparations are approved by the FDA for Paget’s 
disease, hypercalcemia, and osteoporosis in women  
>5 years past menopause.
Injectable calcitonin produces small increments in 
bone mass of the lumbar spine. However, difficulty of 
administration and frequent reactions, including nau-
sea and facial flushing, make general use limited. A nasal 
spray containing calcitonin (200 IU/d) is available for treat-
ment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. One 
study suggests that nasal calcitonin produces small incre-
ments in bone mass and a small reduction in new verte-
bral fractures in calcitonin-treated patients versus those 
on calcium alone. There has been no proven effectiveness 
against nonvertebral fractures. An oral preparation of cal-
citonin recently was approved for use in osteoporosis.
25
20
15
10
5
0
% of patients with incident vertebral fracture
No preexisting fractures
Preexisting fractures
RR, 0.6 (95% CI, 0.4-0.9)
RR, 0.5 (95% CI, 0.3-0.7)
Placebo
60 mg/d of raloxifene
120 mg/d of raloxifene
RR, 0.7 (95% CI, 0.6-0.9)
RR, 0.5 (95% CI, 0.4-0.6)
Figure 28-10 
Effects of two doses of raloxifene on incident verte-
bral fractures in the MORE trial. (After B Ettinger et al: 
JAMA 282:637, 1999.)
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
455
Calcitonin is not indicated for the prevention of 
osteoporosis and is not sufficiently potent to prevent 
bone loss in early postmenopausal women. Calcitonin 
might have an analgesic effect on bone pain, both in 
the subcutaneous and possibly the nasal form.
Mode of Action  Calcitonin suppresses osteo-
clast activity by direct action on the osteoclast calcito-
nin receptor. Osteoclasts exposed to calcitonin cannot 
maintain their active ruffled border, which normally 
maintains close contact with underlying bone.
Denosumab  A novel agent that was given twice 
yearly by SC administration in a randomized controlled 
trial in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis has 
been shown to increase BMD in the spine, hip, and  
forearm and reduce vertebral, hip, and nonvertebral frac-
tures over a 3-year period by 70, 40, and 20%, respec-
tively (Fig. 28-11). Other clinical trials indicate the ability 
to increase bone mass in postmenopausal women with 
low bone mass (above osteoporosis range) and in post-
menopausal women with breast cancer treated with hor-
monal agents. Furthermore, a study of men with prostate 
cancer treated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) agonist therapy indicated the ability of deno-
sumab to improve bone mass and reduce vertebral frac-
ture occurrence. Denosumab was approved by the FDA 
in 2010 for the treatment of postmenopausal women 
who have a high risk for osteoporotic fractures, including 
those with a history of fracture or multiple risk factors for 
fracture, and those who have failed or are intolerant to 
other osteoporosis therapy.
Mode of Action  Denosumab is a fully human 
monoclonal antibody to RANKL, the final common 
effector of osteoclast formation, activity, and survival. 
Denosumab binds to RANKL, inhibiting its ability to 
initiate the formation of mature osteoclasts from osteo-
clast precursors and to bring mature osteoclasts to the 
bone surface and initiate bone resorption. Denosumab 
also plays a role in reducing the survival of the osteo-
clast. Through these actions on the osteoclast, deno-
sumab induces potent antiresorptive action, as assessed 
biochemically and histomorphometrically, and may 
contribute to the occurrence of ONJ. Serious adverse 
reactions include hypocalcemia, infections, and derma-
tologic reactions such as dermatitis, rashes, and eczema.
Parathyroid Hormone  Endogenous PTH is an 
84-amino-acid peptide that is largely responsible for 
calcium homeostasis (Chap. 27). Although chronic 
elevation of PTH, as occurs in hyperparathyroidism, is 
associated with bone loss (particularly cortical bone), 
PTH also can exert anabolic effects on bone. Consistent 
with this, some observational studies have indicated 
that mild elevations in PTH are associated with main-
tenance of trabecular bone mass. On the basis of these 
findings, several clinical trials have been performed
using an exogenous PTH analogue (1-34hPTH; teripa-
ratide) that has been approved for the treatment of 
established osteoporosis in both men and women. 
The first randomized controlled trial in postmeno-
pausal women showed that PTH, when superimposed 
on ongoing estrogen therapy, produced substantial 
increments in bone mass (13% over a 3-year period 
compared with estrogen alone) and reduced the risk of 
0-36
0-12
>12-24
>12-36
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Crude incidence (%)
RR, 0.32
P < 0.001
RR, 0.39
P < 0.001
RR, 0.22
P < 0.001
RR, 0.35
P < 0.001
Placebo
Placebo
Placebo
Denosumab
Denosumab
Denosumab
A 
New vertebral fracture
B 
Time to first nonvertebral fracture
C 
Time to first hip fracture
Month
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Cumulative incidence (%)
Cumulative incidence (%)
0
6
12
18
Month
24
30
36
0
6
12
18
Month
24
30
36
No. at risk
Placebo
Denosumab
3906
3902
3750
3759
3578
3594
3410
3453
3264
3337
3121
3228
3009
3130
No. at risk
Placebo
Denosumab
3906
3902
3799
3796
3672
3676
3538
3566
3430
3477
3311
3397
3221
3311
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Figure 28-11 
Effects of denosumab on new vertebral fractures (A) and 
times to nonvertebral and hip fracture (B) and (C) (After SR 
Cummings et al: N Engl J Med:361:756, 2009.)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
456
vertebral compression deformity. In the pivotal study 
(median, 19 months’ duration), 20 μg PTH(1–34) daily 
by SC injection reduced vertebral fractures by 65% and 
nonvertebral fractures by 45% (Fig. 28-12). Treatment 
is administered as a single daily injection given for a 
maximum of 2 years. Teriparatide produces increases in 
bone mass and mediates architectural improvements 
in skeletal structure. These effects are lower when 
patients have been exposed previously to bisphos-
phonates, possibly in proportion to the potency of the
Figure 28-12 
Effects of teriparatide on new vertebral fractures (A) and 
nonvertebral fragility fractures (B) and (C) (After RM Neer 
et al: N Engl J Med 344:1434, 2001.)
Relative:
65%
Absolute:
9.3%
Effect of teriparatide on the risk of new
vertebral fractures
Relative:
69%
Absolute:
9.9%
Risk reduction
Number of women with 1 or
more new vertebral fractures
50
70
60
10
12
14
15
Placebo
(n = 448)
TPTD20
(n = 444)
TPTD40
(n = 434)
64
40
8
0
2
4
6
30
20
10
0
% of women
22
19
A
Effect of teriparatide on the risk of nonvertebral
fragility fractures
Relative:
53%
Absolute:
2.9%
Relative:
54%
Absolute:
3.0%
Risk reduction
Number of women with
nonvertebral fragility fractures
25
35
30
4
5
6
Placebo
(n = 544)
TPTD20
(n = 541)
TPTD40
(n = 552)
20
2
0
1
3
15
0
10
5
30
14
14
% of women
B
*P <0.05 vs. placebo
4
5
6
7
8
Placebo
Effect of teriparatide on the risk of nonvertebral
fragility fractures (time to first fracture)
Months since randomization
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1
2
3
TPTD20
TPTD40
*
*
%  of women**
C
antiresorptive effect. When 1–34hPTH is being consid-
ered for treatment-naive patients, it is best administered 
as monotherapy and followed by an antiresorptive 
agent such as a bisphosphonate.
Side effects of teriparatide are generally mild and can 
include muscle pain, weakness, dizziness, headache, 
and nausea. Rodents given prolonged treatment with 
PTH in relatively high doses developed osteogenic sar-
comas. One case of osteosarcoma has been described in 
a patient treated with teriparatide. At present this seems 
to equate to the background incidence of osteosarcoma 
in this population.
PTH use may be limited by its mode of administra-
tion; alternative modes of delivery are being investi-
gated. The optimal frequency of administration also 
remains to be established, and it is possible that PTH 
might be effective when used intermittently. Cost also 
may be a limiting factor.
Mode of Action  Exogenously administered PTH 
appears to have direct actions on osteoblast activity, 
with biochemical and histomorphometric evidence 
of de novo bone formation early in response to PTH, 
before activation of bone resorption. Subsequently, 
PTH activates bone remodeling but still appears to favor 
bone formation over bone resorption. PTH stimulates 
IGF-I and collagen production and appears to increase 
osteoblast number by stimulating replication, enhanc-
ing osteoblast recruitment, and inhibiting apopto-
sis. Unlike all other treatments, PTH produces a true 
increase in bone tissue and an apparent restoration of 
bone microarchitecture (Fig.  28-13).
Fluoride  Fluoride has been available for many years 
and is a potent stimulator of osteoprogenitor cells when 
studied in vitro. It has been used in multiple osteoporosis 
studies with conflicting results, in part because of the use 
of varying doses and preparations. Despite increments
Figure 28-13 
Effect of parathyroid hormone (PTH) treatment on bone 
microarchitecture. Paired biopsy specimens from a 64-year-
old woman before (A) and after (B) treatment with PTH. 
(From DW Dempster et al: J Bone Miner Res 16:1846, 2001.)
 
CHAPTER 28
Osteoporosis
457
in bone mass of up to 10%, there are no consistent 
effects of fluoride on vertebral or nonvertebral fracture; 
the latter may actually increase when high doses of fluo-
ride are used. Fluoride remains an experimental agent 
despite its long history and multiple studies.
Strontium Ranelate  Strontium ranelate is approved 
in several European countries for the treatment of 
osteoporosis. It increases bone mass throughout the 
skeleton; in clinical trials, the drug reduced the risk of 
vertebral fractures by 37% and that of nonvertebral 
fractures by 14%. It appears to be modestly antiresorp-
tive while at the same time not causing as much of a 
decrease in bone formation (measured biochemically). 
Strontium is incorporated into hydroxyapatite, replacing 
calcium, a feature that might explain some of its fracture 
benefits. Small increased risks of venous thrombosis, 
seizures, and abnormal cognition have been seen and 
require further study.
Other Potential Anabolic Agents  Several small 
studies of growth hormone (GH), alone or in combination 
with other agents, have not shown consistent or sub-
stantial positive effects on skeletal mass. Many of these 
studies have been relatively short term, and the effects of 
GH, growth hormone–releasing hormone, and the IGFs 
are still under investigation. Anabolic steroids, mostly 
derivatives of testosterone, act primarily as antiresorp-
tive agents to reduce bone turnover but also may stimu-
late osteoblastic activity. Effects on bone mass remain 
unclear but appear weak in general, and use is limited by 
masculinizing side effects. Several recent observational 
studies suggest that the statin drugs, which currently are 
used to treat hypercholesterolemia, may be associated 
with increased bone mass and reduced fractures, but 
conclusions from clinical trials are mixed.
Nonpharmacologic Approaches  Pro-
tective pads worn around the outer thigh, which cover 
the trochanteric region of the hip, can prevent hip frac-
tures in elderly residents in nursing homes. The use of 
hip protectors is limited largely by issues of compliance 
and comfort, but new devices are being developed that 
may circumvent these problems and provide adjunctive 
treatments.
Kyphoplasty and vertebroplasty are also useful non-
pharmacologic approaches for the treatment of pain-
ful vertebral fractures. However, no long-term data are 
available.
Treatment Monitoring  There are currently 
no well-accepted guidelines for monitoring treatment 
of osteoporosis. Because most osteoporosis treatments 
produce small or moderate bone mass increments on 
average, it is reasonable to consider BMD as a monitor-
ing tool. Changes must exceed ∼4% in the spine and 6% 
in the hip to be considered significant in any individual. 
The hip is the preferred site due to larger surface area 
and greater reproducibility. Medication-induced incre-
ments may require several years to produce changes of 
this magnitude (if they do at all). Consequently, it can 
be argued that BMD should be repeated at intervals  
>2 years. Only significant BMD reductions should prompt 
a change in medical regimen, as it is expected that many 
individuals will not show responses greater than the 
detection limits of the current measurement techniques.
Biochemical markers of bone turnover may prove 
useful for treatment monitoring, but little hard evidence 
currently supports this concept; it remains unclear 
which endpoint is most useful. If bone turnover mark-
ers are used, a determination should be made before 
therapy is started and repeated ≥4 months after therapy 
is initiated. In general, a change in bone turnover mark-
ers must be 30–40% lower than the baseline to be sig-
nificant because of the biologic and technical variability 
in these tests. A positive change in biochemical mark-
ers and/or bone density can be useful to help patients 
adhere to treatment regimens.
Glucocorticoid-Induced 
Osteoporosis
Osteoporotic fractures are a well-characterized conse-
quence of the hypercortisolism associated with Cushing’s 
syndrome. However, the therapeutic use of glucocorti-
coids is by far the most common form of glucocorticoid- 
induced osteoporosis. Glucocorticoids are used widely in 
the treatment of a variety of disorders, including chronic 
lung disorders, rheumatoid arthritis, and other connec-
tive tissue diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, and after 
transplantation. Osteoporosis and related fractures are 
serious side effects of chronic glucocorticoid therapy. 
Because the effects of glucocorticoids on the skeleton 
are often superimposed on the consequences of aging 
and menopause, it is not surprising that women and 
the elderly are most frequently affected. The skeletal 
response to steroids is remarkably heterogeneous, how-
ever, and even young, growing individuals treated with 
glucocorticoids can present with fractures.
The risk of fractures depends on the dose and dura-
tion of glucocorticoid therapy, although recent data 
suggest that there may be no completely safe dose. Bone 
loss is more rapid during the early months of treatment, 
and trabecular bone is affected more severely than cor-
tical bone. As a result, fractures have been shown to 
increase within 3 months of steroid treatment. There is 
an increase in fracture risk in both the axial skeleton 
and the appendicular skeleton, including risk of hip 
fracture. Bone loss can occur with any route of steroid 
administration, including high-dose inhaled glucocorti-
coids and intraarticular injections. Alternate-day delivery 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
458
does not appear to ameliorate the skeletal effects of 
glucocorticoids.
Pathophysiology
Glucocorticoids increase bone loss by multiple mecha-
nisms, including (1) inhibition of osteoblast function and 
an increase in osteoblast apoptosis, resulting in impaired 
synthesis of new bone; (2) stimulation of bone resorp-
tion, probably as a secondary effect; (3) impairment of 
the absorption of calcium across the intestine, probably 
by a vitamin D–independent effect; (4) increase of uri-
nary calcium loss and perhaps induction of some degree 
of secondary hyperparathyroidism; (5) reduction of 
adrenal androgens and suppression of ovarian and testic-
ular secretion of estrogens and androgens; and (6) induc-
tion of glucocorticoid myopathy, which may exacerbate 
effects on skeletal and calcium homeostasis as well as 
increase the risk of falls.
Evaluation of the Patient
Because of the prevalence of glucocorticoid-induced 
bone loss, it is important to evaluate the status of the 
skeleton in all patients starting or already receiving long-
term glucocorticoid therapy. Modifiable risk factors 
should be identified, including those for falls. Exami-
nation should include testing of height and muscle 
strength. Laboratory evaluation should include an assess-
ment of 24-h urinary calcium. All patients on long-term 
(>3 months) glucocorticoids should have measurement 
of bone mass at both the spine and the hip using DXA. 
If only one skeletal site can be measured, it is best to 
assess the spine in individuals <60 years and the hip in 
those >60 years.
Prevention
Bone loss caused by glucocorticoids can be prevented, 
and the risk of fractures significantly reduced. Strate-
gies must include using the lowest dose of glucocorticoid 
for disease management. Topical and inhaled routes of 
administration are preferred, where appropriate. Risk factor 
reduction is important, including smoking cessation, 
limitation of alcohol consumption, and participation in 
weight-bearing exercise, when appropriate. All patients 
should receive an adequate calcium and vitamin D intake 
from the diet or from supplements.
Treatment	
Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis
Only bisphosphonates have been demonstrated in large 
clinical trials to reduce the risk of fractures in patients 
being treated with glucocorticoids. Risedronate pre-
vents bone loss and reduces vertebral fracture risk by 
∼70%. Similar beneficial effects are observed in studies of 
alendronate. Controlled trials of hormone therapy have 
shown bone-sparing effects, and calcitonin also has some 
protective effect in the spine. Thiazides reduce urine cal-
cium loss, but their role in the prevention of fractures is 
unclear. PTH has been studied in a small group of women 
with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, among whom 
bone mass increased substantially, and teriparatide is 
being investigated in a larger multicenter trial.
 Murray J. Favus  I   Tamara J. Vokes 
459
 pAget’S DiSeASe of Bone 
 Paget’s disease is a localized bone-remodeling disorder 
that affects widespread, noncontiguous areas of the skel-
eton. The pathologic process is initiated by overactive 
osteoclastic bone resorption followed by a compensatory 
increase in osteoblastic new bone formation, resulting in 
a structurally disorganized mosaic of woven and lamel-
lar bone. Pagetic bone is expanded, less compact, and 
more vascular; thus, it is more susceptible to deformities 
and fractures. Although most patients are asymptomatic, 
symptoms resulting directly from bony involvement 
(bone pain, secondary arthritis, fractures) or secondarily 
from the expansion of bone causing compression of sur-
rounding neural tissue are not uncommon. 
 Epidemiology 
 There is a marked geographic variation in the 
frequency of Paget’s disease, with high preva-
lence in Western Europe (Great Britain, France, 
and Germany, but not Switzerland or Scandinavia) and 
among those who have immigrated to Australia, New 
Zealand, South Africa, and North and South America. 
The disease is rare in native populations of the Americas, 
Africa, Asia, and the Middle East; when it does occur, 
the affected subjects usually have evidence of European 
ancestry, supporting the migration theory. For unclear 
reasons, the prevalence and severity of Paget’s disease are 
decreasing, and the age at diagnosis is increasing. 
 The prevalence is greater in males and increases with 
age. Autopsy series reveal Paget’s disease in about 3% of 
those over age 40. Prevalence of positive skeletal radio-
graphs in patients over age 55 is 2.5% for men and 1.6% 
for women. Elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels in 
asymptomatic patients have an age-adjusted incidence of 
 PAGET’S DISEASE AND OTHER 
DYSPLASIAS OF BONE 
 chApter 29 
12.7 and 7 per 100,000 person-years in men and women, 
respectively. 
 Etiology 
 The etiology of Paget’s disease of bone remains 
unknown, but evidence supports both genetic and viral 
etiologies. A positive family history is found in 15–25% 
of patients and, when present, raises the prevalence of 
the disease seven- to tenfold among fi rst-degree relatives. 
 A clear genetic basis has been established for several 
rare familial bone disorders that clinically and radio-
graphically resemble Paget’s disease but have more severe 
presentation and earlier onset. A homozygous deletion of 
the  TNFRSF11B gene, which encodes osteoprotegerin 
( Fig. 29-1 ) , causes  juvenile Paget’s disease , also known 
as  familial idiopathic hypophosphatasia , a disorder charac-
terized by uncontrolled osteoclastic differentiation and
resorption. Familial patterns of disease in several large 
kindred are consistent with an autosomal dominant pat-
tern of inheritance with variable penetrance.  Familial 
expansile osteolysis, expansile skeletal hyperphosphatasia, and 
early-onset Paget’s disease are associated with mutations
in the  TNFRSF11A gene, which encodes RANK (recep-
tor activator of nuclear factor-κB), a member of the 
tumor-necrosis factor superfamily critical for osteoclast
differentiation ( Fig. 29-1 ). Finally, mutations in the gene 
for valosin-containing protein cause a rare syndrome 
with autosomal dominant inheritance and variable pen-
etrance known as  inclusion body myopathy with Paget’s dis-
ease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD). The role of 
genetic factors is less clear in the more common form 
of late-onset Paget’s disease. Although a few families 
with mutations in the gene encoding RANK have been 
reported, the most common mutations identifi ed in 
familial and sporadic cases of Paget’s disease have been 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
460
Mesenchymal cell
Collagen
osteocalcin
Osteoclast
Osteoclast
precursor
Osteoblasts
Osteoblasts
IGF-1
IGF-2
OPG
M-CSF
IL-1, IL-6
c-fms
+
RANK L
RANK
Figure 29-1
Diagram illustrating factors that promote differentiation 
and function of osteoclasts and osteoblasts and the role 
of the RANK pathway. Stromal bone marrow (mesenchy-
mal) cells and differentiated osteoblasts produce multiple 
growth factors and cytokines, including macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (M-CSF), to modulate osteoclastogenesis. 
RANKL (receptor activator of NFκB ligand) is produced by 
osteoblast progenitors and mature osteoblasts and can bind 
to a soluble decoy receptor known as OPG (osteoprotegerin) 
to inhibit RANKL action. Alternatively, a cell-cell interaction 
between osteoblast and osteoclast progenitors allows RANKL 
to bind to its membrane-bound receptor, RANK, thereby stim-
ulating osteoclast differentiation and function. RANK binds 
intracellular proteins called TRAFs (tumor necrosis factor 
receptor–associated factors) that mediate receptor signaling 
through transcription factors such as NFκB. M-CSF binds 
to its receptor, c-fms, which is the cellular homologue of the 
fms oncogene. See text for the potential role of these path-
ways in disorders of osteoclast function such as Paget’s dis-
ease and osteopetrosis.
in the SQSTM1 gene (sequestasome-1 or p62 protein) 
in the C-terminal ubiquitin-binding domain. The p62 
protein is involved in NF–κB signaling and regulates 
osteoclastic differentiation. The phenotypic variabil-
ity in patients with SQSTM1 mutations suggests that 
additional factors, such as other genetic influences or 
viral infection, may influence clinical expression of the 
disease.
Several lines of evidence suggest that a viral infection 
may contribute to the clinical manifestations of Paget’s 
disease, including (1) the presence of cytoplasmic and 
nuclear inclusions resembling paramyxoviruses (measles 
and respiratory syncytial virus) in pagetic osteoclasts and 
(2) viral mRNA in precursor and mature osteoclasts. The 
viral etiology is further supported by conversion of osteo-
clast precursors to pagetic-like osteoclasts by vectors con-
taining the measles virus nucleocapsid or matrix genes. 
However, the viral etiology has been questioned by the 
inability to culture a live virus from pagetic bone and by 
failure to clone the full-length viral genes from material 
obtained from patients with Paget’s disease.
Pathophysiology
The principal abnormality in Paget’s disease is the increased 
number and activity of osteoclasts. Pagetic osteoclasts 
are large, increased 10- to 100-fold in number, and have 
a greater number of nuclei (as many as 100 compared 
to 3–5 nuclei in the normal osteoclast). The overactive 
osteoclasts may create a sevenfold increase in resorptive 
surfaces and an erosion rate of 9 μg/day (normal is 
1 μg/day). Several causes for the increased number and
activity of pagetic osteoclasts have been identified: 
(1) osteoclastic precursors are hypersensitive to 1,25(OH)2D3;
(2) osteoclasts are hyperresponsive to RANK ligand 
(RANKL), the osteoclast stimulatory factor that medi-
ates the effects of most osteotropic factors on osteoclast 
formation; (3) marrow stromal cells from pagetic lesions 
have increased RANKL expression; (4) osteoclast pre-
cursor recruitment is increased by interleukin (IL)-6, 
which is increased in the blood of patients with active 
Paget’s disease and is overexpressed in pagetic osteo-
clasts; (5) expression of the proto-oncogene c-fos, which
increases osteoclastic activity, is increased; and (6) the 
antiapoptotic oncogene Bcl-2 in pagetic bone is over-
expressed. Numerous osteoblasts are recruited to active 
resorption sites and produce large amounts of new bone 
matrix. As a result, bone turnover is high, and bone mass 
is normal or increased, not reduced, unless there is con-
comitant deficiency of calcium and/or vitamin D.
The characteristic feature of Paget’s disease is increased 
bone resorption accompanied by accelerated bone for-
mation. An initial osteolytic phase involves promi-
nent bone resorption and marked hypervascularization. 
Radiographically, this manifests as an advancing lytic 
wedge, or “blade of grass” lesion. The second phase is a 
period of very active bone formation and resorption that 
replaces normal lamellar bone with haphazard (woven) 
bone. Fibrous connective tissue may replace normal bone 
marrow. In the final sclerotic phase, bone resorption 
declines progressively and leads to a hard, dense, less 
vascular pagetic or mosaic bone, which represents the 
so-called burned-out phase of Paget’s disease. All three 
phases may be present at the same time at different skel-
etal sites.
Clinical manifestations
Diagnosis is often made in asymptomatic patients 
because they have elevated ALP levels on routine blood 
chemistry testing or an abnormality on a skeletal radio-
graph obtained for another indication. The skeletal 
sites most commonly involved are the pelvis, vertebral 
 
CHAPTER 29
Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone 
461
bodies, skull, femur, and tibia. Familial cases with an 
early presentation often have numerous active sites of 
skeletal involvement.
The most common presenting symptom is pain, 
which may result from increased bony vascularity, 
expanding lytic lesions, fractures, bowing, or other 
deformities. Bowing of the femur or tibia causes gait 
abnormalities and abnormal mechanical stresses with 
secondary osteoarthritis of the hip or knee joints. Long 
bone bowing also causes extremity pain by stretching 
the muscles attached to the bone softened by the pag-
etic process. Back pain results from enlarged pagetic 
vertebrae, vertebral compression fractures, spinal steno-
sis, degenerative changes of the joints, and altered body 
mechanics with kyphosis and forward tilt of the upper 
back. Rarely, spinal cord compression may result from 
bone enlargement or from the vascular steal syndrome. 
Skull involvement may cause headaches, symmetric or 
asymmetric enlargement of the parietal or frontal bones 
(frontal bossing), and increased head size. Cranial expan-
sion may narrow cranial foramens and cause neurologic 
complications including hearing loss from cochlear 
nerve damage from temporal bone involvement, cra-
nial nerve palsies, and softening of the base of the skull 
(platybasia) with the risk of brainstem compression. Pag-
etic involvement of the facial bones may cause facial 
deformity, loss of teeth and other dental conditions, 
and, rarely, airway compression.
Fractures are serious complications of Paget’s disease 
and usually occur in long bones at areas of active or 
advancing lytic lesions. Common fracture sites are the 
femoral shaft and subtrochanteric regions. Neoplasms aris-
ing from pagetic bone are rare. The incidence of sarcoma 
appears to be decreasing, possibly because of earlier, more 
effective treatment with potent antiresorptive agents. 
The majority of tumors are osteosarcomas, which usu-
ally present with new pain in a long-standing pagetic 
lesion. Osteoclast-rich benign giant cell tumors may 
arise in areas adjacent to pagetic bone, and they respond 
to glucocorticoid therapy.
Cardiovascular complications may occur in patients 
with involvement of large (15–35%) portions of the 
skeleton and a high degree of disease activity (ALP 
four times above normal). The extensive arteriovenous 
shunting and marked increases in blood flow through 
the vascular pagetic bone lead to a high-output state 
and cardiac enlargement. However, high-output heart 
failure is relatively rare and usually develops in patients 
with concomitant cardiac pathology. In addition, cal-
cific aortic stenosis and diffuse vascular calcifications 
have been associated with Paget’s disease.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis may be suggested on clinical examination 
by the presence of an enlarged skull with frontal boss-
ing, bowing of an extremity, or short stature with sim-
ian posturing. An extremity with an area of warmth and 
tenderness to palpation may suggest an underlying pag-
etic lesion. Other findings include bony deformity of 
the pelvis, skull, spine, and extremities; arthritic involve-
ment of the joints adjacent to lesions; and leg-length dis-
crepancy resulting from deformities of the long bones.
Paget’s disease is usually diagnosed from radiologic and 
biochemical abnormalities. Radiographic findings typical 
of Paget’s disease include enlargement or expansion of an 
entire bone or area of a long bone, cortical thickening, 
coarsening of trabecular markings, and typical lytic and 
sclerotic changes. Skull radiographs (Fig. 29-2) reveal 
regions of “cotton wool,” or osteoporosis circumscripta, 
Figure 29-2
A 48-year-old woman with Paget’s disease of the skull. 
Left; Lateral radiograph showing areas of both bone resorption 
and sclerosis. Right; 99mTc hydroxy diphosphonate (HDP) 
bone scan with anterior, posterior, and lateral views of the 
skull showing diffuse isotope uptake by the frontal, parietal, 
occipital, and petrous bones.
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
462
thickening of diploic areas, and enlargement and scle-
rosis of a portion or all of one or more skull bones. 
Vertebral cortical thickening of the superior and infe-
rior end plates creates a “picture frame” vertebra. Dif-
fuse radiodense enlargement of a vertebra is referred to 
as “ivory vertebra.” Pelvic radiographs may demonstrate 
disruption or fusion of the sacroiliac joints; porotic and 
radiodense lesions of the ilium with whorls of coarse 
trabeculation; thickened and sclerotic iliopectineal line 
(brim sign); and softening with protrusio acetabuli, 
with axial migration of the hips and functional flexion 
contracture. Radiographs of long bones reveal bowing 
deformity and typical pagetic changes of cortical thick-
ening and expansion and areas of lucency and sclerosis 
(Fig. 29-3). Radionuclide 99mTc bone scans are less 
specific but are more sensitive than standard radiographs 
for identifying sites of active skeletal lesions. Although 
CT and MRI studies are not necessary in most cases, 
CT may be useful for the assessment of possible frac-
ture and MRI is necessary to assess the possibility of sar-
coma, giant cell tumor, or metastatic disease in pagetic 
bone. Definitive diagnosis of malignancy often requires 
bone biopsy.
Biochemical evaluation is useful in the diagnosis and 
management of Paget’s disease. The marked increase 
in bone turnover can be monitored using biochemical 
markers of bone formation and resorption. The parallel 
rise in markers of bone formation and resorption con-
firms the coupling of bone formation and resorption in 
Paget’s disease. The degree of bone-marker elevation 
reflects the extent and severity of the disease. Patients 
with the highest elevation of ALP (10 times the upper 
limit of normal) typically have involvement of the skull 
and at least one other skeletal site. Lower values suggest 
less extensive involvement or a quiescent phase of 
the disease. For most patients, serum total ALP remains the 
test of choice both for diagnosis and assessing response 
to therapy. Occasionally, a symptomatic patient with 
evidence of progression at a single site may have a nor-
mal total ALP level but increased bone-specific ALP. 
For unclear reasons, serum osteocalcin, another marker 
of bone formation, is not always elevated and is not 
recommended for use in the diagnosis or management 
of Paget’s disease. Bone-resorption markers (serum or 
urine N-telopeptide or C-telopeptide measured in the 
blood or urine) are also elevated in active Paget’s dis-
ease and decrease more rapidly in response to therapy 
than does ALP.
Serum calcium and phosphate levels are normal in 
Paget’s disease. Immobilization of a patient with active 
Paget’s disease may rarely cause hypercalcemia and 
hypercalciuria and increase the risk for nephrolithiasis. 
However, the discovery of hypercalcemia, even in the 
presence of immobilization, should prompt a search 
for another cause of hypercalcemia. In contrast, hypo-
calcemia or mild secondary hyperparathyroidism may 
develop in patients with Paget’s disease with very active 
bone formation and insufficient dietary calcium intake, 
particularly during bisphosphonate therapy when bone 
resorption is rapidly suppressed and active bone formation 
continues. Therefore, adequate calcium and vitamin D 
intake should be instituted prior to administration of 
bisphosphonates.
Treatment	
Paget’s Disease of Bone
The development of effective and potent pharmacologic 
agents (Table 29-1) has changed the treatment philoso-
phy from treating only symptomatic patients to treating 
asymptomatic patients who are at risk for complications. 
Pharmacologic therapy is indicated in the following cir-
cumstances: to control symptoms caused by metaboli-
cally active Paget’s disease such as bone pain, fracture, 
headache, pain from pagetic radiculopathy or arthropa-
thy, or neurologic complications; to decrease local blood 
flow and minimize operative blood loss in patients who 
need surgery at an active pagetic site; to reduce hyper-
calciuria that may occur during immobilization; and to 
decrease the risk of complications when disease activ-
ity is high (elevated ALP) and when the site of involve-
ment involves weight-bearing bones, areas adjacent to 
major joints, vertebral bodies, and the skull. Whether or 
not early therapy prevents late complications remains to 
be determined. A recent randomized study of over 1200 
patients from the UK showed no difference in bone pain, 
fracture rates, quality of life, and hearing loss between 
Figure 29-3
Radiograph of a 73-year-old man with Paget’s disease of 
the right proximal femur. Note the coarsening of the trabec-
ular pattern with marked cortical thickening and narrowing 
of the joint space consistent with osteoarthritis secondary to 
pagetic deformity of the right femur.
 
CHAPTER 29
Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone 
463
patients who received pharmacologic therapy to control 
symptoms (bone pain) and those receiving bisphospho-
nates to normalize serum ALP. However, the most potent 
agent (zoledronic acid) was not used and the duration 
of observation (mean of 3 years with a range of 2 to 
5 years) may not be long enough to assess the impact 
of treatment on long-term outcomes. It seems likely 
that the restoration of normal bone architecture follow-
ing suppression of pagetic activity will prevent further 
deformities and complications.
Agents approved for treatment of Paget’s disease 
suppress the very high rates of bone resorption and 
secondarily decrease the high rates of bone formation 
(Table 29-1). As a result of decreasing bone turnover, 
pagetic structural patterns, including areas of poorly 
mineralized woven bone, are replaced by more normal 
cancellous or lamellar bone. Reduced bone turnover can 
be documented by a decline in serum ALP and urine or 
serum resorption markers (N-telopeptide, C-telopeptide).
The first clinically useful agent, etidronate, is now 
rarely used because the doses required to suppress 
bone resorption may impair mineralization, necessitat-
ing that the drug be given for a maximum of 6 months 
followed by a 6-month drug-free period. The second-
generation oral bisphosphonates—tiludronate, alendro-
nate, and risedronate—are more potent than etidronate 
in controlling bone turnover and, thus, induce a lon-
ger remission at a lower dose. The lower doses reduce 
the risks of impaired mineralization and osteomalacia. 
Oral bisphosphonates should be taken first thing in the 
morning on an empty stomach, followed by mainte-
nance of upright posture with no food, drink, or other 
medications for 30–60 minutes. The efficacy of different 
agents, based on their ability to normalize or decrease 
ALP levels, is summarized in Table 29-1, although the 
response rates are not comparable because they are 
obtained from different studies.
Intravenous bisphosphonates approved for Paget’s dis-
ease include pamidronate and zoledronic acid. Although 
the recommended dose for pamidronate is 30 mg dis-
solved in 500 mL of normal saline or dextrose IV over 4 h 
on three consecutive days, a more commonly used, sim-
pler regimen is a single infusion of 60–90 mg in patients 
with mild elevation of serum ALP and multiple 90-mg 
infusions in those with higher levels of ALP. In many 
patients, particularly those who have severe disease or 
need rapid normalization of bone turnover (neurologic 
symptoms, severe bone pain due to a lytic lesion, risk 
of an impending fracture, or pretreatment prior to elec-
tive surgery in an area of active disease), treatment with 
zoledronic acid is the first choice. It normalizes ALP in 
about 90% of patients by 6 months, and the therapeu-
tic effect persists for at least 6 more months in most 
patients. About 10–20% of patients experience a flulike 
syndrome after the first infusion, which can be partly 
ameliorated by pretreatment with acetaminophen or 
NSAIDs. In patients with high bone turnover, vitamin D 
(400–800 IU daily) and calcium (500 mg three times daily) 
should be provided to prevent hypocalcemia and sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism. Remission following treat-
ment with IV bisphosphonates, particularly zoledronic 
acid, may persist for well over 1 year. Bisphosphonates 
should not be used in patients with renal insufficiency 
(glomerular filtration rate <35 mL/min).
The subcutaneous injectable form of salmon calci-
tonin is approved for the treatment of Paget’s disease. 
Intranasal calcitonin spray is approved for osteoporosis 
at a dose of 200 U/d; however, the efficacy of this dose 
in Paget’s disease has not been thoroughly studied. The 
usual starting dose of injectable calcitonin (100 U/d) 
reduces ALP by 50% and may relieve skeletal symp-
toms. The dose may be reduced to 50 U/d three times 
weekly after an initial favorable response to 100 U daily; 
however, the lower dose may require long-term use to 
sustain efficacy. The common side effects of calcitonin 
therapy are nausea and facial flushing. Secondary resis-
tance after prolonged use may be due to either the for-
mation of anticalcitonin antibodies or downregulation
Table 29-1
 Pharmacologic Agents Approved for Treatment of Paget’s Disease
Name (Brand)
Dose and Mode of Delivery
Normalization of ALP
Zoledronate (Zometa)
5 mg IV over 15 min
90% of patients at 6 mo
Pamidronate (Aredia)
30 mg IV/d over 4 h on 3 days
∼50% of patients
Risedronate (Actonel)
30 mg PO/d for 2 mo
73% of patients
Alendronate (Fosamax)
40 mg PO/d for 6 mo
63% of patients
Tiludronate (Skelid)
800 mg PO daily for 3 mo
35% of patients
Etidronate (Didronel)
200–400 mg PO/d x 6 mo
15% of patients
Calcitonin (Miacalcin)
100 U SC daily for 6–18 mo (may reduce to  
50 U 3 times per wk)
(Reduction of ALP by 50%)
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
464
of osteoclastic cell–surface calcitonin receptors. The 
lower potency and injectable mode of delivery make 
this agent a less-attractive treatment option that 
should be reserved for patients who either do not tol-
erate bisphosphonates or have a contraindication to 
their use.
Sclerosing Bone Disorders
Osteopetrosis
Osteopetrosis refers to a group of disorders caused by 
severe impairment of osteoclast-mediated bone resorp-
tion. Other terms that are often used include marble 
bone disease, which captures the solid x-ray appearance 
of the involved skeleton, and Albers-Schönberg disease, 
which refers to the milder, adult form of osteopetrosis 
also known as autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II. 
The major types of osteopetrosis include malignant 
(severe, infantile, autosomal recessive) osteopetrosis and 
benign (adult, autosomal dominant) osteopetrosis types I 
and II. A rare autosomal recessive intermediate form has 
a more benign prognosis. Autosomal recessive carbonic 
anhydrase (CA) II deficiency produces osteopetrosis of 
intermediate severity associated with renal tubular aci-
dosis and cerebral calcification.
Etiology and genetics
Naturally occurring and gene-knockout animal models 
with phenotypes similar to those of the human disorders 
have been used to explore the genetic basis of osteo-
petrosis. The primary defect in osteopetrosis is the loss 
of osteo­clastic bone resorption and preservation of nor-
mal osteoblastic bone formation. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) 
is a soluble decoy receptor that binds osteoblast-derived 
RANK ligand, which mediates osteoclast differentiation 
and activation (Fig. 29-1). Transgenic mice that over-
express OPG develop osteopetrosis, presumably by 
blocking RANK ligand. Mice deficient in RANK lack 
osteoclasts and develop severe osteopetrosis.
Recessive mutations of CA II prevent osteoclasts 
from generating an acid environment in the clear zone 
between its ruffled border and the adjacent mineral sur-
face. Absence of CA II, therefore, impairs osteoclastic 
bone resorption. Other forms of human disease have 
less clear genetic defects. About one-half of the patients 
with malignant infantile osteopetrosis have a mutation in 
the TCIRG1 gene encoding the osteoclast-specific sub-
unit of the vacuolar proton pump, which mediates the 
acidification of the interface between bone mineral and 
the osteoclast ruffled border. Mutations in the CICN7 
chloride channel gene cause autosomal dominant osteo-
petrosis type II.
Clinical presentation
The incidence of autosomal recessive, severe (malignant) 
osteopetrosis ranges from 1 in 200,000 to 1 in 500,000 
live births. As bone and cartilage fail to undergo model-
ing, paralysis of one or more cranial nerves may occur 
due to narrowing of the cranial foramens. Failure of 
skeletal modeling also results in inadequate marrow 
space, leading to extramedullary hematopoiesis with 
hypersplenism and pancytopenia. Hypocalcemia due to 
lack of osteoclastic bone resorption may occur in infants 
and young children. The untreated infantile disease is 
fatal, often before age five.
Adult (benign) osteopetrosis is an autosomal dominant 
disease that is usually diagnosed by the discovery of 
typical skeletal changes in young adults who undergo 
radiologic evaluation of a fracture. The prevalence is 
1 in 100,000 to 1 in 500,000 adults. The course is not 
always benign, because fractures may be accompanied 
by loss of vision, deafness, psychomotor delay, mandibular 
osteomyelitis, and other complications usually associ-
ated with the juvenile form. In some kindred, nonpene-
trance results in skip generations, while in other families, 
severely affected children are born into families with 
benign disease. The milder form of the disease does not 
usually require treatment.
Radiography
Typically, there are generalized symmetric increases in 
bone mass with thickening of both cortical and trabecu-
lar bone. Diaphyses and metaphyses are broadened, and 
alternating sclerotic and lucent bands may be seen in the 
iliac crests, at the ends of long bones, and in vertebral 
bodies. The cranium is usually thickened, particularly 
at the base of the skull, and the paranasal and mastoid 
sinuses are underpneumatized.
Laboratory findings
The only significant laboratory findings are elevated 
serum levels of osteoclast-derived tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase (TRAP) and the brain isoenzyme of creatine 
kinase. Serum calcium may be low in severe disease, and 
parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels 
may be elevated in response to hypocalcemia.
Treatment	
Osteopetrosis
Allogeneic HLA-identical bone marrow transplanta-
tion has been successful in some children. Following 
transplantation, the marrow contains progenitor cells 
and normally functioning osteoclasts. A cure is most
 
CHAPTER 29
Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone 
465
likely when children are transplanted before age four.  
Marrow transplantation from nonidentical HLA-matched 
donors has a much higher failure rate. Limited stud-
ies in small numbers of patients have suggested vari-
able benefits following treatment with interferon γ-1β, 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (which stimulates osteoclasts 
directly), methylprednisolone, and a low-calcium/high-
phosphate diet.
Surgical intervention is indicated to decompress 
optic or auditory nerve compression. Orthopedic man-
agement is required for the surgical treatment of frac-
tures and their complications including malunion and 
postfracture deformity.
Pyknodysostosis
This is an autosomal recessive form of osteosclerosis 
that is believed to have affected the French impressionist 
painter Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. The molecular basis 
involves mutations in the gene that encodes cathepsin K, 
a lysosomal metalloproteinase highly expressed in osteo-
clasts and important for bone-matrix degradation. 
Osteoclasts are present but do not function normally. 
Pyknodysostosis is a form of short-limb dwarfism that 
presents with frequent fractures but usually a normal life 
span. Clinical features include short stature; kyphosco-
liosis and deformities of the chest; high-arched palate; 
proptosis; blue sclerae; dysmorphic features includ-
ing small face and chin, frontooccipital prominence, 
pointed beaked nose, large cranium, and obtuse man-
dibular angle; and small, square hands with hypoplastic 
nails. Radiographs demonstrate a generalized increase in 
bone density, but in contrast to osteopetrosis, the long 
bones are normally shaped. Separated cranial sutures, 
including the persistent patency of the anterior fonta-
nel, are characteristic of the disorder. There may also 
be hypoplasia of the sinuses, mandible, distal clavicles, 
and terminal phalanges. Persistence of deciduous teeth 
and sclerosis of the calvarium and base of the skull are 
also common. Histologic evaluation shows normal cor-
tical bone architecture with decreased osteoblastic and 
osteoclastic activities. Serum chemistries are normal, 
and, unlike osteopetrosis, there is no anemia. There is 
no known treatment for this condition, and there are 
no reports of attempted bone marrow transplant.
Progressive Diaphyseal Dysplasia
Also known as Camurati-Engelmann disease, progressive 
diaphyseal dysplasia is an autosomal dominant disor-
der that is characterized radiographically by diaphyseal 
hyperostosis and a symmetric thickening and increased 
diameter of the endosteal and periosteal surfaces of 
the diaphyses of the long bones, particularly the femur 
and tibia, and, less often, the fibula, radius, and ulna. 
The genetic defect responsible for the disease has been 
localized to the area of chromosome 19q13.2 encoding 
tumor growth factor (TGF)-β1. The mutation promotes 
activation of TGF-β1. The clinical severity is variable. 
The most common presenting symptoms are pain and 
tenderness of the involved areas, fatigue, muscle wasting, 
and gait disturbance. The weakness may be mistaken for 
muscular dystrophy. Characteristic body habitus includes 
thin limbs with little muscle mass yet prominent and 
palpable bones and, when the skull is involved, large 
head with prominent forehead and proptosis. Patients 
may also display signs of cranial nerve palsies, hydroceph-
alus, central hypogonadism, and Raynaud’s phenom-
enon. Radiographically, patchy progressive endosteal 
and periosteal new bone formation is observed along the 
diaphyses of the long bones. Bone scintigraphy shows 
increased radiotracer uptake in involved areas.
Treatment with low-dose glucocorticoids relieves 
bone pain and may reverse the abnormal bone forma-
tion. Intermittent bisphosphonate therapy has produced 
clinical improvement in a limited number of patients.
Hyperostosis Corticalis 
Generalisata
This is also known as van Buchem’s disease; it is an 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by endosteal 
hyperostosis in which osteosclerosis involves the skull, 
mandible, clavicles, and ribs. The major manifestations 
are due to narrowed cranial foramens with neural com-
pressions that may result in optic atrophy, facial paraly-
sis, and deafness. Adults may have an enlarged mandible. 
Serum ALP levels may be elevated, which reflect the 
uncoupled bone remodeling with high osteoblastic for-
mation rates and low osteoclastic resorption. As a result, 
there is increased accumulation of normal bone. Endosteal 
hyperostosis with syndactyly, known as sclerosteosis, is
a more severe form. The genetic defects for both scleros-
teosis and van Buchem’s disease have been assigned to 
the same region of the chromosome 17q12-q21. It is 
possible that both conditions may have deactivating 
mutations in the BEER (bone-expressed equilibrium 
regulator) gene.
Melorheostosis
Melorheostosis (Greek, “flowing hyperostosis”) may 
occur sporadically or follow a pattern consistent with 
an autosomal recessive disorder. The major manifesta-
tion is progressive linear hyperostosis in one or more 
bones of one limb, usually a lower extremity. The name 
comes from the radiographic appearance of the involved 
bone, which resembles melted wax that has dripped 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
466
down a candle. Symptoms appear during childhood 
as pain or stiffness in the area of sclerotic bone. There 
may be associated ectopic soft tissue masses, composed 
of cartilage or osseous tissue, and skin changes overly-
ing the involved bone, consisting of scleroderma-like 
areas and hypertrichosis. The disease does not progress 
in adults, but pain and stiffness may persist. Laboratory 
tests are unremarkable. No specific etiology is known. 
There is no specific treatment. Surgical interventions to 
correct contractures are often unsuccessful.
Osteopoikilosis
The literal translation of osteopoikilosis is “spotted 
bones”; it is a benign autosomal dominant condition in 
which numerous small, variably shaped (usually round 
or oval) foci of bony sclerosis are seen in the epiphyses 
and adjacent metaphyses. The lesions may involve any 
bone except the skull, ribs, and vertebrae. They may be 
misidentified as metastatic lesions. The main differentiat-
ing points are that bony lesions of osteopoikilosis are sta-
ble over time and do not accumulate radionucleotide on 
bone scanning. In some kindred, osteopoikilosis is asso-
ciated with connective tissue nevi known as dermatofibro-
sis lenticularis disseminata, also known as Buschke-Ollendorff 
syndrome. Histologic inspection reveals thickened but 
otherwise normal trabeculae and islands of normal corti-
cal bone. No treatment is indicated.
Hepatitis C–Associated 
Osteosclerosis
Hepatitis C–associated osteosclerosis (HCAO) is a 
rare acquired diffuse osteosclerosis in adults with prior 
hepatitis C infection. After a latent period of several 
years, patients develop diffuse appendicular bone pain 
and a generalized increase in bone mass with elevated 
serum ALP. Bone biopsy and histomorphometry reveal 
increased rates of bone formation, decreased bone 
resorption with a marked decrease in osteoclasts, and 
dense lamellar bone. One patient had increased serum 
OPG levels, and bone biopsy showed large numbers 
of osteoblasts positive for OPG and reduced osteoclast 
number. Empirical therapy includes pain control, and 
there may be beneficial response to either calcitonin or 
bisphosphonate.
Disorders Associated with 
Defective Mineralization
Hypophosphatasia
This is a rare inherited disorder that presents as rickets 
in infants and children or osteomalacia in adults with 
paradoxically low serum levels of ALP. The frequency 
of the severe neonatal and infantile forms is about 1 
in 100,000 live births in Canada, where the disease is 
most common because of its high prevalence among 
Mennonites and Hutterites. It is rare in African Americans. 
The severity of the disease is remarkably variable, rang-
ing from intrauterine death associated with profound 
skeletal hypomineralization at one extreme to prema-
ture tooth loss as the only manifestation in some adults. 
Severe cases are inherited in an autosomal recessive man-
ner, but the genetic patterns are less clear for the milder 
forms. The disease is caused by a deficiency of tissue 
nonspecific (bone/liver/kidney) ALP (TNSALP), which, 
although ubiquitous, results only in bone abnormalities. 
Protein levels and functions of the other ALP isozymes 
(germ cell, intestinal, placental) are normal. Defective 
ALP permits accumulation of its major naturally occur-
ring substrates including phosphoethanolamine (PEA), 
inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), and pyridoxal 5′-phos-
phate (PLP). The accumulation of PPi interferes with 
mineralization through its action as a potent inhibitor of 
hydroxyapatite crystal growth.
Perinatal hypophosphatasia becomes manifest during 
pregnancy and is often complicated by polyhydram-
nios and intrauterine death. The infantile form becomes 
clinically apparent before the age of 6 months with fail-
ure to thrive, rachitic deformities, functional craniosyn-
ostosis despite widely open fontanels (which are actually 
hypomineralized areas of the calvarium), raised intracra-
nial pressure, and flail chest and predisposition to pneu-
monia. Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria are common. 
This form has a mortality rate of about 50%. Prognosis 
seems to improve for the children who survive infancy. 
Childhood hypophosphatasia has variable clinical pre-
sentation. Premature loss of deciduous teeth (before 
age five) is the hallmark of the disease. Rickets causes 
delayed walking with waddling gait, short stature, and 
dolichocephalic skull with frontal bossing. The disease 
often improves during puberty but may recur in adult 
life. Adult hypophosphatasia presents during middle age 
with painful, poorly healing metatarsal stress fractures or 
thigh pain due to femoral pseudofractures.
Laboratory investigation reveals low ALP levels and 
normal or elevated levels of serum calcium and phos-
phorus despite clinical and radiologic evidence of 
rickets or osteomalacia. Serum parathyroid hormone, 
25-hydroxyvitamin D, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 
levels are normal. The elevation of PLP is specific for 
the disease and may even be present in asymptomatic 
parents of severely affected children. Because vitamin B6 
increases PLP levels, vitamin B6 supplements should be 
discontinued one week before testing.
There is no established medical therapy. In contrast 
to other forms of rickets and osteomalacia, calcium and 
vitamin D supplementation should be avoided because 
they may aggravate hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria. 
A low-calcium diet, glucocorticoids, and calcitonin have 
 
CHAPTER 29
Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone 
467
been used in a small number of patients with variable 
responses. Because fracture healing is poor, placement 
of intramedullary rods is best for acute fracture repair 
and for prophylactic prevention of fractures.
Axial Osteomalacia
This is a rare disorder characterized by defective skel-
etal mineralization despite normal serum calcium and 
phosphate levels. Clinically, the disorder presents in 
middle-aged or elderly men with chronic axial skel-
etal discomfort. Cervical spine pain may also be pres-
ent. Radiographic findings are mainly osteosclerosis due 
to coarsened trabecular patterns typical of osteomalacia. 
Spine, pelvis, and ribs are most commonly affected. His-
tologic changes show defective mineralization and flat, 
inactive osteoblasts. The primary defect appears to be 
an acquired defect in osteoblast function. The course is 
benign, and there is no established treatment. Calcium 
and vitamin D therapies are not effective.
Fibrogenesis Imperfecta Ossium
This is a rare condition of unknown etiology. It pres-
ents in both sexes in middle age or later; with progres-
sive, intractable skeletal pain and fractures; worsening 
immobilization; and a debilitating course. Radiographic 
evaluation reveals generalized osteomalacia, osteope-
nia, and occasional pseudofractures. Histologic features 
include a tangled pattern of collagen fibrils with abun-
dant osteoblasts and osteoclasts. There is no effective 
treatment. Spontaneous remission has been reported 
in a small number of patients. Calcium and vitamin D 
have not been beneficial.
Fibrous Dysplasia and McCune-
Albright Syndrome
Fibrous dysplasia is a sporadic disorder characterized by 
the presence of one (monostotic) or more (polyostotic) 
expanding fibrous skeletal lesions composed of bone-
forming mesenchyme. The association of the polyos-
totic form with café-au-lait spots and hyperfunction of 
an endocrine system such as pseudo-precocious puberty 
of ovarian origin is known as McCune-Albright syndrome 
(MAS). A spectrum of the phenotypes is caused by acti-
vating mutations in the GNAS1 gene, which encodes 
the α subunit of the stimulatory G protein (Gsα). As 
the postzygotic mutations occur at different stages of 
early development, the extent and type of tissue affected 
are variable and explain the mosaic pattern of skin and 
bone changes. GTP binding activates the Gsα regulatory
protein and mutations in regions of Gsα that selecti­
vely inhibit GTPase activity, which results in constitutive 
stimulation of the cyclic AMP–protein kinase A signal 
transduction pathway. Such mutations of the Gsα protein– 
coupled receptor may cause autonomous function in 
bone (parathyroid hormone receptor); skin (melanocyte-
stimulating hormone receptor); and various endocrine 
glands including ovary (follicle-stimulating hormone 
receptor), thyroid (thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor), 
adrenal (adrenocorticotropic hormone receptor), and 
pituitary (growth hormone–releasing hormone recep-
tor). The skeletal lesions are composed largely of mes-
enchymal cells that do not differentiate into osteoblasts, 
resulting in the formation of imperfect bone. In some 
areas of bone, fibroblast-like cells develop features of 
osteoblasts in that they produce extracellular matrix that 
organizes into woven bone. Calcification may occur in 
some areas. In other areas, cells have features of chon-
drocytes and produce cartilage-like extracellular matrix.
Clinical presentation
Fibrous dysplasia occurs with equal frequency in both 
sexes, whereas MAS with precocious puberty is more 
common (10:1) in girls. The monostotic form is the most 
common and is usually diagnosed in patients between 20 
and 30 years of age without associated skin lesions. The 
polyostotic form typically manifests in children <10 years 
old and may progress with age. Early-onset disease is 
generally more severe. Lesions may become quiescent in 
puberty and progress during pregnancy or with estrogen 
therapy. In polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, the lesions most 
commonly involve the maxilla and other craniofacial 
bones, ribs, and metaphyseal or diaphyseal portions of 
the proximal femur or tibia. Expanding bone lesions may 
cause pain, deformity, fractures, and nerve entrapment. 
Sarcomatous degeneration involving the facial bones or 
femur is infrequent (<1%). The risk of malignant trans-
formation is increased by radiation, which has proven to 
be ineffective treatment. In rare patients with widespread 
lesions, renal phosphate wasting and hypophosphatemia 
may cause rickets or osteomalacia. Hypophosphatemia 
may be due to production of a phosphaturic factor by the 
abnormal fibrous tissue.
MAS patients may have café-au-lait spots, which are 
flat, hyperpigmented skin lesions that have rough bor-
ders (“coast of Maine”) in contrast to the café-au-lait 
lesions of neurofibromatosis that have smooth borders 
(“coast of California”). The most common endocri-
nopathy is isosexual pseudoprecocious puberty in girls. 
Other less common endocrine disorders include thyro-
toxicosis, Cushing’s syndrome, acromegaly, hyperpara-
thyroidism, hyperprolactinemia, and pseudoprecocious 
puberty in boys.
Radiographic findings
In long bones, the fibrous dysplastic lesions are typically 
well-defined, radiolucent areas with thin cortices and a 
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
468
ground-glass appearance. Lesions may be lobulated with 
trabeculated areas of radiolucency (Fig. 29-4). Involve-
ment of facial bones usually presents as radiodense 
lesions, which may create a leonine appearance (leontia-
sis osea). Expansile cranial lesions may narrow foramens 
and cause optic lesions, reduce hearing, and create other 
manifestations of cranial nerve compression.
Laboratory Results
Serum ALP is occasionally elevated but calcium, para-
thyroid hormone, 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and 1,25- 
dihydroxyvitamin D levels are normal. Patients with 
extensive polyostotic lesions may have hypophosphate-
mia, hyperphosphaturia, and osteomalacia. The hypo-
phosphatemia and phosphaturia are directly related to 
the levels of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). Bio-
chemical markers of bone turnover may be elevated.
Treatment	
Fibrous Dysplasia and McCune-Albright 
Syndrome
Spontaneous healing of the lesions does not occur, and 
there is no established effective treatment. Improve-
ment in bone pain and partial or complete resolution 
of radiographic lesions have been reported after IV 
bisphosphonate therapy. Surgical stabilization is used 
to prevent pathologic fracture or destruction of a major 
joint space and to relieve nerve root or cranial nerve 
compression or sinus obstruction.
Other Dysplasias of Bone and 
Cartilage
Pachydermoperiostosis
Pachydermoperiostosis, or hypertrophic osteoarthropa-
thy (primary or idiopathic), is an autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by periosteal new bone formation 
that involves the distal extremities. The lesions present 
as clubbing of the digits and hyperhydrosis and thick-
ening of the skin, primarily of the face and forehead. 
The changes usually appear during adolescence, prog-
ress over the next decade, and then become quiescent. 
During the active phase, progressive enlargement of the 
hands and feet produces a pawlike appearance, which 
may be mistaken for acromegaly. Arthralgias, pseudo-
gout, and limited mobility may also occur. The disor-
der must be differentiated from secondary hypertrophic 
osteopathy that develops during the course of serious 
pulmonary disorders. The two conditions can be differ-
entiated by standard radiography of the digits in which 
secondary pachydermoperiostosis has exuberant perios-
teal new bone formation and a smooth and undulating 
surface. In contrast, primary hypertrophic osteopathy 
has an irregular periosteal surface.
There are no diagnostic blood or urine tests. Synovial 
fluid does not have an inflammatory profile. There is no 
specific therapy, although a limited experience with col-
chicine suggests some benefit in controlling the arthralgias.
Osteochondrodysplasias
These include several hundred heritable disorders of con-
nective tissue. These primary abnormalities of cartilage 
manifest as disturbances in cartilage and bone growth. 
Selected growth-plate chondrodysplasias are described 
here. 
Achondrodysplasia
This is a relatively common form of short-limb dwarf-
ism that occurs in 1 in 15,000 to 1 in 40,000 live births. 
The disease is caused by a mutation of the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene that results in 
a gain-of-function state. Most cases are sporadic muta-
tions. However, when the disorder appears in families, 
the inheritance pattern is consistent with an autosomal 
dominant disorder. The primary defect is abnormal 
chondrocyte proliferation at the growth plate that 
causes development of short, but proportionately thick, 
long bones. Other regions of the long bones may be 
relatively unaffected. The disorder is manifest by the 
presence of short limbs (particularly the proximal por-
tions), normal trunk, large head, saddle nose, and an 
exaggerated lumbar lordosis. Severe spinal deformity 
may lead to cord compression. The homozygous disor-
der is more serious than the sporadic form and may cause 
Figure 29-4
Radiograph of a 16-year-old male with fibrous dyspla-
sia of the right proximal femur. Note the multiple cystic 
lesions, including the large lucent lesion in the proximal mid-
shaft with scalloping of the interior surface. The femoral neck 
contains two lucent cystic lesions.
 
CHAPTER 29
Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone 
469
neonatal death. Pseudoachondroplasia clinically resem-
bles achondrodysplasia but has no skull abnormalities.
Enchondromatosis
This is also called dyschondroplasia or Ollier’s disease; it is 
also a disorder of the growth plate in which the primary 
cartilage is not resorbed. Cartilage ossification proceeds 
normally, but it is not resorbed normally, leading to 
cartilage accumulation. The changes are most marked 
at the ends of long bones, where the highest growth 
rates occur. Chondrosarcoma develops infrequently. The 
association of enchondromatosis and cavernous heman-
giomas of the skin and soft tissues is known as Maffucci 
syndrome. Both Ollier’s disease and Maffucci syndrome 
are associated with various malignancies, including gran-
ulosa cell tumor of the ovary and cerebral glioma.
Multiple exostoses
This is also called diaphyseal aclasis or osteochondromatosis; it 
is a genetic disorder that follows an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance. In this condition, areas of growth 
plates become displaced, presumably by growing through 
a defect in the perichondrium. The lesion begins with 
vascular invasion of the growth-plate cartilage, resulting 
in a characteristic radiographic finding of a mass that is 
in direct communication with the marrow cavity of the 
parent bone. The underlying cortex is resorbed. The dis-
ease is caused by inactivating mutations of the EXT1 and 
EXT2 genes, whose products normally regulate process-
ing of chondrocyte cytoskeletal proteins. The products 
of the EXT gene likely function as tumor suppressors, 
with the loss-of-function mutation resulting in abnormal 
proliferation of growth-plate cartilage. Solitary or mul-
tiple lesions are located in the metaphyses of long bones. 
Although usually asymptomatic, the lesions may interfere 
with joint or tendon function or compress peripheral 
nerves. The lesions stop growing when growth ceases 
but may recur during pregnancy. There is a small risk for 
malignant transformation into chondrosarcoma.
Extraskeletal (ECTOPIC) 
Calcification and Ossification
Deposition of calcium phosphate crystals (calcification) or 
formation of true bone (ossification) in nonosseous soft tis-
sue may occur by one of three mechanisms: (1) metastatic 
calcification due to a supranormal calcium × phosphate 
concentration product in extracellular fluid; (2) dystrophic 
calcification due to mineral deposition into metabolically 
impaired or dead tissue despite normal serum levels of cal-
cium and phosphate; and (3) ectopic ossification, or true 
bone formation. Disorders that may cause extraskeletal 
calcification or ossification are listed in Table 29-2.
Metastatic Calcification
Soft tissue calcification may complicate diseases associ-
ated with significant hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, 
or both. In addition, vitamin D and phosphate treatments 
or calcium administration in the presence of mild hyper-
phosphatemia, such as during hemodialysis, may induce 
ectopic calcification. Calcium phosphate precipitation 
may complicate any disorder when the serum calcium ×
phosphate concentration product is >75. The initial 
calcium phosphate deposition is in the form of small, 
poorly organized crystals, which subsequently organize 
into hydroxyapatite crystals. Calcifications that occur in 
hypercalcemic states with normal or low phosphate have 
a predilection for kidney, lungs, and gastric mucosa. 
Hyperphosphatemia with normal or low serum calcium 
may promote soft tissue calcification with predilection 
for the kidney and arteries. The disturbances of calcium 
and phosphate in renal failure and hemodialysis are com-
mon causes of soft tissue (metastatic) calcification.
Tumoral Calcinosis
This is a rare genetic disorder characterized by masses 
of metastatic calcifications in soft tissues around major 
joints, most often shoulders, hips, and ankles. Tumoral 
calcinosis differs from other disorders in that the periartic-
ular masses contain hydroxyapatite crystals or amorphous 
calcium phosphate complexes, while in fibrodysplasia ossi-
ficans progressiva (see later section), true bone is formed in 
soft tissues. About one-third of tumoral calcinosis cases are 
familial, with both autosomal recessive and autosomal 
dominant modes of inheritance reported. The disease is 
also associated with a variably expressed abnormality of 
Table 29-2
Diseases and Conditions Associated With 
Ectopic Calcification and Ossification
Metastatic calcification
  Hypercalcemic states
Primary hyperparathy-
roidism
    Sarcoidosis
    Vitamin D intoxication
    Milk-alkali syndrome
    Renal failure
  Hyperphosphatemia
    Tumoral calcinosis
Secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism
Pseudohypoparathy-
roidism
    Renal failure
    Hemodialysis
Cell lysis following 
chemotherapy
Therapy with vitamin D 
and phosphate
Dystrophic calcification
  Inflammatory disorders
    Scleroderma
    Dermatomyositis
Systemic lupus  
erythematosus
  Trauma induced
Ectopic ossification
  Myositis ossificans
    Postsurgery
    Burns
    Neurologic injury
    Other trauma
Fibrodysplasia ossificans 
progressiva
SECTION V
Disorders of Bone and Calcium Metabolism
470
dentition marked by short, bulbous roots; pulp calcifica-
tion; and radicular dentin deposited in swirls. The pri-
mary defect responsible for the metastatic calcification 
appears to be hyperphosphatemia resulting from the 
increased capacity of the renal tubule to reabsorb fil-
tered phosphate. Spontaneous soft tissue calcification is 
related to the elevated serum phosphate, which, along 
with normal serum calcium, exceeds the concentration 
product of 75.
All of the North American patients reported have 
been African American. The disease usually presents 
in childhood and continues throughout the patient’s 
life. The calcific masses are typically painless and grow 
at variable rates, sometimes becoming large and bulky. 
The masses are often located near major joints but 
remain extracapsular. Joint range of motion is not usu-
ally restricted unless the tumors are very large. Com-
plications include compression of neural structures and 
ulceration of the overlying skin with drainage of chalky 
fluid and risk of secondary infection. Small deposits 
not detected by standard radiographs may be detected 
by 99mTc bone scanning. The most common labora-
tory findings are hyperphosphatemia and elevated serum 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels. Serum calcium, para-
thyroid hormone, and ALP levels are usually normal. 
Renal function is also usually normal. Urine calcium 
and phosphate excretions are low, and calcium and 
phosphate balances are positive.
An acquired form of the disease may occur with other 
causes of hyperphosphatemia, such as secondary hyper-
parathyroidism associated with hemodialysis, hypopara-
thyroidism, pseudohypoparathyroidism, and massive cell 
lysis following chemotherapy for leukemia. Tissue 
trauma from joint movement may contribute to the 
periarticular calcifications. Metastatic calcifications are 
also seen in conditions associated with hypercalcemia, 
such as in sarcoidosis, vitamin D intoxication, milk-alkali 
syndrome, and primary hyperparathyroidism. In these 
conditions, however, mineral deposits are more likely 
to occur in proton-transporting organs such as kidney, 
lungs, and gastric mucosa in which an alkaline milieu is 
generated by the proton pumps.
Treatment	
Tumoral Calcinosis
Therapeutic successes have been achieved with surgical 
removal of subcutaneous calcified masses, which tend not to 
recur if all calcification is removed from the site. Reduc-
tion of serum phosphate by chronic phosphorus restric-
tion may be accomplished using low dietary phosphorus 
intake alone or in combination with oral phosphate bind-
ers. The addition of the phosphaturic agent acetazolamide 
may be useful. Limited experience using the phosphaturic 
action of calcitonin deserves further testing.
Dystrophic Calcification
Posttraumatic calcification may occur with normal serum 
calcium and phosphate levels and normal ion-solubility 
product. The deposited mineral is either in the form of 
amorphous calcium phosphate or hydroxyapatite crys-
tals. Soft tissue calcification complicating connective 
tissue disorders such as scleroderma, dermatomyositis, 
and systemic lupus erythematosus may involve localized 
areas of the skin or deeper subcutaneous tissue and is 
referred to as calcinosis circumscripta. Mineral deposition at 
sites of deeper tissue injury including periarticular sites is 
called calcinosis universalis.
Ectopic Ossification
True extraskeletal bone formation that begins in areas 
of fasciitis following surgery, trauma, burns, or neuro-
logic injury is referred to as myositis ossificans. The bone 
formed is organized as lamellar or trabecular, with nor-
mal osteoblasts and osteoclasts conducting active remod-
eling. Well-developed haversian systems and marrow 
elements may be present. A second cause of ectopic bone 
formation occurs in an inherited disorder, fibrodysplasia 
ossificans progressiva.
Fibrodysplasia Ossificans 
Progressiva
This is also called myositis ossificans progressiva; it is a rare 
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by con-
genital deformities of the hands and feet and episodic 
soft tissue swellings that ossify. Ectopic bone forma-
tion occurs in fascia, tendons, ligaments, and connec-
tive tissue within voluntary muscles. Tender, rubbery 
induration, sometimes precipitated by trauma, develops 
in the soft tissue and gradually calcifies. Eventually, het-
erotopic bone forms at these sites of soft tissue trauma. 
Morbidity results from heterotopic bone interfering 
with normal movement and function of muscle and 
other soft tissues. Mortality is usually related to restric-
tive lung disease caused by an inability of the chest to 
expand. Laboratory tests are unremarkable.
There is no effective medical therapy. Bisphospho-
nates, glucocorticoids, and a low-calcium diet have 
largely been ineffective in halting progression of the 
ossification. Surgical removal of ectopic bone is not rec-
ommended, because the trauma of surgery may precipi-
tate formation of new areas of heterotopic bone. Dental 
complications including frozen jaw may occur follow-
ing injection of local anesthetics. Thus, CT imaging of 
the mandible should be undertaken to detect early sites 
of soft tissue ossification before they are appreciated by 
standard radiography.
 Alexander Kratz  I   Michael A. Pesce  I   Robert C. Basner  
I   Andrew J. Einstein 
471
 APPENDIX  
Table 1 
 Hematology and Coagulation 
analyte
SpeCimen
Si unitS
Conventional unitS
Activated clotting time
WB
70–180 s
70–180 s
Activated protein C resistance (factor V Leiden)
P
Not applicable
Ratio >2.1
ADAMTS13 activity
P
≥0.67
≥67%
ADAMTS13 inhibitor activity
P
Not applicable
≤0.4 U
ADAMTS13 antibody
P
Not applicable
≤18 U
Alpha 2 antiplasmin
P
0.87–1.55
87–155%
Antiphospholipid antibody panel
 PTT-LA (lupus anticoagulant screen)
P
Negative
Negative
 Platelet neutralization procedure
P
Negative
Negative
 Dilute viper venom screen
P
Negative
Negative
 Anticardiolipin antibody
S
  IgG
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 GPL
  IgM
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 MPL
 This Appendix contains tables of reference values for 
laboratory tests, special analytes, and special function 
tests. A variety of factors can inﬂ uence reference values. 
Such variables include the population studied, the dura-
tion and means of specimen transport, laboratory meth-
ods and instrumentation, and even the type of container 
used for the collection of the specimen. The reference 
or “normal” ranges given in this appendix may there-
fore not be appropriate for all laboratories, and these 
values should only be used as general guidelines. When-
ever possible, reference values provided by the labora-
tory performing the testing should be utilized in the 
interpretation of laboratory data. Values supplied in 
this Appendix reﬂ ect typical reference ranges in adults. 
Pediatric reference ranges may vary signiﬁ cantly from 
adult values. 
 In preparing the Appendix, the authors have taken 
into account the fact that the system of international 
units (SI, système international d’unités) is used in most 
countries and in some medical journals. However, 
clinical laboratories may continue to report values in 
“traditional” or conventional units. Therefore, both 
systems are provided in the Appendix. The dual system 
is also used in the text except for (1) those instances in 
which the numbers remain the same but only the ter-
minology is changed (mmol/L for meq/L or IU/L for 
mIU/mL), when only the SI units are given; and (2) 
most pressure measurements (e.g., blood and cerebrospi-
nal ﬂ uid pressures), when the traditional units (mmHg, 
mmH 2 O) are used. In all other instances in the text the 
SI unit is followed by the traditional unit in parentheses.
 REFERENCE VALUES FOR 
LABORATORY TESTS 
(continued)
 LABORATORY VALUES OF CLINICAL 
IMPORTANCE 
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
472
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Antithrombin III
P
  Antigenic
220–390 mg/L
22–39 mg/dL
  Functional
0.7–1.30 U/L
70–130%
Anti-Xa assay (heparin assay)
P
  Unfractionated heparin
0.3–0.7 kIU/L
0.3–0.7 IU/mL
  Low-molecular-weight heparin
0.5–1.0 kIU/L
0.5–1.0 IU/mL
  Danaparoid (Orgaran)
0.5–0.8 kIU/L
0.5–0.8 IU/mL
Autohemolysis test
WB
0.004–0.045
0.4–4.50%
Autohemolysis test with glucose
WB
0.003–0.007
0.3–0.7%
Bleeding time (adult)
<7.1 min
<7.1 min
Bone marrow
Clot retraction
WB
0.50–1.00/2 h
50–100%/2 h
Cryofibrinogen
P
Negative
Negative
D-dimer
P
220–740 ng/mL FEU
220–740 ng/mL FEU
Differential blood count
WB
Relative counts:
  Neutrophils
0.40–0.70
40–70%
  Bands
0.0–0.05
0–5%
  Lymphocytes
0.20–0.50
20–50%
  Monocytes
0.04–0.08
4–8%
  Eosinophils
0.0–0.6
0–6%
  Basophils
0.0–0.02
0–2%
Absolute counts:
  Neutrophils
1.42–6.34 × 109/L
1420–6340/mm3
  Bands
0–0.45 × 109/L
0–450/mm3
  Lymphocytes
0.71–4.53 × 109/L
710–4530/mm3
  Monocytes
0.14–0.72 × 109/L
140–720/mm3
  Eosinophils
0–0.54 × 109/L
0–540/mm3
  Basophils
0–0.18 × 109/L
0–180/mm3
Erythrocyte count
WB
  Adult males
4.30–5.60 × 1012/L
4.30–5.60 × 106/mm3
  Adult females
4.00–5.20 × 1012/L
4.00–5.20 × 106/mm3
Erythrocyte life span
WB
  Normal survival
120 days
120 days
  Chromium labeled, half-life (t1/2)
25–35 days
25–35 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
WB
  Females
0–20 mm/h
0–20 mm/h
  Males
0–15 mm/h
0–15 mm/h
Euglobulin lysis time
P
7200–14400 s
120–240 min
Factor II, prothrombin
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor V
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VIII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor IX
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor X
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XI
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XIII screen
P
Not applicable
Present
Factor inhibitor assay
P
<0.5 Bethesda Units
<0.5 Bethesda Units
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
P
0–1 mg/L
0–1 μg/mL
Fibrinogen
P
2.33–4.96 g/L
233–496 mg/dL
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (erythrocyte)
WB
<2400 s
<40 min
Ham’s test (acid serum)
WB
Negative
Negative
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
473
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Hematocrit
WB
  Adult males
0.388–0.464
38.8–46.4
  Adult females
0.354–0.444
35.4–44.4
Hemoglobin
  Plasma
P
6–50 mg/L
0.6–5.0 mg/dL
  Whole blood:
WB
    Adult males
133–162 g/L
13.3–16.2 g/dL
    Adult females
120–158 g/L
12.0–15.8 g/dL
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
WB
  Hemoglobin A
0.95–0.98
95–98%
  Hemoglobin A2
0.015–0.031
1.5–3.1%
  Hemoglobin F
0–0.02
0–2.0%
  Hemoglobins other than A, A2, or F
Absent
Absent
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibody
P
Negative
Negative
Immature platelet fraction (IPF)
WB
0.011–0.061
1.1–6.1%
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Leukocytes
  Alkaline phosphatase (LAP)
WB
0.2–1.6 μkat/L
13–100 μ/L
  Count (WBC)
WB
3.54–9.06 × 109/L
3.54–9.06 × 103/mm3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
WB
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
WB
323–359 g/L
32.3–35.9 g/dL
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin of reticulocytes (CH)
WB
24–36 pg
24–36 pg
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
WB
79–93.3 fL
79–93.3 μm3
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
WB
9.00–12.95 fL
9.00–12.95
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
WB
  Direct
0.0035–0.0045
0.35–0.45%
  Indirect
0.0030–0.0065
0.30–0.65%
Partial thromboplastin time, activated
P
26.3–39.4 s
26.3–39.4 s
Plasminogen
P
  Antigen
84–140 mg/L
8.4–14.0 mg/dL
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
P
4–43 μg/L
4–43 ng/mL
Platelet aggregation
PRP
Not applicable
>65% aggregation in 
response to adenosine 
diphosphate, epinephrine, 
collagen, ristocetin, and ara-
chidonic acid
Platelet count
WB
165–415 × 109/L
165–415 × 103/mm3
Platelet, mean volume
WB
6.4–11 fL
6.4–11.0 μm3
Prekallikrein assay
P
0.50–1.5
50–150%
Prekallikrein screen
P
No deficiency detected
Protein C
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Protein S
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.65–1.40
65–140%
  Free antigen P
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A
WB
Not applicable
Not present
Prothrombin time
P
12.7–15.4 s
12.7–15.4 s
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
474
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
WB
0.28–0.64 μmol/L of 
red blood cells
16–36 μg/dL of red blood cells
Red cell distribution width
WB
<0.145
<14.5%
Reptilase time
P
16–23.6 s
16–23.6 s
Reticulocyte count
WB
  Adult males
0.008–0.023 red cells
0.8–2.3% red cells
  Adult females
0.008–0.020 red cells
0.8–2.0% red cells
Reticulocyte hemoglobin content
WB
>26 pg/cell
>26 pg/cell
Ristocetin cofactor (functional von Willebrand factor)
P
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
Serotonin release assay
S
<0.2 release
<20% release
Sickle cell test
WB
Negative
Negative
Sucrose hemolysis
WB
<0.1
<10% hemolysis
Thrombin time
P
15.3–18.5 s
15.3–18.5 s
Total eosinophils
WB
150–300 × 106/L
150–300/mm3
Transferrin receptor
S, P
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
Viscosity
  Plasma
P
1.7–2.1
1.7–2.1
  Serum
S
1.4–1.8
1.4–1.8
von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen (factor VIII:R  
antigen)
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
von Willebrand factor multimers
P
Normal distribution
Normal distribution
White blood cells: see “Leukocytes”
Abbreviations: JF, joint fluid; P, plasma; PRP, platelet-rich plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetoacetate
P
49–294 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 mg/dL
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
P
1.3–16.7 pmol/L
6.0–76.0 pg/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)
S
0.12–0.70 μkat/L
7–41 U/L
Albumin
S
40–50 g/L
4.0–5.0 mg/dL
Aldolase
S
26–138 nkat/L
1.5–8.1 U/L
Aldosterone (adult)
  Supine, normal sodium diet
S, P
<443 pmol/L
<16 ng/dL
  Upright, normal
S, P
111–858 pmol/L
4–31 ng/dL
Alpha fetoprotein (adult)
S
0–8.5 μg/L
0–8.5 ng/mL
Alpha1 antitrypsin
S
1.0–2.0 g/L
100–200 mg/dL
Ammonia, as NH3
P
11–35 μmol/L
19–60 μg/dL
Amylase (method dependent)
S
0.34–1.6 μkat/L
20–96 U/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
475
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Androstendione (adult)
S
  Males
0.81–3.1 nmol/L
23–89 ng/dL
  Females
    Premenopausal
0.91–7.5 nmol/L
26–214 ng/dL
    Postmenopausal
0.46–2.9 nmol/L
13–82 ng/dL
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
S
0.15–1.1 μkat/L
9–67 U/L
Anion gap
S
7–16 mmol/L
7–16 mmol/L
Apolipoprotein A-1
  Male
  Female
S
0.94–1.78 g/L
1.01–1.99 g/L
94–178 mg/dL
101–199 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein B
  Male
  Female
S
0.55–1.40 g/L
0.55–1.25 g/L
55–140 mg/dL
55–125 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases
  [HCO3
–]
  PCO2
  pH
  Po2
WB
22–30 mmol/L
4.3–6.0 kPa
7.35–7.45
9.6–13.8 kPa
22–30 meq/L
32–45 mmHg
7.35–7.45
72–104 mmHg
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT)
S
0.20–0.65 μkat/L
12–38 U/L
Autoantibodies
  Anti-centromere antibody IgG
  Anti-double-strand (native) DNA
  Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies
    Qualitative IgG, IgA
    Quantitative IgG antibody
  Anti-histone antibodies
  Anti-Jo-1 antibody
  Anti-mitochondrial antibody
    Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies
    Serine proteinase 3 antibodies
    Myeloperoxidase antibodies
  Antinuclear antibody
  Anti-parietal cell antibody
  Anti-RNP antibody
  Anti-Scl 70 antibody
  Anti-Smith antibody
  Anti–smooth muscle antibody
  Anti-SSA antibody
  Anti-SSB antibody
  Anti-thyroglobulin antibody
  Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody
S
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
<40 kIU/L
<35 kIU/L
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
<20 Units
<1:20
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Negative at 1:40
None detected
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
Negative
<40 IU/mL
<35 IU/mL
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
P
Age and gender specific: 
<100 ng/L
Age and gender specific:  
<100 pg/mL
Bence Jones protein, serum qualitative
S
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, serum quantitative
  Free kappa
  Free lambda
K/L ratio
S
3.3–19.4 mg/L
5.7–26.3 mg/L
0.26–1.65
0.33–1.94 mg/dL
0.57–2.63 mg/dL
0.26–1.65
Beta-2-microglobulin
S
1.1–2.4 mg/L
1.1–2.4 mg/L
Bilirubin
  Total
  Direct
  Indirect
S
5.1–22 μmol/L
1.7–6.8 μmol/L
3.4–15.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.3 mg/dL
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
0.2–0.9 mg/dL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
476
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
C peptide
S
0.27–1.19 nmol/L
0.8–3.5 ng/mL
C1-esterase-inhibitor protein
S
210–390 mg/L
21–39 mg/dL
CA 125
S
<35 kU/L
<35 U/mL
CA 19-9
S
<37 kU/L
<37 U/mL
CA 15-3
S
<33 kU/L
<33 U/mL
CA 27-29
S
0–40 kU/L
0–40 U/mL
Calcitonin
  Male
  Female
S
0–7.5 ng/L
0–5.1 ng/L
0–7.5 pg/mL
0–5.1 pg/mL
Calcium
S
2.2–2.6 mmol/L
8.7–10.2 mg/dL
Calcium, ionized
WB
1.12–1.32 mmol/L
4.5–5.3 mg/dL
Carbon dioxide content (TCO2)
P (sea level)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
  Loss of consciousness and death
WB
0.0–0.015
0.04–0.09
>0.50
0–1.5%
4–9%
>50%
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
S
0.0–3.0 μg/L
0.0–5.0 μg/L
0.0–3.0 ng/mL
0.0–5.0 ng/mL
Ceruloplasmin
S
250–630 mg/L
25–63 mg/dL
Chloride
S
102–109 mmol/L
102–109 meq/L
Cholesterol: see Table 5
Cholinesterase
S
5–12 kU/L
5–12 U/mL
Chromogranin A
S
0–50 μg/L
0–50 ng/mL
Complement
  C3
  C4
  Complement total
S
0.83–1.77 g/L
0.16–0.47 g/L
60–144 CAE units
83–177 mg/dL
16–47 mg/dL
60–144 CAE units
Cortisol
  Fasting, 8 a.m.–12 noon
  12 noon–8 p.m.
  8 p.m.–8 a.m.
S
138–690 nmol/L
138–414 nmol/L
0–276 nmol/L
5–25 μg/dL
5–15 μg/dL
0–10 μg/dL
C-reactive protein
S
<10 mg/L
<10 mg/L
C-reactive protein, high sensitivity
S
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (total)
  Females
  Males
S
0.66–4.0 μkat/L
0.87–5.0 μkat/L
39–238 U/L
51–294 U/L
Creatine kinase-MB
  Mass
  Fraction of total activity (by electrophoresis)
S
0.0–5.5 μg/L
0–0.04
0.0–5.5 ng/mL
0–4.0%
Creatinine
  Female
  Male
S
44–80 μmol/L
53–106 μmol/L
0.5–0.9 mg/dL
0.6–1.2 mg/dL
Cryoglobulins
S
Not applicable
None detected
Cystatin C
S
0.5–1.0 mg/L
0.5–1.0 mg/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
477
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
6.2–43.4 nmol/L
4.5–34.0 nmol/L
180–1250 ng/dL
130–980 ng/dL
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate
  Male (adult)
  Female (adult, premenopausal)
  Female (adult, postmenopausal)
S
100–6190 μg/L
120–5350 μg/L
300–2600 μg/L
10–619 μg/dL
12–535 μg/dL
30–260 μg/dL
11-Deoxycortisol (adult) (compound S)
S
0.34–4.56 nmol/L
12–158 ng/dL
Dihydrotestosterone
  Male
  Female
S, P
1.03–2.92 nmol/L
0.14–0.76 nmol/L
30–85 ng/dL
4–22 ng/dL
Dopamine
P
0–130 pmol/L
0–20 pg/mL
Epinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
<273 pmol/L
<328 pmol/L
<491 pmol/L
<50 pg/mL
<60 pg/mL
<90 pg/mL
Erythropoietin
S
4–27 U/L
4–27 U/L
Estradiol
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Midcycle peak
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
74–532 pmol/L
411–1626 pmol/L
74–885 pmol/L
217 pmol/L
74 pmol/L
<20–145 pg/mL
112–443 pg/mL
<20–241 pg/mL
<59 pg/mL
<20 pg/mL
Estrone
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
<555 pmol/L
<740 pmol/L
11–118 pmol/L
33–133 pmol/L
<150 pg/mL
<200 pg/mL
3–32 pg/mL
9–36 pg/mL
Fatty acids, free (nonesterified)
P
0.1–0.6 mmol/L
2.8–16.8 mg/dL
Ferritin
  Female
  Male
S
10–150 μg/L
29–248 μg/L
10–150 ng/mL
29–248 ng/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
  Female
    Menstruating
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
3.0–20.0 IU/L
9.0–26.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
18.0–153.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
3.0–20.0 mIU/mL
9.0–26.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
18.0–153.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Fructosamine
S
<285 umol/L
<285 umol/L
Gamma glutamyltransferase
S
0.15–0.99 μkat/L
9–58 U/L
Gastrin
S
<100 ng/L
<100 pg/mL
Glucagon
P
40–130 ng/L
40–130 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
478
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Glucose
Glucose (fasting)
  Normal
  Increased risk for diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
P
3.6–5.3 mmol/L
4.2–5.6 mmol/L
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
Fasting >7.0 mmol/L
A 2-hour level of >11.1 
mmol/L during an oral 
glucose tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥11.1 mmol/L in patients 
with symptoms of hyper-
glycemia
65–95 mg/dL
75–100 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
Fasting >126 mg/dL
A 2-hour level of ≥200 mg/dL 
during an oral glucose  
tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥200 mg/dL in patients with 
symptoms of hyperglycemia
Growth hormone
S
0–5 μg/L
0–5 ng/mL
Hemoglobin Alc
  Pre-diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
0.04–0.06 HgB fraction
0.057–0.064 HgB fraction
A hemoglobin A1c level 
of ≥0.065 Hgb fraction 
as suggested by the  
American Diabetes 
Association
4.0–5.6%
5.7–6.4%
A hemoglobin A1c level of 
≥6.5% as suggested by 
the American Diabetes  
Association
Hemoglobin A1c with estimated average glucose 
(eAg)
WB
eAg mmoL/L = 1.59 × 
HbA1c − 2.59
eAg (mg/dL) = 28.7 × HbA1c 
− 46.7
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) (see Table 5)
Homocysteine
P
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
  Nonpregnant female
  1–2 weeks postconception
  2–3 weeks postconception
  3–4 weeks postconception
  4–5 weeks postconception
  5–10 weeks postconception
  10–14 weeks postconception
  Second trimester
  Third trimester
S
<5 IU/L
9–130 IU/L
75–2600 IU/L
850–20,800 IU/L
4000–100,200 IU/L
11,500–289,000 IU/L
18,300–137,000 IU/L
1400–53,000 IU/L
940–60,000 IU/L
<5 mIU/mL
9–130 mIU/mL
75–2600 mIU/mL
850–20,800 mIU/mL
4000–100,200 mIU/mL
11,500–289,000 mIU/mL
18,300–137,000 mIU/mL
1400–53,000 mIU/mL
940–60,000 mIU/mL
b-Hydroxybutyrate
P
60–170 μmol/L
0.6–1.8 mg/dL
17-Hydroxyprogesterone (adult)
  Male
  Female
    Follicular phase
    Luteal phase
S
<4.17 nmol/L
0.45–2.1 nmol/L
1.05–8.7 nmol/L
<139 ng/dL
15–70 ng/dL
35–290 ng/dL
Immunofixation
S
Not applicable
No bands detected
Immunoglobulin, quantitation (adult)
  IgA
  IgD
  IgE
  IgG
    IgG1
    IgG2
    IgG3
    IgG4
  IgM
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
0.70–3.50 g/L
0–140 mg/L
1–87 KIU/L
7.0–17.0 g/L
2.7–17.4 g/L
0.3–6.3 g/L
0.13–3.2 g/L
0.11–6.2 g/L
0.50–3.0 g/L
70–350 mg/dL
0–14 mg/dL
1–87 IU/mL
700–1700 mg/dL
270–1740 mg/dL
30–630 mg/dL
13–320 mg/dL
11–620 mg/dL
50–300 mg/dL
Insulin
S, P
14.35–143.5 pmol/L
2–20 μU/mL
Iron
S
7–25 μmol/L
41–141 μg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
479
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Iron-binding capacity
S
45–73 μmol/L
251–406 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity saturation
S
0.16–0.35
16–35%
Ischemia modified albumin
S
<85 KU/L
<85 U/mL
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Ketone (acetone)
S
Negative
Negative
Lactate
P, arterial
P, venous
0.5–1.6 mmol/L
0.5–2.2 mmol/L
4.5–14.4 mg/dL
4.5–19.8 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase
S
2.0–3.8 μkat/L
115–221 U/L
Lipase
S
0.51–0.73 μkat/L
3–43 U/L
Lipids: see Table 5
Lipoprotein (a)
S
0–300 mg/L
0–30 mg/dL
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (see Table 5)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
  Female
    Menstruating
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
Male
S, P
2.0–15.0 U/L
22.0–105.0 U/L
0.6–19.0 U/L
16.0–64.0 U/L
2.0–12.0 U/L
2.0–15.0 mIU/mL
22.0–105.0 mIU/mL
0.6–19.0 mIU/mL
16.0–64.0 mIU/mL
2.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Magnesium
S
0.62–0.95 mmol/L
1.5–2.3 mg/dL
Metanephrine
P
<0.5 nmol/L
<100 pg/mL
Methemoglobin
WB
0.0–0.01
0–1%
Myoglobin
  Male
  Female
S
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
Norepinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
650–2423 pmol/L
709–4019 pmol/L
739–4137 pmol/L
110–410 pg/mL
120–680 pg/mL
125–700 pg/mL
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
S
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
NT-Pro BNP
S, P
<125 ng/L up to 75 years
<450 ng/L >75 years
<125 pg/mL up to 75 years
<450 pg/mL >75 years
5′ Nucleotidase
S
0.00–0.19 μkat/L
0–11 U/L
Osmolality
P
275–295 mosmol/kg 
serum water
275–295 mosmol/kg serum 
water
Osteocalcin
S
11–50 μg/L
11–50 ng/mL
Oxygen content
  Arterial (sea level)
  Venous (sea level)
WB
17–21
10–16
17–21 vol%
10–16 vol%
Oxygen saturation (sea level)
  Arterial
  Venous, arm
WB
Fraction:
0.94–1.0
0.60–0.85
Percent:
94–100%
60–85%
Parathyroid hormone (intact)
S
8–51 ng/L
8–51 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
480
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Phosphatase, alkaline
S
0.56–1.63 μkat/L
33–96 U/L
Phosphorus, inorganic
S
0.81–1.4 mmol/L
2.5–4.3 mg/dL
Potassium
S
3.5–5.0 mmol/L
3.5–5.0 meq/L
Prealbumin
S
170–340 mg/L
17–34 mg/dL
Procalcitonin
S
<0.1 μg/L
<0.1 ng/mL
Progesterone
  Female: Follicular
  Midluteal
  Male
S, P
<3.18 nmol/L
9.54–63.6 nmol/L
<3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
3–20 ng/mL
<1.0 ng/mL
Prolactin
  Male
  Female
S
53–360 mg/L
40–530 mg/L
2.5–17 ng/mL
1.9–25 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
S
0.0–4.0 μg/L
0.0–4.0 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen, free
S
With total PSA between 
4 and 10 μg/L and when 
the free PSA is:
>0.25 decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<0.10 increased risk of 
prostate cancer
With total PSA between 4 and 
10 ng/mL and when the free
PSA is:
>25% decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<10% increased risk of 
prostate cancer
Protein fractions:
  Albumin
  Globulin
  Alpha1
  Alpha2
  Beta
  Gamma
S
35–55 g/L
20–35 g/L
2–4 g/L
5–9 g/L
6–11 g/L
7–17 g/L
3.5–5.5 g/dL (50–60%)
2.0–3.5 g/dL (40–50%)
0.2–0.4 g/dL (4.2–7.2%)
0.5–0.9 g/dL (6.8–12%)
0.6–1.1 g/dL (9.3–15%)
0.7–1.7 g/dL (13–23%)
Protein, total
S
67–86 g/L
6.7–8.6 g/dL
Pyruvate
P
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
Rheumatoid factor
S
<15 kIU/L
<15 IU/mL
Serotonin
WB
0.28–1.14 umol/L
50–200 ng/mL
Serum protein electrophoresis
S
Not applicable
Normal pattern
Sex hormone–binding globulin (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
Sodium
S
136–146 mmol/L
136–146 meq/L
Somatomedin-C (IGF-1) (adult)
  16 years
  17 years
  18 years
  19 years
  20 years
  21–25 years
  26–30 years
  31–35 years
  36–40 years
  41–45 years
  46–50 years
  51–55 years
  56–60 years
  61–65 years
S
226–903 μg/L
193–731 μg/L
163–584 μg/L
141–483 μg/L
127–424 μg/L
116–358 μg/L
117–329 μg/L
115–307 μg/L
119–204 μg/L
101–267 μg/L
94–252 μg/L
87–238 μg/L
81–225 μg/L
75–212 μg/L
226–903 ng/mL
193–731 ng/mL
163–584 ng/mL
141–483 ng/mL
127–424 ng/mL
116–358 ng/mL
117–329 ng/mL
115–307 ng/mL
119–204 ng/mL
101–267 ng/mL
94–252 ng/mL
87–238 ng/mL
81–225 ng/mL
75–212 ng/mL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
481
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
  66–70 years
  71–75 years
  76–80 years
  81–85 years
69–200 μg/L
64–188 μg/L
59–177 μg/L
55–166 μg/L
69–200 ng/mL
64–188 ng/mL
59–177 ng/mL
55–166 ng/mL
Somatostatin
P
<25 ng/L
<25 pg/mL
Testosterone, free
  Female, adult
  Male, adult
S
10.4–65.9 pmol/L
312–1041 pmol/L
3–19 pg/mL
90–300 pg/mL
Testosterone, total,
  Female
  Male
S
0.21–2.98 nmol/L
9.36–37.10 nmol/L
6–86 ng/dL
270–1070 ng/dL
Thyroglobulin
S
1.3–31.8 μg/L
1.3–31.8 ng/mL
Thyroid-binding globulin
S
13–30 mg/L
1.3–3.0 mg/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
S
0.34–4.25 mIU/L
0.34–4.25 μIU/mL
Thyroxine, free (fT4)
S
9.0–16 pmol/L
0.7–1.24 ng/dL
Thyroxine, total (T4)
S
70–151 nmol/L
5.4–11.7 μg/dL
Thyroxine index (free)
S
6.7–10.9
6.7–10.9
Transferrin
S
2.0–4.0 g/L
200–400 mg/dL
Triglycerides (see Table 5)
S
0.34–2.26 mmol/L
30–200 mg/dL
Triiodothyronine, free (fT3)
S
3.7–6.5 pmol/L
2.4–4.2 pg/mL
Triiodothyronine, total (T3)
S
1.2–2.1 nmol/L
77–135 ng/dL
Troponin I (method dependent)
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.04 μg/L
0–0.04 ng/mL
Troponin T
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.01 μg/L
0–0.01 ng/mL
Urea nitrogen
S
2.5–7.1 mmol/L
7–20 mg/dL
Uric acid
  Females
  Males
S
0.15–0.33 mmol/L
0.18–0.41 mmol/L
2.5–5.6 mg/dL
3.1–7.0 mg/dL
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
P
0–60 ng/L
0–60 pg/mL
Zinc protoporphyrin
WB
0–400 μg/L
0–40 μg/dL
Zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP)-to-heme ratio
WB
0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme 0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme
Abbreviations: P, plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
482
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetaminophen
66–199 μmol/L
10–30 μg/mL
>1320 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Amikacin
  Peak
  Trough
34–51 μmol/L
0–17 μmol/L
20–30 μg/mL
0–10 μg/mL
>60 μmol/L
>17 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
>10 μg/mL
Amitriptyline/nortriptyline  
(total drug)
430–900 nmol/L
120–250 ng/mL
>1800 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Amphetamine
150–220 nmol/L
20–30 ng/mL
>1500 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Bromide
  Mild toxicity
  Severe toxicity
  Lethal
9.4–18.7 mmol/L
75–150 mg/dL
>18.8 mmol/L
6.4–18.8 
mmol/L
>18.8 mmol/L
>37.5 mmol/L
>150 mg/dL
51–150 mg/dL
>150 mg/dL
>300 mg/dL
Caffeine
25.8–103 μmol/L
5–20 μg/mL
>206 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Carbamazepine
17–42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
>85 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Chloramphenicol
  Peak
  Trough
31–62 μmol/L
15–31 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
5–10 μg/mL
>77 μmol/L
>46 μmol/L
>25 μg/mL
>15 μg/mL
Chlordiazepoxide
1.7–10 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 μg/mL
>17 μmol/L
>5.0 μg/mL
Clonazepam
32–240 nmol/L
10–75 ng/mL
>320 nmol/L
>100 ng/mL
Clozapine
0.6–2.1 μmol/L
200–700 ng/mL
>3.7 μmol/L
>1200 ng/mL
Cocaine
>3.3 μmol/L
>1.0 μg/mL
Codeine
43–110 nmol/mL
13–33 ng/mL
>3700 nmol/mL
>1100 ng/mL (lethal)
Cyclosporine
  Renal transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
  Cardiac transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
208–312 nmol/L
166–250 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
125–208 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
250–375 ng/mL
200–300 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
150–250 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
>312 nmol/L
>250 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>208 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>375 ng/mL
>300 ng/mL
>150 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>250 ng/mL
150 ng/mL
  Lung transplant 
    0–6 months
  Liver transplant
    Initiation
    Maintenance
250–374 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
83–166 nmol/L
300–450 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
100–200 ng/mL
>374 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>166 nmol/L
>450 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>200 ng/mL
Desipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Diazepam (and metabolite)
  Diazepam
  Nordiazepam
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
0.4–6.6 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
0.1–1.8 μg/mL
>7.0 μmol/L
>9.2 μmol/L
>2.0 μg/mL
>2.5 μg/mL
Digoxin
0.64–2.6 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
>5.0 nmol/L
>3.9 ng/mL
Disopyramide
5.3–14.7 μmol/L
2–5 μg/mL
>20.6 μmol/L
>7 μg/mL
Doxepin and nordoxepin
    Doxepin
    Nordoxepin
0.36–0.98 μmol/L
0.38–1.04 μmol/L
101–274 ng/mL
106–291 ng/mL
>1.8 μmol/L
>1.9 μmol/L
>503 ng/mL
>531 ng/mL
Ethanol
  Behavioral changes
  Legal limit
  Critical with acute exposure
>4.3 mmol/L
≥17 mmol/L
>54 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
≥80 mg/dL
>250 mg/dL
Ethylene glycol
  Toxic
  Lethal
>2 mmol/L
>20 mmol/L
>12 mg/dL
>120 mg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
483
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Ethosuximide
280–700 μmol/L
40–100 μg/mL
>700 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Everolimus
3.13–8.35 nmol/L
3–8 ng/mL
>12.5 nmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Flecainide
0.5–2.4 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>3.6 μmol/L
>1.5 μg/mL
Gentamicin
  Peak
  Trough
10–21 μmol/mL
0–4.2 μmol/mL
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>25 μmol/mL
>4.2 μmol/mL
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Heroin (diacetyl morphine)
>700 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL (as morphine)
Ibuprofen
49–243 μmol/L
10–50 μg/mL
>970 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Imipramine (and metabolite)
  Desimipramine
  Total imipramine + 
  desimipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
563–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
150–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
>500 ng/mL
Lamotrigine
11.7–54.7 μmol/L
3–14 μg/mL
>58.7 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Lidocaine
5.1–21.3 μmol/L
1.2–5.0 μg/mL
>38.4 μmol/L
>9.0 μg/mL
Lithium
0.5–1.3 mmol/L
0.5–1.3 meq/L
>2 mmol/L
>2 meq/L
Methadone
1.0–3.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.0 μg/mL
>6.5 μmol/L
>2 μg/mL
Methamphetamine
0.07–0.34 μmol/L
0.01–0.05 μg/mL
>3.35 μmol/L
>0.5μg/mL
Methanol
>6 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
Methotrexate
  Low-dose
  High-dose (24 h)
  High-dose (48 h)
  High-dose (72 h)
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
Morphine
232–286 μmol/L
65–80 ng/mL
>720 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Mycophenolic acid
3.1–10.9 μmol/L
1.0–3.5 ng/mL
>37 μmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Nitroprusside (as thiocyanate)
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Nortriptyline
190–569 nmol/L
50–150 ng/mL
>1900 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>258 μmol/L
>60 μg/mL
Phenytoin
40–79 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>158 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Phenytoin, free
  % Free
4.0–7.9 μg/mL
0.08–0.14
1–2 μg/mL
8–14%
>13.9 μg/mL
>3.5 μg/mL
Primidone and metabolite
  Primidone
  Phenobarbital
23–55 μmol/L
65–172 μmol/L
5–12 μg/mL
15–40 μg/mL
>69 μmol/L
>215 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
>50 μg/mL
Procainamide
  Procainamide
  NAPA (N-acetylprocainamide)
17–42 μmol/L
22–72 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
6–20 μg/mL
>43 μmol/L
>126 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
>35 μg/mL
Quinidine
6.2–15.4 μmol/L
2.0–5.0 μg/mL
>19 μmol/L
>6 μg/mL
Salicylates
145–2100 μmol/L
2–29 mg/dL
>2900 μmol/L
>40 mg/dL
Sirolimus (trough level) 
  Kidney transplant
4.4–15.4 nmol/L
4–14 ng/mL
>16 nmol/L
>15 ng/mL
Tacrolimus (FK506) (trough)
  Kidney and liver
    Initiation
    Maintenance
  Heart
    Initiation
    Maintenance
12–19 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
19–25 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
15–20 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
>20 ng/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
484
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Theophylline
56–111 μg/mL
10–20 μg/mL
>168 μg/mL
>30 μg/mL
Thiocyanate
  After nitroprusside infusion
  Nonsmoker
  Smoker
103–499 μmol/L
17–69 μmol/L
52–206 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
1–4 μg/mL
3–12 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Tobramycin
  Peak
  Trough
11–22 μg/L
0–4.3 μg/L
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>26 μg/L
>4.3 μg/L
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Valproic acid
346–693 μmol/L
50–100 μg/mL
>693 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Vancomycin
  Peak
  Trough
14–28 μmol/L
3.5–10.4 μmol/L
20–40 μg/mL
5–15 μg/mL
>55 μmol/L
>14 μmol/L
>80 μg/mL
>20 μg/mL
Table 4 
Vitamins and Selected Trace Minerals
Reference Range
Specimen
Analyte
SI Units
Conventional Units
Aluminum
S
<0.2 μmol/L
<5.41 μg/L
Arsenic
WB
0.03–0.31 μmol/L
2–23 μg/L
Cadmium
WB
<44.5 nmol/L
<5.0 μg/L
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone)
P
433–1532 μg/L
433–1532 μg/L
β-Carotene
S
0.07–1.43 μmol/L
4–77 μg/dL
Copper
S
11–22 μmol/L
70–140 μg/dL
Folic acid
RC
340–1020 nmol/L cells
150–450 ng/mL cells
Folic acid
S
12.2–40.8 nmol/L
5.4–18.0 ng/mL
Lead (adult)
S
<0.5 μmol/L
<10 μg/dL
Mercury
WB
3.0–294 nmol/L
0.6–59 μg/L
Selenium
S
0.8–2.0 umol/L
63–160 μg/L
Vitamin A
S
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
20–100 μg/dL
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
S
0–75 nmol/L
0–2 μg/dL
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
S
106–638 nmol/L
4–24 μg/dL
Vitamin B6
P
20–121 nmol/L
5–30 ng/mL
Vitamin B12
S
206–735 pmol/L
279–996 pg/mL
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
S
23–57 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D3,1,25-dihydroxy, total
S, P
36–180 pmol/L
15–75 pg/mL
Vitamin D3, 25-hydroxy, total
P
75–250 nmol/L
30–100 ng/mL
Vitamin E
S
12–42 μmol/L
5–18 μg/mL
Vitamin K
S
0.29–2.64 nmol/L
0.13–1.19 ng/mL
Zinc
S
11.5–18.4 μmol/L
75–120 μg/dL
Abbreviations: P, plasma; RC, red cells; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
485
Table 5 
Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL 
Cholesterol
LDL Cholesterol
  <70 mg/dL
Therapeutic option for very high 
risk patients
  <100 mg/dL
Optimal
  100–129 mg/dL
Near optimal/above optimal
  130–159 mg/dL
Borderline high
  160–189 mg/dL
High
  ≥190 mg/dL
Very high
Total Cholesterol
  <200 mg/dL
Desirable
  200–239 mg/dL
Borderline high
  ≥240 mg/dL
High
HDL Cholesterol
  <40 mg/dL
Low
  ≥60 mg/dL
High
Abbreviations: LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density 
lipoprotein.
Source: Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) expert panel on detec-
tion, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults 
(adult treatment panel III). JAMA 2001; 285:2486–97. Implications 
of Recent Clinical Trials for the National Cholesterol Education 
Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. SM Grundy et al for 
the Coordinating Committee of the National Cholesterol Education 
Program: Circulation 110:227, 2004.
Acknowledgment
The contributions of Drs. Daniel J. Fink, Patrick M. Sluss, 
James L. Januzzi, and Kent B. Lewandrowski to this chapter in 
previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 
are gratefully acknowledged. We also express our gratitude to 
Drs. Amudha Palanisamy and Scott Fink for careful review of 
tables and helpful suggestions.
This page intentionally left blank 
Charles Wiener    n    Cynthia D. Brown    n    Anna R. Hemnes
487
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to each 
question.
	 1.	All of the following represent examples of hypothalamic-
pituitary negative feedback EXCEPT:
A.	Cortisol on the CRH-ACTH axis
B.	Gonadal steroids on the GnRH-LH/FSH axis
C.	IGF-1 on the growth hormone–releasing hormone 
(GHRH)-GH axis
D.	Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis
E.	Thyroid hormones on TRH-TSH axis
	 2.	Endocrine dysfunction can be separated into glan-
dular hyperfunction or hypofunction, or hormone 
resistance. Which of the following diseases is due to 
hormone resistance?
A.	Graves’ disease
B.	Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
C.	Pheochromocytoma
D.	Sheehan’s syndrome
E.	Type 2 diabetes mellitus
	 3.	Secretion 
of 
gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone 
(GnRH) normally stimulates the release of luteiniz-
ing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH), which promote the production and release 
of testosterone and estrogen. Which mechanism best 
explains how long-acting gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agonists (e.g., leuprolide) decrease testos-
terone levels in the management of prostate cancer?
A.	GnRH agonists also promote the production of sex 
hormone–binding globulin, which decreases the 
availability of testosterone.
B.	Negative feedback loop between GnRH and LH/FSH.
C.	Sensitivity of LH and FSH to pulse frequency of 
GnRH.
D.	Translocation of the cytoplasmic nuclear recep-
tor into the nucleus with constitutive activation of 
GnRH.
	 4.	The mineralocorticoid receptor in the renal tubule 
is responsible for the sodium retention and potas-
sium wasting that is seen in mineralocorticoid excess 
states such as aldosterone-secreting tumors. How-
ever, states of glucocorticoid excess (e.g., Cushing’s 
syndrome) can also present with sodium retention 
and hypokalemia. What characteristic of the miner-
alocorticoid-glucocorticoid pathways explains this 
finding?
A.	Higher affinity of the mineralocorticoid receptor for 
glucocorticoids
B.	Oversaturation of the glucocorticoid degradation 
pathway in states of glucocorticoid excess
C.	Similar, but distinct, DNA-binding sites producing 
the same metabolic effect
D.	Upregulation of the mineralocorticoid-binding pro-
tein in states of glucocorticoid excess
	 5.	All of the following hormones are produced by the 
anterior pituitary EXCEPT:
A.	Adrenocorticotropic hormone
B.	Growth hormone
C.	Oxytocin
D.	Prolactin
E.	Thyroid-stimulating hormone
	 6.	A 22-year-old woman who is otherwise healthy 
undergoes an uneventful vaginal delivery of a full-term 
infant. One day postpartum she complains of visual 
changes and severe headache. Two hours after these 
complaints, she is found unresponsive and profoundly 
hypotensive. She is intubated and placed on mechani-
cal ventilation. Her blood pressure is 68/28 mmHg, 
heart rate is regular at 148 beats/min, and oxygen 
saturation is 95% on FiO2 0.40. Physical exam is unre-
markable. Her laboratories are notable for glucose of 
49 mg/dL and normal hematocrit and white blood 
cell count. Which of the following is most likely to 
reverse her hypotension?
REVIEW AND  
SELF-ASSESSMENT
a
QUESTIONS
aQuestions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Review and Self-Assessment
488
	 6.	(Continued )
A.	Activated drotrecogin alfa
B.	Hydrocortisone
C.	Piperacillin/tazobactam
D.	T4
E.	Transfusion of packed red blood cells
	 7.	A 45-year-old man reports to his primary care phy-
sician that his wife has noted coarsening of his facial 
features over several years. In addition, he reports 
low libido and decreased energy. Physical examina-
tion shows frontal bossing and enlarged hands. An 
MRI confirms that he has a pituitary mass. Which 
of the following screening tests should be ordered to 
diagnose the cause of the mass?
A.	24-hour urinary free cortisol
B.	ACTH assay
C.	Growth hormone level
D.	Serum IGF-1 level
E.	Serum prolactin level
	 8.	All of the following are potential causes of hyperp-
rolactinemia EXCEPT:
A.	Cirrhosis
B.	Hirsutism
C.	Nipple stimulation
D.	Opiate abuse
E.	Rathke’s cyst
	 9.	A 28-year-old woman presents to her primary care 
physician’s office with 1 year of amenorrhea. She 
reports mild galactorrhea and headaches. Although 
she is sexually active, a urine pregnancy test is neg-
ative. Serum prolactin level is elevated and she is 
subsequently diagnosed with a microscopic pro-
lactinoma. Which of the following represents the 
primary goal of bromocriptine therapy for her 
condition?
A.	Control of hyperprolactinemia
B.	Reduction in tumor size
C.	Resolution of galactorrhea
D.	Restoration of menses and fertility
E.	All of the above
	10.	A 58-year-old man undergoes severe head trauma 
and develops pituitary insufficiency. After recov-
ery, he is placed on thyroid hormone, testosterone, 
glucocorticoids, and vasopressin. On a routine visit 
he questions his primary care physician regarding 
potential growth hormone deficiency. All of the 
following are potential signs or symptoms of growth 
hormone deficiency EXCEPT:
	10.	(Continued )
A.	Abnormal lipid profile
B.	Atherosclerosis
C.	Increased bone mineral density
D.	Increased waist:hip ratio
E.	Left ventricular dysfunction
	11.	A 75-year-old man presents with development of 
abdominal obesity, proximal myopathy, and skin 
hyperpigmentation. His laboratory evaluation shows 
a hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis. Cushing’s syn-
drome is suspected. Which of the following state-
ments regarding this syndrome is true?
A.	Basal ACTH level is likely to be low.
B.	Circulating corticotropin-releasing hormone is likely 
to be elevated.
C.	Pituitary MRI will visualize all ACTH-secreting tumors.
D.	Referral for urgent performance of inferior petrosal 
venous sampling is indicated.
E.	Serum potassium level below 3.3 mmol/L is sugges-
tive of ectopic ACTH production.
	12.	A 23-year-old college student is followed in the 
student health center for medical management of 
panhypopituitarism after resection of craniopharyn-
gioma as a child. She reports moderate compliance 
with her medications but feels generally well. A 
TSH is checked and is below the limits of detec-
tion of the assay. Which of the following is the next 
most appropriate action?
A.	Decrease levothyroxine dose to half of current dose.
B.	Do nothing.
C.	Order free T4 level.
D.	Order MRI of her brain.
E.	Order thyroid uptake scan.
	13.	A 23-year-old woman presents to the clinic com-
plaining of months of weight gain, fatigue, amen-
orrhea, and worsening acne. She cannot precisely 
identify when her symptoms began, but she reports 
that without a change in her diet she has noted a 
12.3-kg weight gain over the past 6 months. She has 
been amenorrheic for several months. On exami-
nation she is noted to have truncal obesity with 
bilateral purplish striae across both flanks. Cushing’s 
syndrome is suspected. Which of the following tests 
should be used to make the diagnosis?
A.	24-hour urine free cortisol
B.	Basal adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
C.	Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) level at 8 a.m.
D.	Inferior petrosal venous sampling
E.	Overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test
Review and Self-Assessment
489
	14.	A patient visited a local emergency room 1 week 
ago with a headache. She received a head MRI, 
which did not reveal a cause for her symptoms, but 
the final report states that the patient was discharged 
from the emergency department with instructions to 
follow up with her primary care physician as soon as 
possible. Her headache has resolved, and the patient 
has no complaints; however, she comes to your 
office 1 day later very concerned about this unex-
pected MRI finding. What should be the next step 
in her management?
A.	Diagnose her with subclinical panhypopituitarism, 
and initiate low-dose hormone replacement.
B.	Reassure her and follow laboratory results closely.
C.	Reassure her and repeat MRI in 6 months.
D.	This may represent early endocrine malignancy—
whole-body positron emission tomography/CT is 
indicated.
E.	This MRI finding likely represents the presence of a 
benign adenoma—refer to neurosurgery for resection.
	15.	A 31-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital 
after an appendectomy for acute appendicitis. The 
surgery is uncomplicated, but postoperatively she is 
noted to make copious urine (6 L/d) and complain 
of severe thirst. On the third postoperative day, her 
BUN and creatinine are noted to be elevated. On 
further questioning, she reports a long history of 
extreme thirst, urinary frequency, and occasional 
episodes of enuresis that she was too embarrassed to 
bring to the attention of a health care practitioner. 
Aside from oral contraceptives, she takes no medi-
cations and reports no past medical history. Which 
of the following is the most appropriate first step to 
confirm her diagnosis?
A.	24-hour urine volume and osmolarity measurement
B.	Fasting morning plasma osmolarity
C.	Fluid deprivation test
D.	MRI of the brain
E.	Plasma ADH level
	16.	A 63-year-old man is admitted to the hospital to 
begin induction chemotherapy for acute myelo-
monocytic leukemia (AML-M4). He is afebrile and 
has been feeling well other than fatigue and bruis-
ing. His physical examination is notable for normal 
vital signs and no focal findings other than three 
1- × 2-cm subcutaneous nodules that had previ-
ously been demonstrated to be cutaneous spread of 
AML-M4. On the night of admission, the patient’s 
wife calls for assistance because her husband’s men-
tal status is altered. He is confused and somnolent. 
	16.	(Continued )
	
	You notice that there are four urinals filled with 
urine by his bed. His wife reports that for the 
last 6 hours he has been urinating frequently and 
has been drinking water constantly. However, 
over the last hour, despite urinating frequently, 
he has not been able to drink water due to som-
nolence. Laboratory studies are notable for an 
absolute neutrophil count of 400, a platelet count 
of 35,000, and a serum sodium of 155. Which 
of the following therapies should be administered 
immediately?
A.	All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
B.	Desmopressin
C.	Hydrochlorothiazide
D.	Hydrocortisone
E.	Lithium
	17.	Which of the following is the most common cause 
of preventable mental deficiency in the world?
A.	Beriberi disease
B.	Cretinism
C.	Folate deficiency
D.	Scurvy
E.	Vitamin A deficiency
	18.	Which of the following proteins is the primary 
source of bound T4 in the plasma?
A.	Albumin
B.	Gamma globulins
C.	Transthyretin
D.	Thyroid peroxidase
E.	Thyroxine-binding globulin
	19.	All of the following are associated with increased lev-
els of total T4 in the plasma with a normal free T4 
EXCEPT:
A.	Cirrhosis
B.	Pregnancy
C.	Sick-euthyroid syndrome
D.	Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia
E.	Familial excess thyroid-binding globulin
	20.	Which of the following is the most common cause 
of hypothyroidism worldwide?
A.	Graves’ disease
B.	Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
C.	Iatrogenic hypothyroidism
D.	Iodine deficiency
E.	Radiation exposure
Review and Self-Assessment
490
	21.	A 75-year-old woman is diagnosed with hypo-
thyroidism. She has long-standing coronary artery 
disease and is wondering about the potential con-
sequences for her cardiovascular system. Which of 
the following statements is true regarding the inter-
action of hypothyroidism and the cardiovascular 
system?
A.	Myocardial contractility is increased with hypo-
thyroidism.
B.	A reduced stroke volume is found with hypothy-
roidism.
C.	Pericardial effusions are a rare manifestation of 
hypothyroidism.
D.	Reduced peripheral resistance is found in hypothy-
roidism and may be accompanied by hypotension.
E.	Blood flow is diverted toward the skin in hypo-
thyroidism.
	22.	A 38-year-old mother of three presents to her pri-
mary care office with complaints of fatigue. She 
feels that her energy level has been low for the past 
3 months. She was previously healthy and was tak-
ing no medications. She does report that she has 
gained about 5 kg and has severe constipation, for 
which she has been taking a number of laxatives. A 
TSH is elevated at 25 mU/L. Free T4 is low. She 
is wondering why she has hypothyroidism. Which 
of the following tests is most likely to diagnose the 
etiology?
A.	Antithyroglobulin antibody
B.	Antithyroid peroxidase antibody
C.	Radioiodine uptake scan
D.	Serum thyroglobulin level
E.	Thyroid ultrasound
	23.	A 54-year-old woman with long-standing hypo-
thyroidism is seen in her primary care physician’s 
office for a routine evaluation. She reports feeling 
fatigued and somewhat constipated. Since her last 
visit, her other medical conditions, which include 
hypercholesterolemia and systemic hypertension, 
are stable. She was diagnosed with uterine fibroids 
and started on iron recently. Her other medications 
include levothyroxine, atorvastatin, and hydrochlo-
rothiazide. A TSH is checked and it is elevated to 
15 mU/L. Which of the following is the most likely 
reason for her elevated TSH?
A.	Celiac disease
B.	Colon cancer
C.	Medication noncompliance
D.	Poor absorption of levothyroxine due to ferrous sulfate
E.	TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma
	24.	An 87-year-old woman is admitted to the inten-
sive care unit with depressed level of consciousness, 
hypothermia, sinus bradycardia, hypotension, and 
hypoglycemia. She was previously healthy with the 
exception of hypothyroidism and systemic hyper-
tension. Her family recently checked in on her and 
found that she was not taking any of her medications 
because of financial difficulties. There is no evi-
dence of infection on exam, urine microscopy, or 
chest radiograph. Her serum chemistries are notable 
for mild hyponatremia and a glucose of 48. TSH is 
above 100 mU/L. All of the following statements 
regarding this condition are true EXCEPT:
A.	External warming is a critical feature of therapy in 
patients with a temperature above 34°C (93.2°F).
B.	Hypotonic intravenous solutions should be avoided.
C.	IV levothyroxine should be administered with IV 
glucocorticoids.
D.	Sedation should be avoided if possible.
E.	This condition occurs almost exclusively in the 
elderly and often is precipitated by an unrelated 
medical illness.
	25.	A 29-year-old woman is evaluated for anxiety, pal-
pitations, and diarrhea and is found to have Graves’ 
disease. Before she begins therapy for her thyroid 
condition, she has an episode of acute chest pain and 
presents to the emergency department. Although a 
CT angiogram is ordered, the radiologist calls to 
notify the treating physician that this is potentially 
dangerous. Which of the following best explains the 
radiologist’s recommendation?
A.	Iodinated contrast exposure in patients with Graves’ 
disease may exacerbate hyperthyroidism.
B.	Pulmonary embolism is exceedingly rare in Graves’ 
disease.
C.	Radiation exposure in patients with hyper thyroidism is 
associated with increased risk of subsequent malignancy.
D.	Tachycardia with Graves’ disease limits the image 
quality of CT angiography and will not allow accu-
rate assessment of pulmonary embolism.
E.	The radiologist was mistaken; CT angiography is safe 
in Graves’ disease.
	26.	What percentage of patients with hyperthyroidism 
and atrial fibrillation convert to sinus rhythm after 
treatment of thyroid state alone?
A.	20%
B.	30%
C.	50%
D.	70%
E.	90%
Review and Self-Assessment
491
	27.	Which of the following statements best describes 
Graves’ ophthalmopathy?
A.	Although a cosmetic problem, Graves’ ophthalmopathy 
is rarely associated with major ocular complications.
B.	Diplopia may occur from periorbital muscle swelling.
C.	It is never found without concomitant hyperthyroidism.
D.	The most serious complication is corneal abrasion.
E.	Unilateral disease is not found.
	28.	Which of the following is the most important mech-
anism of action of propylthiouracil in the treatment 
of Graves’ disease?
A.	Impaired production of transthyretin
B.	Inhibition of production of thyroid-stimulating  
immunoglobulins
C.	Inhibition of the function of thyroid peroxidase
D.	Reduced peripheral conversion of T4 to T3
E.	Reversal of iodine organification
	29.	A 44-year-old male is involved in a motor vehicle 
collision. He sustains multiple injuries to the face, 
chest, and pelvis. He is unresponsive in the field and 
is intubated for airway protection. An intravenous 
line is placed. The patient is admitted to the inten-
sive care unit (ICU) with multiple orthopedic inju-
ries. He is stabilized medically and on hospital day 
2 undergoes successful open reduction and internal 
fixation of the right femur and right humerus. After 
his return to the ICU, you review his laboratory 
values. TSH is 0.3 mU/L, and the total T4 level is 
normal. T3 is 0.6 μg/dL. What is the most appropri-
ate next management step?
A.	Initiation of levothyroxine
B.	Initiation of prednisone
C.	Observation
D.	Radioiodine uptake scan
E.	Thyroid ultrasound
	30.	A 29-year-old woman presents to your clinic com-
plaining of difficulty swallowing, sore throat, and 
tender swelling in her neck. She has also noted fevers 
intermittently over the past week. Several weeks prior 
to her current symptoms she experienced symptoms 
of an upper respiratory tract infection. She has no 
past medical history. On physical examination, she is 
noted to have a small goiter that is painful to the touch. 
Her oropharynx is clear. Laboratory studies are sent 
and reveal a white blood cell count of 14,100 cells/
μL with a normal differential, erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate (ESR) of 53 mm/h, and a thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) of 21 μIU/mL. Thyroid antibodies 
are negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
	30.	(Continued )
A.	Autoimmune hypothyroidism
B.	Cat-scratch fever
C.	Graves’ disease
D.	Ludwig’s angina
E.	Subacute thyroiditis
	31.	What is the most appropriate treatment for the 
patient described in question 30?
A.	Iodine ablation of the thyroid
B.	Large doses of aspirin
C.	Local radiation therapy
D.	No treatment necessary
E.	Propylthiouracil
	32.	Which of the following is consistent with a diagno-
sis of subacute thyroiditis?
A.	A 38-year-old female with a 2-week history of a 
painful thyroid, elevated T4, elevated T3, low TSH, 
and an elevated radioactive iodine uptake scan
B.	A 42-year-old male with a history of a painful thy-
roid 4 months ago, fatigue, malaise, low free T4, low 
T3, and elevated TSH
C.	A 31-year-old female with a painless enlarged thy-
roid, low TSH, elevated T4, elevated free T4, and an 
elevated radioiodine uptake scan
D.	A 50-year-old male with a painful thyroid, slightly 
elevated T4, normal TSH, and an ultrasound show-
ing a mass
	33.	A healthy 53-year-old man comes to your office for 
an annual physical examination. He has no complaints 
and has no significant medical history. He is taking an 
over-the-counter multivitamin and no other medi-
cines. On physical examination he is noted to have 
a nontender thyroid nodule. His thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) level is checked and is found to be 
low. What is the next step in his evaluation?
A.	Close follow-up and measure TSH in 6 months
B.	Fine-needle aspiration
C.	Low-dose thyroid replacement
D.	Positron emission tomography followed by surgery
E.	Radionuclide thyroid scan
	34.	A patient has neurosurgery for a pituitary tumor 
that requires resection of the gland. Which of the 
following functions of the adrenal gland will be pre-
served in this patient immediately postoperatively?
A.	Morning peak of plasma cortisol level
B.	Release of cortisol in response to stress
C.	Sodium retention in response to hypovolemia
D.	None of the above
Review and Self-Assessment
492
	35.	Which of the following is the most common cause 
of Cushing’s syndrome?
A.	ACTH-producing pituitary adenoma
B.	Adrenocortical adenoma
C.	Adrenocortical carcinoma
D.	Ectopic ACTH secretion
E.	McCune-Albright syndrome
	36.	All of the following are features of Conn’s syndrome 
EXCEPT:
A.	Alkalosis
B.	Hyperkalemia
C.	Muscle cramps
D.	Normal serum sodium
E.	Severe systemic hypertension
	37.	All of the following statements regarding asymptom-
atic adrenal masses (incidentalomas) are true EXCEPT:
A.	All patients with incidentalomas should be screened 
for pheochromocytoma.
B.	Fine-needle aspiration may distinguish between 
benign and malignant primary adrenal tumors.
C.	In patients with a history of malignancy, the likelihood 
that the mass is a metastasis is approximately 50%.
D.	The majority of adrenal incidentalomas are non-
secretory.
E.	The vast majority of adrenal incidentalomas are 
benign.
	38.	A 43-year-old man with episodic, severe hyperten-
sion is referred for evaluation of possible secondary 
causes of hypertension. He reports feeling well gen-
erally, except for episodes of anxiety, palpitations, 
and tachycardia with elevation in his blood pres-
sure during these episodes. Exercise often brings on 
these events. The patient also has mild depression 
and is presently taking sertraline, labetalol, amlo-
dipine, and lisinopril to control his blood pressure. 
Urine 24-hour total metanephrines are ordered and 
show an elevation of 1.5 times the upper limit of 
normal. Which of the following is the next most 
appropriate step?
A.	Hold labetalol for 1 week and repeat testing.
B.	Hold sertraline for 1 week and repeat testing.
C.	Immediately refer for surgical evaluation.
D.	Measure 24-hour urine vanillylmandelic acid level.
E.	Send for MRI of the abdomen.
	39.	A 45-year-old man is diagnosed with pheochromo-
cytoma after presentation with confusion, marked 
hypertension to 250/140 mmHg, tachycardia, 
	39.	(Continued )
	
	he­adaches, and flushing. His fractionated plasma 
metanephrines show a normetanephrine level of 
560 pg/mL and a metanephrine level of 198 pg/mL 
(normal values: normetanephrine: 18–111 pg/mL; 
metanephrine: 12–60 pg/mL). CT scanning of the 
abdomen with IV contrast demonstrates a 3-cm 
mass in the right adrenal gland. A brain MRI with 
gadolinium shows edema of the white matter near 
the parietooccipital junction consistent with revers-
ible posterior leukoencephalopathy. You are asked 
to consult regarding management. Which of the 
following statements is true regarding management 
of pheochromocytoma is this individual?
A.	Beta-blockade is absolutely contraindicated for 
tachycardia even after adequate alpha-blockade has 
been attained.
B.	Immediate surgical removal of the mass is indicated, 
because the patient presented with hypertensive crisis 
with encephalopathy.
C.	Salt and fluid intake should be restricted to prevent 
further exacerbation of the patient’s hypertension.
D.	Treatment with phenoxybenzamine should be started 
at a high dose (20–30 mg three times daily) to rapidly 
control blood pressure, and surgery can be under-
taken within 24–48 hours.
E.	Treatment with IV phentolamine is indicated for 
treatment of the hypertensive crisis. Phenoxybenzamine 
should be started at a low dose and titrated to the 
maximum tolerated dose over 2–3 weeks. Surgery 
should not be planned until the blood pressure is 
consistently below 160/100 mmHg.
	40.	Which of the following ethnic populations in 
the United States has the highest risk of diabetes 
mellitus?
A.	Asian American
B.	Hispanic
C.	Non-Hispanic black
D.	Non-Hispanic white
	41.	Which of the following defines normal glucose 
tolerance?
A.	Fasting plasma glucose below 100 mg/dL
B.	Fasting plasma glucose below 126 mg/dL following 
an oral glucose challenge
C.	Hemoglobin A1C below 5.6% and fasting plasma 
glucose below 140 mg/dL
D.	Hemoglobin A1C below 6.0%
E.	Fasting plasma glucose below 100 mg/dL, plasma 
glucose below 140 mg/dL following an oral glucose 
challenge, and hemoglobin A1C below 5.6%
Review and Self-Assessment
493
	42.	A 37-year-old woman with obesity presents to the 
clinic for a routine health evaluation. She reports 
that over the last year she has had two yeast infec-
tions treated with over-the-counter remedies and 
frequently feels thirsty. She does report waking up 
at night to urinate. Which of the following studies 
is the most appropriate first test in evaluating the 
patient for diabetes mellitus?
A.	Hemoglobin A1C
B.	Oral glucose tolerance test
C.	Plasma C-peptide level
D.	Plasma insulin level
E.	Random plasma glucose level
	43.	All of the following are risk factors for type 2 diabe-
tes mellitus EXCEPT:
A.	BMI above 25 kg/m2
B.	Delivery of a baby more than 3.5 kg
C.	HDL level below 35 mg/dL
D.	Hemoglobin A1C 5.7–6.4%
E.	Systemic hypertension
	44.	A 27-year-old woman with mild obesity is seen in 
her primary care office for increased thirst and poly-
uria. Diabetes mellitus is suspected, and a random 
plasma glucose of 211 mg/dL confirms this diagnosis. 
Which of the following tests will strongly indicate 
that she has type 1 diabetes mellitus?
A.	Anti–GAD-65 antibody.
B.	Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ-2 poly-
morphism testing.
C.	Plasma insulin level.
D.	Testing for HLA-DR3.
E.	There is no laboratory test indicating type 1 diabetes 
mellitus.
	45.	In patients with impaired fasting glucose, all of 
the following interventions have been proven to 
decrease progression to type 2 diabetes mellitus 
EXCEPT:
A.	Diet modification
B.	Exercise
C.	Glyburide
D.	Metformin
	46.	A patient is evaluated in the emergency department 
for complications of diabetes mellitus with an epi-
sode of life stressors. All of the following laboratory 
tests are consistent with the diagnosis of diabetic 
ketoacidosis EXCEPT:
	46.	(Continued )
A.	Arterial pH 7.1
B.	Glucose 550 mg/dL
C.	Markedly positive plasma ketones
D.	Normal serum potassium
E.	Plasma osmolality 380 mosm/mL
	47.	All of the following are consistent with nonprolif-
erative diabetic retinopathy EXCEPT:
A.	Blot hemorrhages
B.	Cotton-wool spots
C.	Neovascularization
D.	Occurs in first or second decade of diabetes mellitus
E.	Retinal vascular microaneurysms
	48.	A 68-year-old man with poorly controlled type 2 
diabetes mellitus is admitted to the hospital with an 
ulcer on the lateral surface of his right lower extrem-
ity that has been painful and appears purulent. He 
has had 3 days of fever. All of the following inter-
ventions are recommended to improve wound heal-
ing in a patient with a diabetic wound EXCEPT:
A.	Appropriate use of antibiotics
B.	Debridement
C.	Hyperbaric oxygen
D.	Off-loading
E.	Revascularization
	49.	Pick the correct combination of onset of action and 
duration of action for the following insulins:
A.	Aspart: 1 hour, 6 hours
B.	Detemir: 2 hours, 12 hours
C.	Lispro: 0.5 hour, 2 hours
D.	NPH: 2 hours, 14 hours
E.	Regular: 0.25 hour, 6 hours
	50.	A 54-year-old woman is diagnosed with type 2 dia-
betes mellitus after a routine follow-up for impaired 
fasting glucose showed that her hemoglobin A1C 
is now 7.6%. She has attempted to lose weight and 
to exercise with no improvement in her hemoglo-
bin A1C, and drug therapy is now recommended. 
She has mild systemic hypertension that is well con-
trolled and no other medical conditions. Which 
of the following is the most appropriate first-line 
therapy?
A.	Acarbose
B.	Exenatide
C.	Glyburide
D.	Metformin
E.	Sitagliptin
Review and Self-Assessment
494
	51.	The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT) provided definitive proof that reduction 
in chronic hyperglycemia:
A.	Improves microvascular complications in type 1 
diabetes mellitus
B.	Improves macrovascular complications in type 1 
diabetes mellitus
C.	Improves microvascular complications in type 2 
diabetes mellitus
D.	Improves macrovascular complications in type 2 
diabetes mellitus
E.	Improves both microvascular and macrovascular 
complications in type 2 diabetes mellitus
	52.	A patient is seen in the clinic for follow-up of type 
2 diabetes mellitus. Her hemoglobin A1C has been 
poorly controlled at 9.4% recently. The patient can 
be counseled to expect all the following improve-
ments with improved glycemic control EXCEPT:
A.	Decreased microalbuminuria
B.	Decreased risk of nephropathy
C.	Decreased risk of neuropathy
D.	Decreased risk of peripheral vascular disease
E.	Decreased risk of retinopathy
	53.	A 21-year-old female with a history of type 1 diabe-
tes mellitus is brought to the emergency department 
with nausea, vomiting, lethargy, and dehydration. 
Her mother notes that she stopped taking insulin 
1 day before presentation. She is lethargic, has dry 
mucous membranes, and is obtunded. Blood pres-
sure is 80/40 mmHg, and heart rate is 112 beats/
min. Heart sounds are normal. Lungs are clear. The 
abdomen is soft, and there is no organomegaly. She 
is responsive and oriented × 3 but diffusely weak. 
Serum sodium is 126 meq/L, potassium is 4.3 meq/L, 
magnesium is 1.2 meq/L, blood urea nitrogen is 
76 mg/dL, creatinine is 2.2 mg/dL, bicarbonate is 
10 meq/L, and chloride is 88 meq/L. Serum glucose 
is 720 mg/dL. All of the following are appropriate 
management steps EXCEPT:
A.	3% sodium solution
B.	Arterial blood gas
C.	Intravenous insulin
D.	Intravenous potassium
E.	Intravenous fluids
	54.	Which of the following studies is the most sensitive 
for detecting diabetic nephropathy?
A.	Creatinine clearance
B.	Glucose tolerance test
	54.	(Continued )
C.	Serum creatinine level
D.	Ultrasonography
E.	Urine albumin
	55.	Alteration in which of the following substance lev-
els is the first defense against hypoglycemia?
A.	Cortisol
B.	Epinephrine
C.	Glucagon
D.	Insulin
E.	Insulin-like growth factor
	56.	A 25-year-old health care worker is seen for evalu-
ation of recurrent hypoglycemia. She has had sev-
eral episodes at work over the past year in which 
she feels shaky, anxious, and sweaty, and when she 
measures her finger stick glucose, it is 40–55 mg/dL. 
She drinks orange juice and feels better. These epi-
sodes have not happened outside the work envi-
ronment. Aside from oral contraceptives, she takes 
no medications and is otherwise healthy. Which of 
the following tests is most likely to demonstrate the 
underlying cause of her hypoglycemia?
A.	Measurement of insulin-like growth factor 1
B.	Measurement of fasting insulin and glucose levels
C.	Measurement of fasting insulin, glucose, and C-peptide 
levels
D.	Measurement of insulin, glucose, and C-peptide 
levels during a symptomatic episode
E.	Measurement of plasma cortisol
	57.	All of the following statements regarding hypogly-
cemia in diabetes mellitus are true EXCEPT:
A.	Individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus experience 
less hypoglycemia than those with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus.
B.	From 2 to 4% of deaths in type 1 diabetes mellitus 
are directly attributable to hypoglycemia.
C.	Recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia predispose to the 
development of autonomic failure with defective glucose 
counterregulation and hypoglycemia unawareness.
D.	The average person with type 1 diabetes mellitus has 
two episodes of symptomatic hypoglycemia weekly.
E.	Thiazolidinediones and metformin cause hypoglyce-
mia more frequently than sulfonylureas.
	58.	A 58-year-old man is seen in his primary care physi-
cian’s office for evaluation of bilateral breast enlarge-
ment. This has been present for several months 
and is accompanied by mild pain in both breasts. 
He reports no other symptoms. His other medical 
Review and Self-Assessment
495
	58.	(Continued )
	
	conditions include coronary artery disease with a 
history of congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, 
obesity, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. His current med-
ications include lisinopril, spironolactone, furosemide, 
insulin, and digoxin. He denies illicit drug use and has 
fathered three children. Examination confirms bilat-
eral breast enlargement with palpable glandular tissue 
that measures 2 cm bilaterally. Which of the following 
statements regarding his gynecomastia is true?
A.	He should be referred for mammography to rule out 
breast cancer.
B.	His gynecomastia is most likely due to obesity with 
adipose tissue present in the breast.
C.	Serum testosterone, LH, and FSH should be mea-
sured to evaluate for androgen insensitivity.
D.	Spironolactone should be discontinued and exam 
followed for regression.
E.	Liver function testing should be performed to screen 
for cirrhosis.
	59.	All the following drugs may interfere with testicular 
function EXCEPT:
A.	Cyclophosphamide
B.	Ketoconazole
C.	Metoprolol
D.	Prednisone
E.	Spironolactone
	60.	Clinical signs and findings of the presence of ovula-
tion include all of the following EXCEPT:
A.	Detection of urinary LH surge
B.	Estrogen peak during secretory phase of menstrual cycle
C.	Increase in basal body temperature more than 0.5°F 
in the second half of the menstrual cycle
D.	Presence of mittelschmerz
E.	Progesterone level above 5 ng/mL 7 days before 
expected menses
	61.	A couple has been married for 5 years and has 
attempted to conceive a child for the last 12 months. 
Despite regular intercourse they have not achieved 
pregnancy. They are both 32 years of age and have 
no medical problems. Neither partner is taking 
medications. Which of the following is the most 
likely cause of their infertility?
A.	Endometriosis
B.	Male causes
C.	Ovulatory dysfunction
D.	Tubal defect
E.	Unexplained
	62.	A couple seeks advice regarding infertility. The female 
partner is 35 years old. She has never been pregnant 
and took oral contraceptive pills from age 20 until age 
34. It is now 16 months since she discontinued her oral 
contraceptives. She is having menstrual cycles approx-
imately once every 35 days, but occasionally will go 
as long as 60 days between cycles. Most months, she 
develops breast tenderness about 2–3 weeks after the 
start of her menstrual cycle. When she was in col-
lege, she was treated for Neisseria gonorrhoeae that was 
diagnosed when she presented to the student health 
center with a fever and pelvic pain. She otherwise has 
no medical history. She works about 60 hours weekly 
as a corporate attorney and exercises daily. She drinks 
coffee daily and alcohol on social occasions only. Her 
body mass index (BMI) is 19.8 kg/m2. Her husband, 
who is 39 years old, accompanies her to the evalua-
tion. He also has never had children. He was married 
previously from the ages of 24–28. He and his prior 
wife attempted to conceive for about 15 months, 
but were unsuccessful. At that time, he was smoking 
marijuana on a daily basis and attributed their lack of 
success to his drug use. He has now been completely 
free of drugs for 9 years. He suffers from hypertension 
and is treated with lisinopril 10 mg daily. He is not 
obese (BMI, 23.7 kg/m2). They request evaluation 
for their infertility and help with conception. Which 
of the following statements is true in regard to their 
infertility and likelihood of success in conception?
A.	Determination of ovulation is not necessary in the 
female partner as most of her cycles occur regularly, 
and she develops breast tenderness midcycle, which 
is indicative of ovulation.
B.	Lisinopril should be discontinued immediately because 
of the risk of birth defects associated with its use.
C.	The female partner should be assessed for tubal 
patency by a hysterosalpingogram. If significant scar-
ring is found, in vitro fertilization should be strongly 
considered to decrease the risk of ectopic pregnancy.
D.	The prolonged use of oral contraceptives for more 
than 10 years has increased the risk of anovulation 
and infertility.
E.	The use of marijuana by the male partner is directly 
toxic to sperm motility, and this is the likely cause of 
their infertility.
	63.	Which of the following forms of contraception 
have theoretical efficacy of more than 90%?
A.	Condoms
B.	Intrauterine devices
C.	Oral contraceptives
D.	Spermicides
E.	All of the above
Review and Self-Assessment
496
	64.	A 30-year-old male, the father of three children, has 
had progressive breast enlargement during the last 
6 months. He does not use any drugs. Laboratory 
evaluation reveals that both LH and testosterone 
are low. Further evaluation of this patient should 
include which of the following?
A.	24-hour urine collection for the measurement of  
17 ketosteroids
B.	Blood sampling for serum glutamic-oxaloacetic 
transaminase (SGOT) and serum alkaline phosphatase 
and bilirubin levels
C.	Breast biopsy
D.	Karyotype analysis to exclude Klinefelter’s syndrome
E.	Measurement of estradiol and human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) levels
	65.	The Women’s Health Initiative study investigated 
hormonal therapy in postmenopausal women. The 
study was stopped early due to increased risk of which 
of the following diseases in the estrogen-only arm?
A.	Deep venous thrombosis
B.	Endometrial cancer
C.	Myocardial infarction
D.	Osteoporosis
E.	Stroke
	66.	A 37-year-old man is evaluated for infertility. He 
and his wife have been attempting to conceive a 
child for the past 2 years without success. He ini-
tially saw an infertility specialist, but was referred 
to endocrinology after sperm analysis showed no 
sperm. He is otherwise healthy and only takes a 
multivitamin. On physical examination his vital 
signs are normal. He is tall and has small testes, 
gynecomastia, and minimal facial and axillary hair. 
Chromosomal analysis confirms Klinefelter’s syn-
drome. Which of the following statements is true?
A.	Androgen supplementation is of little use in this 
condition.
B.	He is not at increased risk for breast tumors.
C.	Increased plasma concentrations of estrogen are present.
D.	Most cases are diagnosed prepuberty.
E.	Plasma concentrations of FSH and LH are decreased 
in this condition.
	67.	A 17-year-old woman is evaluated in your office 
for primary amenorrhea. She feels as if she has not 
entered puberty in that she has never had a men-
strual period and has sparse axillary and pubic hair 
growth. On examination, she is noted to be 150 cm 
tall. She has a low hairline and slight webbing of 
her neck. Her follicle-stimulating hormone level is 
	67.	(Continued )
	
	75 mIU/mL, luteinizing hormone is 20 mIU/mL, 
and estradiol level is 2 pg/mL. You suspect Turner’s 
syndrome. All of the following tests are indicated in 
this individual EXCEPT:
A.	Buccal smear for nuclear heterochromatin (Barr body)
B.	Echocardiogram
C.	Karyotype analysis
D.	Renal ultrasound
E.	Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
	68.	A 35-year-old man is seen in the emergency depart-
ment for evaluation of epigastric pain, diarrhea, and 
reflux. He reports frequent similar episodes and 
has undergone multiple endoscopies. In each case 
he was told that he has a duodenal ulcer. He has 
become quite frustrated because he was told that 
ulcers are usually due to a bacteria that can be 
treated, but he does not have Helicobacter pylori pres-
ent on any of his ulcer biopsies. His current medi-
cations are high-dose omeprazole and oxycodone/
acetaminophen. He is admitted to the hospital for 
pain control. Which of the following is the most 
appropriate next step in his diagnostic evaluation?
A.	CT scan of the abdomen.
B.	Discontinue omeprazole for 1 week and measure 
plasma gastrin level.
C.	Gastric pH measurement.
D.	Plasma gastrin level.
E.	Screen for parathyroid hyperplasia.
	69.	A 48-year-old female is undergoing evaluation for 
flushing and diarrhea. Physical examination is nor-
mal except for nodular hepatomegaly. A CT scan of 
the abdomen demonstrates multiple nodules in both 
lobes of the liver consistent with metastases in the 
liver and a 2-cm mass in the ileum. The 24-hour 
urinary 5-HIAA excretion is markedly elevated. All 
the following treatments are appropriate EXCEPT:
A.	Diphenhydramine
B.	Interferon α
C.	Octreotide
D.	Ondansetron
E.	Phenoxybenzamine
	70.	While undergoing a physical examination during 
medical student clinical skills, the patient in ques-
tion 69 develops severe flushing, wheezing, nausea, 
and lightheadedness. Vital signs are notable for a 
blood pressure of 70/30 mmHg and a heart rate of 
135 beats/min. Which of the following is the most 
appropriate therapy?
Review and Self-Assessment
497
	70.	(Continued )
A.	Albuterol
B.	Atropine
C.	Epinephrine
D.	Hydrocortisone
E.	Octreotide
	71.	A 49-year-old male is brought to the hospital by 
his family because of confusion and dehydration. 
The family reports that for the last 3 weeks he has 
had persistent copious, watery diarrhea that has not 
abated with the use of over-the-counter medica-
tions. The diarrhea has been unrelated to food 
intake and has persisted during fasting. The stool 
does not appear fatty and is not malodorous. The 
patient works as an attorney, is a vegetarian, and has 
not traveled recently. No one in the household has 
had similar symptoms. Before the onset of diarrhea, 
he had mild anorexia and a 5-lb weight loss. Since 
the diarrhea began, he has lost at least 5 kg. The 
physical examination is notable for blood pressure 
of 100/70 mmHg, heart rate of 110 beats/min, and 
temperature of 36.8°C (98.2°F). Other than poor 
skin turgor, confusion, and diffuse muscle weakness, 
the physical examination is unremarkable. Labora-
tory studies are notable for a normal complete blood 
count and the following chemistry results:
Na+
146 meq/L
K+
3.0 meq/L
Cl–
96 meq/L
HCO3
–
36 meq/L
BUN
32 mg/dL
Creatinine
1.2 mg/dL 
	
	A 24-hour stool collection yields 3 L of tea-colored 
stool. Stool sodium is 50 meq/L, potassium is 
25 meq/L, and stool osmolality is 170 mosmol/L. 
Which of the following diagnostic tests is most 
likely to yield the correct diagnosis?
A.	Serum cortisol
B.	Serum TSH
C.	Serum VIP
D.	Urinary 5-HIAA
E.	Urinary metanephrine
	72.	An 18-year-old girl is evaluated at her primary care 
physician’s office for a routine physical. She is pres-
ently healthy. Her family history is notable for a 
father and two aunts with MEN 1, and the patient 
has undergone genetic testing and carries the MEN 
1 gene. Which of the following is the first and most 
	72.	(Continued )
	
	common presentation for individuals with this 
genetic mutation?
A.	Peptic ulcer disease 
B.	Hypercalcemia
C.	Hypoglycemia
D.	Amenorrhea
E.	Uncontrolled systemic hypertension
	73.	A 35-year-old male is referred to your clinic for eval-
uation of hypercalcemia noted during a health insur-
ance medical screening. He has noted some fatigue, 
malaise, and a 4-lb weight loss over the last 2 months. 
He also has noted constipation and “heartburn.” 
He is occasionally nauseated after large meals and 
has water brash and a sour taste in his mouth. The 
patient denies vomiting, dysphagia, or odynophagia. 
He also notes decreased libido and a depressed mood. 
Vital signs are unremarkable. Physical examination is 
notable for a clear oropharynx, no evidence of a thy-
roid mass, and no lymphadenopathy. Jugular venous 
pressure is normal. Heart sounds are regular with no 
murmurs or gallops. The chest is clear. The abdomen 
is soft with some mild epigastric tenderness. There is 
no rebound or organomegaly. Stool is guaiac posi-
tive. Neurologic examination is nonfocal. Laboratory 
values are notable for a normal complete blood count. 
Calcium is 11.2 mg/dL, phosphate is 2.1 mg/dL, 
and magnesium is 1.8 meq/dL. Albumin is 3.7 g/dL, 
and total protein is 7.0 g/dL. TSH is 3 μIU/mL, pro-
lactin is 250 μg/L, testosterone is 620 ng/dL, and 
serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) is normal. 
Serum intact parathyroid hormone level is 135 pg/dL. 
In light of the patient’s abdominal discomfort and 
heme-positive stool, you perform an abdominal 
computed tomography (CT) scan that shows a lesion 
measuring 2 × 2 cm in the head of the pancreas. 
What is the diagnosis?
A.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1
B.	MEN type 2a
C.	MEN type 2b
D.	Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome
E.	Von-Hippel Lindau (VHL) syndrome
	74.	A 55-year-old male is admitted to the intensive 
care unit with fever and cough. He was well until 
1 week before admission, when he noted progres-
sive shortness of breath, cough, and productive 
sputum. On the day of admission the patient’s wife 
noted him to be lethargic. Emergency response 
found the patient unresponsive. He was intubated in 
the field and brought to the emergency department. 
Review and Self-Assessment
498
	74.	(Continued )
	
	His medications include insulin. The past medical his-
tory is notable for alcohol abuse and diabetes melli-
tus. Temperature is 38.9°C (102°F), blood pressure 
is 76/40 mmHg, and oxygen saturation is 86% on 
room air. On examination, the patient is intubated 
on mechanical ventilation. Jugular venous pressure is 
normal. There are decreased breath sounds at the right 
lung base with egophony. Heart sounds are normal. 
The abdomen is soft. There is no peripheral edema. 
Chest radiography shows a right lower lobe infiltrate 
with a moderate pleural effusion. An electrocardio-
gram is normal. Sputum Gram stain shows gram- 
positive diplococci. White blood cell count is 23 × 
103/μL, with 70% polymorphonuclear cells and 6% 
bands. Blood urea nitrogen is 80 mg/dL, and creati-
nine is 3.1 mg/dL. Plasma glucose is 425 mg/dL. He is 
started on broad-spectrum antibiotics, intravenous flu-
ids, omeprazole, and an insulin drip. A nasogastric tube 
is inserted, and tube feedings are started. On hospital 
day 2, his creatinine improves to 1.6 mg/dL. How-
ever, plasma phosphate is 1.0 mg/dL (0.3 mmol/L) 
and calcium is 8.8 mg/dL. All of the following are 
causes of hypophosphatemia in this patient EXCEPT:
A.	Alcoholism
B.	Insulin
C.	Malnutrition
D.	Renal failure
E.	Sepsis
	75.	In the patient in question 74, what is the most appro-
priate approach to correcting the hypophosphatemia?
A.	Administer IV calcium gluconate 1 g followed by infu-
sion of IV phosphate at a rate of 8 mmol/h for 6 hours.
B.	Administer IV phosphate alone at a rate of 2 mmol/h 
for 6 hours.
C.	Administer IV phosphate alone at a rate of 8 mmol/h 
for 6 hours.
D.	Continue close observation as redistribution of phos-
phate is expected to normalize over the course of the 
next 24–48 hours.
E.	Initiate oral phosphate replacement at a dose of 
1500 mg/d.
	76.	A 35-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital at 
37 weeks’ gestation following a seizure associated with 
an elevated blood pressure to 190/96 mmHg. She is 
treated acutely with magnesium sulfate intravenously 
for eclampsia and is starting on a continuous magne-
sium sulfate infusion at 1 g/h, which will be contin-
ued for 24 hours following her seizure. An emergency 
caesarian section is planned. Serum magnesium levels 
will be measured every 6 hours. What magnesium 
	76.	(Continued )
	
	level would be worrisome for the development of 
central nervous system depression, respiratory muscle 
paralysis, and cardiac arrhythmias?
A.	0.5 mmol/L
B.	1.0 mmol/L
C.	2.5 mmol/L
D.	3.0 mmol/L
E.	5.0 mmol/L
	77.	You are caring for a 72-year-old man who has been 
living in a nursing home for the past 3 years. He 
has severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
requires continuous oxygen at 3 L/min. He also pre-
viously had a stroke, which has left him with a right 
hemiparesis. His current medications include aspirin, 
losartan, hydrochlorothiazide, fluticasone/salmeterol, 
tiotropium, and albuterol. His body mass index is 
18.5 kg/m2. You are concerned that he may have vita-
min D deficiency. Which of the following is the best 
test to determine if vitamin D deficiency is present?
A.	1,25-hydroxy vitamin D
B.	25-hydroxy vitamin D
C.	Alkaline phosphatase
D.	Parathyroid hormone
E.	Serum total and ionized calcium levels
	78.	A 42-year-old man presents to the emergency 
department with acute-onset right-sided flank pain. 
He describes the pain as 10 out of 10 in severity radi-
ating to the groin. He has had one episode of hema-
turia. A noncontrast CT scan confirms the presence 
of a right-sided renal stone that is currently located 
in the distal ureter. He has a past medical history of 
pulmonary sarcoidosis that is not currently treated. 
This was diagnosed by bronchoscopic biopsy show-
ing noncaseating granulomas. His chest radiograph 
shows bilateral hilar adenopathy. His serum calcium 
level is 12.6 mg/dL. What is the mechanism of 
hypercalcemia in this patient?
A.	Increased activation of 25-hydroxy vitamin D to 
1,25-hydroxy vitamin D by macrophages within 
granulomas
B.	Increased activation of 25-hydroxy vitamin D to 
1,25-hydroxy vitamin D by the kidney
C.	Increased activation of vitamin D to 25-hydroxy 
vitamin D by macrophages within granulomas
D.	Missed diagnosis of lymphoma with subsequent bone 
marrow invasion and resorption of bone through 
local destruction
E.	Production of parathyroid hormone–related peptide 
by macrophages within granulomas
Review and Self-Assessment
499
	79.	A 52-year-old man has end-stage kidney disease 
from long-standing hypertension and diabetes mel-
litus. He has been managed with hemodialysis for 
the past 8 years. Throughout this time, he has been 
poorly compliant with his medications and hemo-
dialysis schedule, frequently missing one session 
weekly. He is now complaining of bone pain and 
dyspnea. His oxygen saturation is noted to be 92% 
on room air, and his chest radiograph shows hazy 
bilateral infiltrates. Chest CT shows ground-glass 
infiltrates bilaterally. His laboratory data include cal-
cium of 12.3 mg/dL, phosphate of 8.1 mg/dL, and 
parathyroid hormone of 110 pg/mL. Which of the 
following would be the best approach to the treat-
ment of the patient’s current clinical condition?
A.	Calcitriol 0.5 μg intravenously with hemodialysis 
with sevelamer three times daily
B.	Calcitriol 0.5 μg orally daily with sevelamer 1600 mg 
three times daily
C.	More aggressive hemodialysis to achieve optimal 
fluid and electrolyte balance
D.	Parathyroidectomy
E.	Sevelamer 1600 mg three times daily
	80.	A 54-year-old woman undergoes total thyroidec-
tomy for follicular carcinoma of the thyroid. About 
6 hours after surgery, the patient complains of tin-
gling around her mouth. She subsequently devel-
ops a pins-and-needles sensation in the fingers and 
toes. The nurse calls the physician to the bedside 
to evaluate the patient after she has severe hand 
cramps when her blood pressure is taken. Upon 
evaluation, the patient is still complaining of inter-
mittent cramping of her hands. Since surgery, she 
has received morphine sulfate 2 mg for pain and 
Compazine 5 mg for nausea. She has had no change 
in her vital signs and is afebrile. Tapping on the 
inferior portion of the zygomatic arch 2 cm anterior 
to the ear produces twitching at the corner of the 
mouth. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows a QT 
interval of 575 milliseconds. What is the next step 
in the evaluation and treatment of this patient?
A.	Administration of benztropine 2 mg IV
B.	Administration of calcium gluconate 2 g IV
C.	Administration of magnesium sulphate 4 g IV
D.	Measurement of calcium, magnesium, phosphate, 
and potassium levels
E.	Measurement of forced vital capacity
	81.	A 68-year-old woman with stage IIIB squamous 
cell carcinoma of the lung is admitted to the hospi-
tal because of altered mental status and dehydration. 
Upon admission, she is found to have a calcium 
	81.	(Continued )
	
	level of 19.6 mg/dL and phosphate of 1.8 mg/dL. 
Concomitant measurement of parathyroid hormone 
was 0.1 pg/mL (normal 10–65 pg/mL), and a screen 
for parathyroid hormone–related peptide was posi-
tive. Over the first 24 hours, the patient receives 4 L 
of normal saline with furosemide diuresis. The next 
morning, the patient’s calcium is 17.6 mg/dL and 
phosphate is 2.2 mg/dL. She continues to have delir-
ium. What is the best approach for ongoing treat-
ment of this patient’s hypercalcemia?
A.	Continue therapy with large-volume fluid adminis-
tration and forced diuresis with furosemide.
B.	Continue therapy with large-volume fluid admin-
istration, but stop furosemide and treat with hydro-
chlorothiazide.
C.	Initiate therapy with calcitonin alone.
D.	Initiate therapy with pamidronate alone.
E.	Initiate therapy with calcitonin and pamidronate.
	82.	A 60-year-old woman is referred to your office for 
evaluation of hypercalcemia of 12.9 mg/dL. This 
was found incidentally on a chemistry panel that was 
drawn during a hospitalization for cervical spondylo-
sis. Despite fluid administration in the hospital, her 
serum calcium at discharge was 11.8 mg/dL. The 
patient is asymptomatic. She is otherwise in good 
health and has had her recommended age-appropriate 
cancer screening. She denies constipation or bone 
pain and is now 8 weeks out from her spinal surgery. 
Today, her serum calcium level is 12.4 mg/dL, and 
phosphate is 2.3 mg/dL. Her hematocrit and all other 
chemistries including creatinine were normal. What 
is the most likely diagnosis?
A.	Breast cancer
B.	Hyperparathyroidism
C.	Hyperthyroidism
D.	Multiple myeloma
E.	Vitamin D intoxication
	83.	All of the following are actions of parathyroid hor-
mone EXCEPT:
A.	Direct stimulation of osteoblasts to increase bone 
formation
B.	Direct stimulation of osteoclasts to increase bone 
resorption
C.	Increased reabsorption of calcium from the distal 
tubule of the kidney
D.	Inhibition of phosphate reabsorption in the proximal 
tubule of the kidney
E.	Stimulation of renal 1-α-hydroxylase to produce 
1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol
Review and Self-Assessment
500
	84.	Which of the following statements regarding the 
epidemiology of osteoporosis and bone fractures is 
correct?
A.	For every 5-year period after age 70, the incidence 
of hip fractures increases by 25%.
B.	Fractures of the distal radius increase in frequency 
before age 50 and plateau by age 60 with only a 
modest age-related increase.
C.	Most women meet the diagnostic criteria for osteo-
porosis between the ages of 60 and 70.
D.	The risk of hip fracture is equal when white women 
are compared to black women.
E.	Women outnumber men with osteoporosis at a ratio 
of about 10 to 1.
	85.	A 50-year-old woman presents to your office 
to inquire about her risk of fracture related to 
osteoporosis. She has a positive family history of 
osteoporosis in her mother, but her mother never 
experienced any hip or vertebral fractures. The 
patient herself has also not experienced any frac-
tures. She is white and has a 20 pack-year history 
of tobacco, quitting 10 years prior. At the age of 
37, she had a total hysterectomy with bilateral 
salpingo-oophorectomy for endometriosis. She 
is lactose intolerant and does not consume dairy 
products. She currently takes calcium carbonate 
500 mg daily. Her weight is 52 kg. All of the fol-
lowing are risk factors for an osteoporotic fracture 
in this woman EXCEPT:
A.	Early menopause
B.	Female sex
C.	History of cigarette smoking
D.	Low body weight
E.	Low calcium intake
	86.	All of the following diseases are associated with an 
increased risk of osteoporosis EXCEPT:
A.	Anorexia nervosa
B.	Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
C.	Congestive heart failure
D.	Malabsorption syndromes
E.	Hyperparathyroidism
	87.	A 54-year-old woman is referred to the endocri-
nology clinic for evaluation of osteoporosis after a 
recent examination for back pain revealed a com-
pression fracture of the T4 vertebral body. She is 
perimenopausal with irregular menstrual periods 
and frequent hot flashes. She does not smoke. She 
otherwise is well and healthy. Her weight is 70 kg 
and height is 168 cm. She has lost 5 cm from her 
	87.	(Continued )
	
	maximum height. A bone mineral density scan 
shows a T-score of –3.5 SD and a Z-score of –2.5 SD. 
All of the following tests are indicated for the evalua-
tion of osteoporosis in this patient EXCEPT:
A.	24-hour urine calcium
B.	Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hor-
mone levels
C.	Serum calcium
D.	Thyroid-stimulating hormone
E.	Vitamin D levels (25-hydroxyvitamin D)
	88.	A 45-year-old white woman seeks advice from 
her primary care physician regarding her risk 
for osteoporosis and the need for bone density 
screening. She is a lifelong nonsmoker and drinks 
alcohol only socially. She has a history of moderate- 
persistent asthma since age 12. She is currently on 
fluticasone, 44 mg/puff twice daily, with good 
control currently. She last required oral prednisone 
therapy about 6 months ago when she had influenza 
that was complicated by an asthma flare. She took 
prednisone for a total of 14 days. She has had three 
pregnancies and two live births at ages 39 and 41. She 
currently has irregular periods occurring approxi-
mately every 42 days. Her follicle-stimulating 
hormone level is 25 mIU/L and 17β-estradiol 
level is 115 pg/mL on day 12 of her menstrual 
cycle. Her mother and maternal aunt both have 
been diagnosed with osteoporosis. Her mother 
also has rheumatoid arthritis and requires predni-
sone therapy, 5 mg daily. Her mother developed a 
compression fracture of the lumbar spine at age 68. 
On physical examination, the patient appears well 
and healthy. Her height is 168 cm. Her weight is 
66.4 kg. The chest, cardiac, abdominal, muscular, 
and neurologic examinations are normal. What do 
you tell the patient about the need for bone density 
screening?
A.	As she is currently perimenopausal, she should have a 
bone density screen every other year until she com-
pletes menopause and then have bone densitometry 
measured yearly thereafter.
B.	Because of her family history, she should initiate 
bone density screening yearly beginning now.
C.	Bone densitometry screening is not recommended 
until after completion of menopause.
D.	Delayed childbearing until the fourth and fifth 
decade decreases her risk of developing osteoporosis 
so bone densitometry is not recommended.
E.	Her use of low-dose inhaled glucocorticoids 
increases her risk of osteoporosis threefold, and she 
should undergo yearly bone density screening.
Review and Self-Assessment
501
	89.	What is the definition of osteoporosis by dual-energy 
x-ray absorptiometry testing (bone densitometry)?
A.	A patient with a bone density less than the mean of 
age-, race-, and gender-matched controls
B.	A patient with a bone density less than 1.0 standard 
deviation (SD) below the mean of race- and gender-
matched controls
C.	A patient with a bone density less than 1.0 SD below 
the mean of age-, race-, and gender-matched controls
D.	A patient with a bone density less than 2.5 SD below 
the mean of race- and gender-matched controls
E.	A patient with a bone density less than 2.5 SD below 
the mean of age-, race-, and gender-matched controls
	90.	A 66-year-old Asian woman seeks treatment for 
osteoporosis. She fell and fractured her right hip, 
requiring a surgical intervention 3 months ago. She 
was told while hospitalized that she had osteoporosis 
but had not previously been evaluated for this. Dur-
ing the hospitalization, she developed a deep venous 
thrombosis (DVT) with pulmonary embolus, for 
which she is currently taking warfarin. She completed 
menopause at age 52. She is a former smoker, quit-
ting about 6 years ago. She has always been thin, and 
her current body mass index (BMI) is 19.2 kg/m2. 
Her laboratory studies show calcium of 8.7 mg/dL, 
phosphate of 3 mg/dL, creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL, and 
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels of 18 ng/mL (normal 
>30 ng/mL). A dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry 
scan of bone mineral density has a T-score of –3.0. 
What is the best initial therapy for this patient?
A.	Calcitonin 200 IU intranasally daily
B.	Calcium carbonate 1200 mg and vitamin D 400 IU 
daily
C.	Ethinyl estradiol 5 μg and medroxyprogesterone 
acetate 625 mg daily
D.	Raloxifene 60 mg daily
E.	Risedronate 35 mg once weekly, and calcium car-
bonate 1200 mg and vitamin D 400 IU daily
	91.	A 52-year-old man is found to have an elevated alka-
line phosphatase level during routine blood chemistry 
testing prior to obtaining life insurance after chang-
ing jobs. He has a history of hypertension and hyper-
lipidemia. He previously had a cholecystectomy for 
gallstone disease. His current medications include 
losartan 25 mg daily, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg 
daily, and rosuvastatin 20 mg daily. He is physically 
active and has a body mass index of 25.2 kg/m2. 
His only complaint is low back pain that has been 
more severe recently. He has had no further eval-
uation for his back pain. His physical examina-
tion is normal. His liver is 10 cm to percussion. 
	91.	(Continued )
	
	It is palpable with deep inspiration at the right cos-
tal margin. It is noted to be smooth. Murphy’s sign 
is negative. There is no warmth or tenderness to 
palpation over the vertebral bodies of the lumbosa-
cral spine. Laboratory evaluation reveals an alkaline 
phosphatase level of 468 U/L, alanine aminotrans-
ferase level of 22 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 
level of 32 U/L, total bilirubin of 1.0 mg/dL, cal-
cium of 9.4 mg/dL, phosphate 3.2 mg/dL, and 
γ-glutamyl transferase level of 20 U/L. What is the 
most likely diagnosis?
A.	Adverse reaction to rosuvastatin
B.	Paget’s disease
C.	Primary biliary cirrhosis
D.	Retained common bile duct stone
E.	Vertebral osteomyelitis
	92.	Which of the following tests is most likely to lead to 
the diagnosis of the patient in question 91?
A.	Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
B.	Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbosacral spine
C.	Plain radiographs of the lumbosacral spine
D.	Right upper quadrant ultrasound
E.	Serum osteocalcin
	93.	Which of the following biochemical tests is most 
likely to be within the normal range in a healthy, 
active individual with Paget’s disease?
A.	Serum alkaline phosphatase
B.	Serum C-telopeptide
C.	Serum calcium
D.	Serum N-telopeptide
E.	Serum osteocalcin
	94.	A 67-year-old woman presents to the clinic after 
a fall on the ice a week ago. She visited the local 
emergency department immediately after the fall, 
where hip radiographs were performed and were 
negative for fracture or dislocation. They did reveal 
fusion of the sacroiliac joints and coarse trabecula-
tions in the ilium, consistent with Paget’s disease. A 
comprehensive metabolic panel was also sent at that 
visit and is remarkable for an alkaline phosphatase 
of 257 U/L, with normal serum calcium and phos-
phate levels. She was discharged with analgesics and 
told to follow up with her primary care doctor for 
further management of her radiographic findings. 
She is recovering from her fall and denies any long-
standing pain or immobility of her hip joints. She 
states that her father suffered from a bone disease 
that caused him headaches and hearing loss near 
Review and Self-Assessment
502
	94.	(Continued )
	
	the end of his life. She is very concerned about the 
radiographs and wants to know what they mean. 
Which of the following is the best treatment strat-
egy at this point?
A.	Initiate physical therapy and non–weight bearing 
exercises to strengthen the hip.
B.	Initiate therapy with vitamin D and calcium.
C.	Initiate therapy with an oral bisphosphonate.
D.	Initiate therapy with prednisone 1 mg/kg, tapering 
over 6 months.
E.	No treatment is required as she is asymptomatic.
	95.	A 32-year-old man is evaluated at a routine clinic visit 
for coronary risk factors. He is healthy and reports 
no tobacco use, his systemic blood pressure is nor-
mal, and he does not have diabetes. His family his-
tory is notable for high cholesterol in his mother and 
maternal grandparents. Physical examination shows 
tendon xanthomas. A fasting cholesterol is notable 
for a low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) 
of 387 mg/dL. Which of the following is the most 
likely genetic disorder affecting this individual?
A.	Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia
B.	Familial defective apoB-100
C.	Familial hepatic lipase deficiency
D.	Familial hypercholesterolemia
E.	Lipoprotein lipase deficiency
	96.	All of the following are potential causes of elevated 
LDL EXCEPT:
A.	Anorexia nervosa
B.	Cirrhosis
C.	Hypothyroidism
D.	Nephrotic syndrome
E.	Thiazide diuretics
	97.	A 16-year-old male is brought to your clinic by his 
parents due to concern about his weight. He has not 
seen a physician for many years. He states that he has 
gained weight due to inactivity and that he is less 
active because of exertional chest pain. He takes no 
medications. He was adopted and his parents do not 
know the medical history of his biological parents. 
Physical examination is notable for stage 1 hyper-
tension and body mass index of 30 kg/m2. He has 
xanthomas on his hands, heels, and buttocks. Labora-
tory testing shows a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
of 210 mg/dL, creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL, total bili-
rubin of 3.1 mg/dL, haptoglobin below 6 mg/dL, 
and a glycosylated hemoglobin of 6.7%. You suspect 
a hereditary lipoproteinemia due to the clinical and 
	97.	(Continued )
	
	laboratory findings. Which test would be diagnostic 
of the primary lipoprotein disorder in this patient?
A.	Congo red staining of xanthoma biopsy
B.	CT scan of the liver
C.	Family pedigree analysis
D.	Gas chromatography
E.	LDL receptor function in skin biopsy
	98.	Your 60-year-old patient with a monoclonal gam-
mopathy of unclear significance presents for a follow-
up visit and to review recent laboratory data. His 
creatinine is newly elevated to 2.0 mg/dL, potassium 
is 3.7 mg/dL, calcium is 12.2 mg/dL, low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) is 202 mg/dL, and triglycerides 
are 209 mg/dL. On further questioning he reports 
3 months of swelling around the eyes and “foamy” 
urine. On examination, he has anasarca. Concerned 
for multiple myeloma and nephrotic syndrome, you 
order a urine protein/creatinine ratio, which returns 
at 14:1. Which treatment option would be most 
appropriate to treat his lipid abnormalities?
A.	Cholesterol ester transfer protein inhibitor
B.	Dietary management
C.	HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
D.	Lipid apheresis
E.	Niacin and fibrates
	99.	Which of the following statements describes the rela-
tionship between testicular tumors and serum markers?
A.	Pure seminomas produce α-fetoprotein (AFP) or 
beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) in 
more than 90% of cases.
B.	More than 40% of nonseminomatous germ cell 
tumors produce no cell markers.
C.	Both β-hCG and AFP should be measured in fol-
lowing the progress of a tumor.
D.	Measurement of tumor markers the day after surgery 
for localized disease is useful in determining the 
completeness of the resection.
E.	β-hCG is limited in its usefulness as a marker because 
it is identical to human luteinizing hormone.
100.	A 32-year-old man presents complaining of a tes-
ticular mass. On examination, you palpate a 1 cm × 
2 cm painless mass on the surface of the left testicle. 
A chest x-ray shows no lesions, and a CT scan of 
the abdomen and pelvis shows no evidence of ret-
roperitoneal adenopathy. The α-fetoprotein (AFP) 
level is elevated at 400 ng/mL. Beta human chori-
onic gonadotropin (β-hCG) is normal, as is lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH). You send the patient for an 
Review and Self-Assessment
503
100.	(Continued )
	
	orchiectomy. The pathology comes back as sem-
inoma limited to the testis alone. The AFP level 
declines to normal at an appropriate interval. What 
is the appropriate management at this point?
A.	Radiation to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes
B.	Adjuvant chemotherapy
C.	Hormonal therapy
D.	Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND)
E.	Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
	101.	Which of the following statements regarding the 
relationship between ovarian cancer and BRCA gene 
mutations is true?
A.	Most women with BRCA mutations have a family 
history that is strongly positive for breast or ovarian 
cancer (or both).
B.	More than 30% of women with ovarian cancer have 
a somatic mutation in either BRCA1 or BRCA2.
C.	Prophylactic oophorectomy in patients with BRCA 
mutations does not protect against the development 
of breast cancer.
D.	Screening studies with serial ultrasound and serum 
CA-125 tumor marker studies are effective in detect-
ing early stage disease.
E.	Women with known mutations in a single BRCA1 
or BRCA2 allele have a 75% lifetime risk of devel-
oping ovarian cancer.
	102.	All of the following statements regarding the diag-
nosis of uterine cancer are true EXCEPT:
A.	Five-year survival after surgery in disease confined to 
the corpus is approximately 90%.
B.	Endometrial carcinoma is the most common gyneco-
logic malignancy in the United States.
C.	Most women present with amenorrhea.
D.	Tamoxifen is associated with an increased risk of 
endometrial carcinoma.
E.	Unopposed estrogen exposure is a risk factor for 
developing endometrial carcinoma.
103.	All of the following statements regarding the influ-
ence of genetics on obesity are true EXCEPT:
A.	Adopted children have body mass indices more similar 
to their biologic parents than their adoptive parents.
B.	Decreased levels of leptin and resistance to leptin are 
associated with the development of obesity.
C.	Heritability follows a Mendelian pattern.
D.	Identical twins have more similar body mass indices 
when compared to dizygotic twins.
E.	In humans with mutations of the ob gene, severe 
early-onset obesity is seen.
104.	All of the following syndromes are associated with 
obesity EXCEPT:
A.	Acromegaly
B.	Cushing’s syndrome
C.	Hypothyroidism
D.	Insulinoma
E.	Prader-Willi syndrome
105.	A 34-year-old woman sees her primary care phy-
sician for counseling regarding weight loss. She 
gained approximately 36 kg during her first preg-
nancy 6 years previously and has not lost this weight. 
Prior to that time, she maintained a weight of 
70 kg at a height of 68 in (BMI 23.6 kg/m2). Her 
current weight is 110 kg (BMI 36.8 kg/m2). She 
has no medical history other than obesity. She is 
taking oral contraceptive pills and does not smoke. 
What is the most effective strategy for weight loss 
in this individual?
A.	A very low-calorie diet (≤800 kcal/d) with a propri-
etary formula.
B.	Referral for bariatric surgery.
C.	A goal to attain her prepregnancy weight within  
6 months.
D.	Initiation of an exercise plan of 150 minutes of 
moderate-intensity activity weekly without changing 
her dietary habits.
E.	Decrease calorie consumption by 500–1000 kcal/d 
to achieve a weight loss of 0.5–1 kg per week.
106.	A 44-year-old woman seeks evaluation for bariatric 
surgery. She has tried a variety of diets in the past, 
but failed to sustain weight loss. She is being treated 
for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia, and is 
concerned about developing diabetes mellitus if she 
does not lose weight. Her height is 65 in and weight 
is 122 kg (BMI 44.6 kg/m2). What advice would 
you provide her regarding the benefits and risks of 
bariatric surgical procedures?
A.	A restrictive surgery is as effective as a restrictive-
malabsorptive surgery.
B.	A vertical-banded gastroplasty is the most effective 
restrictive surgical procedure.
C.	All types of bariatric surgery are associated with 
micronutrient deficiencies that require lifelong 
supplementation.
D.	The mean weight loss following bariatric surgery is 
30–35%, and 60% of individuals are able to maintain 
weight loss at 6 years.
E.	The mortality associated with bariatric surgery is 
about 2%.
Review and Self-Assessment
504
ANSWERS
107.	An 81-year-old man is admitted to the hospital 
for altered mental status. He was found at home, 
confused and lethargic, by his son. His medical 
history is significant for metastatic prostate can-
cer. The patient’s medications include periodic 
intramuscular goserelin injections. On examina-
tion, he is afebrile. Blood pressure is 110/50 mm 
Hg, and the pulse rate is 110 beats/min. He is 
lethargic and minimally responsive to sternal rub. 
He has bitemporal wasting, and his mucous mem-
branes are dry. On neurologic examination, he is 
obtunded. The patient has an intact gag reflex and 
withdraws to pain in all four extremities. Rectal 
tone is normal. Laboratory values are significant 
for a creatinine of 4.2 mg/dL, a calcium level of 
14.4 meq/L, and an albumin of 2.6 g/dL. All the 
following are appropriate initial management steps 
EXCEPT:
	107.	(Continued )
A.	Normal saline
B.	Pamidronate
C.	Furosemide when the patient is euvolemic
D.	Calcitonin
E.	Dexamethasone
	108.	A 55-year-old man is found to have a serum calcium 
of 13.0 mg/dL after coming to the clinic complain-
ing of fatigue and thirst for the past month. A chest 
radiograph demonstrates a 4-cm mass in the right 
lower lobe. Which of the following serum tests is 
most likely to reveal the cause of his hypercalcemia?
A.	Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
B.	Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
C.	Insulin-like growth factor
D.	Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
E.	Parathyroid hormone–related protein (PTH-rp)
	 1.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 1) Feedback control may be either positive or 
negative. The primary means of hormone control within 
the endocrine system is negative feedback. For example, 
when a steroid hormone level is sensed to be low by 
the hypothalamus, a releasing hormone is released, which 
effects the release of a stimulatory hormone from the pitu-
itary, and the target gland secretes the steroid hormone 
and plasma levels rise. The hypothalamus then senses 
this and decreases the release of the releasing hormone. 
This is employed by the endocrine system to control lev-
els of thyroid hormone, cortisol, gonadal steroids, and 
growth hormone. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
axis is independent of the pituitary and hypothalamus and 
involves the liver, lungs, and kidney.
	 2.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 1) Hormone resistance may be due to receptor 
mutations or signaling pathway mutations, or, most com-
monly, postreceptor alterations. Type 2 diabetes mellitus 
and leptin resistance are examples of postreceptor altera-
tions resulting in hormone resistance. Pheochromocytoma 
and Graves’ disease are examples of organ hyperfunction, 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Sheehan’s syndrome are dis-
eases of organ hypofunction. In the case of Sheehan’s syn-
drome, the affected organ is the pituitary gland.
	 3.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 1) Intermittent pulses of GnRH are necessary to 
maintain pituitary sensitivity to the hormone. Continu-
ous exposure to GnRH causes pituitary gonadotrope 
desensitization, which ultimately leads to decreased 
levels of testosterone. The relationship between GnRH 
and LH/FSH is a positive feedback loop where GnRH 
causes secretion of LH and FSH. Receptor translocation 
from the cytoplasm into the nucleus occurs with certain 
hormones (e.g., glucocorticoid); however, this receptor 
phenomenon is not specific to any regulatory mechanism. 
GnRH does not promote the production of sex hormone– 
binding globulin. Moreover, although binding globulins 
can decrease the amount of bound hormone measured 
in the serum, abnormal levels of binding globulins usu-
ally do not have any clinical significance because the free 
hormone levels usually increase.
	 4.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 1) With few exceptions, hormone binding is 
highly specific for a single type of nuclear receptor. The 
mineralocorticoid-glucocorticoid hormones are a nota-
ble exception because the mineralocorticoid receptor 
also has a high, but not greater, affinity for glucocorti-
coid. An enzyme (11 β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase) 
located in renal tubules inactivates glucocorticoid, allow-
ing selective responses to mineralocorticoid. When there 
is glucocorticoid excess, the enzyme becomes oversatu-
rated and glucocorticoid can exhibit mineralocorticoid 
effects. This effect is in contrast to the estrogen receptor, 
where different compounds confer unique transcription 
machinery. Mineralocorticoid hormones do not have 
serum-binding proteins. Examples of hormones that cir-
culate with serum-binding proteins are T4, T3, cortisol, 
estrogen, and growth hormone. Most binding protein 
abnormalities have little clinical consequence because the 
free concentrations of the hormone often remain normal.
	 5.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 2) Hormones produced by the anterior pituitary 
include adrenocorticotropic hormone, thyroid-stimulating 
Review and Self-Assessment
505
hormone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hor-
mone, prolactin, and growth hormone. The posterior pitu-
itary produces vasopressin and oxytocin. The anterior and 
posterior pituitary has a separate vascular supply, and the 
posterior pituitary is directly innervated by the hypotha-
lamic neurons via the pituitary stalk, thus making it suscep-
tible to shear stress–associated dysfunction. Hypothalamic 
control of anterior pituitary function is through secreted 
hormones; thus it is less susceptible to traumatic injury.
	 6.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 2) The patient has evidence of Sheehan’s syn-
drome postpartum. In this syndrome, the hyperplastic 
pituitary postpartum is at increased risk for hemorrhage 
and/or infarction. This leads to bilateral visual changes, 
headache, and meningeal signs. Ophthalmoplegia may 
be observed. In severe cases, cardiovascular collapse and 
altered levels of consciousness may be observed. Labo-
ratory evaluation commonly shows hypoglycemia. Pitu-
itary CT or MRI may show signs of sellar hemorrhage 
if present. Involvement of all pituitary hormones may be 
seen, though the most acute finding is often hypogly-
cemia and hypotension from the failure of adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone. The hypoglycemia and hypotension 
present in this case suggest failure of the glucocorticoid 
system; thus treatment with a corticosteroid is indi-
cated. There is no evidence of sepsis; thus antibiotics 
and drotrecogin alfa are not indicated. With a normal 
hematocrit and no reported evidence of massive hemor-
rhage, packed red cell transfusion is unlikely to be help-
ful. Although thyroid-stimulating hormone production 
is undoubtedly low in this patient, the most immediate 
concern is replacement of glucocorticoid.
	 7.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 2) Functional pituitary adenoma presentations 
include acromegaly, as in this patient, prolactinomas, and 
Cushing’s syndrome. Hypersecretion of growth hormone 
underlies this syndrome in patients with pituitary masses, 
though ectopic production of growth hormone, particu-
larly by tumors, has been reported. Because growth hor-
mone is secreted in a highly pulsatile fashion, obtaining 
random serum levels is not reliable. Thus, the downstream 
mediator of systemic effects of growth hormone, IGF-1, 
is measured to screen for growth hormone excess. IGF-1 is 
made by the liver in response to growth hormone stimula-
tion. An oral glucose tolerance test with growth hormone 
obtained at 0, 30, and 60 minutes may also be used to screen 
for acromegaly, as normal persons should suppress growth 
hormone to this challenge. Serum prolactin level is useful to 
screen for prolactinomas; 24-hour urinary free cortisol and 
ACTH assay are useful screens for Cushing’s disease.
	 8.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 2) Hyperprolactinemia is the most common pitu-
itary hormone hypersecretion syndrome in both men 
and women. Although pituitary adenoma is a frequent 
cause, there are several physiologic, medication-related, 
and potentially reversible etiologies. Prolactin is normally 
elevated during pregnancy and lactation, though levels 
should fall to normal within 6 months of cessation of 
breastfeeding. Nipple stimulation, sleep, and stress may 
all increase prolactin levels. Systemic disorders such as 
chronic renal failure and cirrhosis may also cause elevated 
prolactin levels. Prolactin levels are also typically elevated 
after generalized seizures, which may be useful in the eval-
uation of pseudoseizures. Drug-induced hypersecretion is 
associated with dopamine receptor blockers, dopamine 
synthesis inhibitors, opiates, H2 antagonists, imipramines, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and calcium chan-
nel blockers. Hypothalamic-pituitary stalk damage may 
also cause hyperprolactinemia. Rathke’s cysts, which are 
benign intrasellar lesions, may produce endocrinologic 
abnormalities similar to pituitary adenomas.
	 9.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 2) Tumors arising from the lactotrope cells of 
the pituitary account for half of all functioning pitu-
itary tumors and most commonly affect women. The 
most common presentations are amenorrhea, infertility, 
and/or galactorrhea. Microadenomas rarely progress to 
become macroadenomas. For symptomatic disease, the 
primary goals of therapy are control of hyperprolac-
tinemia, reduction of tumor size, restoration of menses 
and fertility, and resolution of galactorrhea. Usually oral 
dopamine agonists, such as carbergoline and bromocrip-
tine, are used for this purpose.
	10.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 2) Adult growth hormone deficiency is usually 
caused by hypothalamic or pituitary damage. Because 
growth hormone is no longer important for achiev-
ing stature, the presentation is different from childhood 
growth hormone deficiency. Although growth hormone 
has direct tissue effects, it primarily acts through increas-
ing secretion of IGF-1, which in turn stimulates lipoly-
sis, increases circulating fatty acids, reduces omental fat 
mass, and enhances lean body mass. Thus, deficiency of 
growth hormone causes the opposite effects. In addition, 
hypertension, left ventricular dysfunction, and increased 
plasma fibrinogen levels may also be present with defi-
cient growth hormone. Reduced, not increased, bone 
mineral density may also occur in adults with growth 
hormone deficiency.
	11.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 2) The patient has a clinical presentation consistent 
with Cushing’s syndrome. Although many cases of inap-
propriate elevation of ACTH are due to pituitary tumors, a 
substantial proportion are due to ectopic ACTH secretion. 
Clues to this diagnosis include a rapid onset of hypercor-
tisolism features associated with skin hyperpigmentation 
Review and Self-Assessment
506
and severe myopathy. Additionally, hypertension, hypo-
kalemic metabolic alkalosis, glucose intolerance, and 
edema are more prominent in ectopic ACTH secre-
tion than in pituitary tumors. Serum potassium below 
3.3 mmol/L is present in 70% of ectopic ACTH cases, 
but in less than 10% of pituitary-dependent Cushing’s syn-
drome. ACTH levels will be high, as this is the underlying 
cause of both types of Cushing’s syndrome. Corticotropin- 
releasing hormone is rarely the cause of Cushing’s syn-
drome. Unfortunately, MRI of the pituitary gland will not 
visualize lesions less than 2 mm; thus occasional sampling 
of the inferior petrosal veins is required, but this is not indi-
cated in the case presented at this time in the evaluation.
	12.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 2) The patient has panhypopituitarism and is unable 
to make TSH; thus her plasma TSH level will always be 
low, regardless of the adequacy of her T4 replacement. 
A free T4 level will allow the determination of whether 
her plasma level is in the normal range of thyroid hor-
mone. This, coupled with her symptoms, will aid in the 
determination of proper levothyroxine dosing. There is 
no evidence of recurrent disease clinically; thus MRI is 
not useful. She is unlikely to have primary thyroid disease, 
and T4 level is unknown presently, so thyroid uptake scan 
is not indicated at this time.
	13.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 2) The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome relies on 
documentation of endogenous hypercortisolism. Of the 
list of choices, the most cost-effective and precise test is 
the 24-hour urine free cortisol. Failure to suppress plasma 
morning cortisol after overnight suppression with 1 mg 
dexamethasone is an alternative. Most ACTH-secreting 
pituitary adenomas are less than 5 mm in diameter, and 
approximately half are not detected even with sensitive 
MRI. Further, because incidental microadenomas are 
common in the pituitary, the presence of a small pitu-
itary abnormality on MRI may not establish the source of 
ACTH production. Basal plasma ACTH levels are used to 
distinguish between ACTH-independent (adrenal or exog-
enous glucocorticoid) and ACTH-dependent (pituitary, 
ectopic ACTH) sources of hypercortisolism. Mean basal 
ACTH levels are higher in patients with ectopic ACTH 
production than in patients with pituitary ACTH adeno-
mas. There is significant overlap in ACTH levels, however, 
and this test should not be used as an initial diagnostic test. 
Rarely, patients have Cushing’s syndrome and elevated 
ACTH due to a CRH-releasing tumor. In this case, CRH 
levels are elevated. Inferior petrosal venous sampling can 
be used to identify a pituitary source of ACTH secretion 
when imaging modalities do not reveal a source.
	14.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 2) The identification of an empty sella is often 
the result of an incidental MRI finding. Typically these 
patients will have normal pituitary function and should 
be reassured. It is likely that the surrounding rim of pitu-
itary tissue is functioning normally. An empty sella may 
signal the insidious onset of hypopituitarism, and labora-
tory results should be followed closely. Unless her clinical 
situation changes, repeat MRI is not indicated. Endo-
crine malignancy is unlikely, and surgery is not part of 
the management of an empty sella.
	15.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 3) The patient has a classic presentation for a 
patient with idiopathic diabetes insipidus with long-
standing urinary frequency, thirst, enuresis, and noctu-
ria. Patients may also report mild fatigue from frequent 
nocturnal awakenings. Diabetes insipidus may be nephro-
genic or central, though this case presentation is not spe-
cific for either etiology. Diabetes insipidus is confirmed 
by measurement of 24-hour urine volume, which is 
more than 50 mg/kg per day (3500 mL in a 70-kg male), 
and urine osmolarity of greater than 300 mosmol/L. In 
order to differentiate central from nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus, history may be useful in determining prior head 
trauma, neurosurgery, or granulomatous disease that may 
damage the neurohypophysis, or may suggest a medica-
tion such as lithium known to cause nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus. The fluid deprivation test, in which a patient is 
deprived of fluid and hourly urine output; body weight; 
plasma osmolarity and/or sodium concentration; and 
urine osmolarity are measured. If fluid deprivation con-
firms persistent elevation of urine osmolarity, then severe 
diabetes insipidus is again confirmed. Desmopressin can 
be administered at this point and if the electrolyte, uri-
nary, and clinical variables are corrected, central disease 
is confirmed. In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, there is 
minimal response to ADH, as the primary defect is in the 
kidney. MRI of the brain is not useful until after central 
disease is confirmed.
	16.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 3) This patient presents with acute central diabetes 
insipidus (DI) in the context of AMML. MRI will most 
likely demonstrate a chloroma (myeloid tumor often seen 
in AMML) in the posterior pituitary, particularly given 
his history of other extra–bone marrow tumor nodules. 
The urine is dilute due to the ADH deficiency leading to 
hypernatremia. The altered mental status is likely due to 
the hypernatremia, which typically develops in central DI 
as water intake cannot keep up with urine output, which 
can exceed 5 L/d. Immediate replacement of ADH in the 
form of desmopressin will confirm the diagnosis of central 
DI if urine output drops and will provide symptomatic 
relief. Desmopressin may be administered nasally or intra-
venously with rapid onset of action. Hydrochlorothiazide 
is used in nephrogenic DI to increase proximal sodium and 
water reabsorption. ATRA is used to treat acute promy-
elocytic leukemia, not AMML. Hydrocortisone would be 
Review and Self-Assessment
507
the therapy of choice for acute Addisonian crisis, not cen-
tral DI. Lithium is a well-known cause of nephrogenic DI.
	17.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 4) Nutritional and maternal iodine deficiencies 
are common in many parts of the developing world 
and, when severe, can result in cretinism. Cretinism is 
characterized by mental and growth retardation but is 
preventable by administration of iodine and/or thyroid 
hormone early in life. Concomitant selenium deficiency 
can contribute to the neurologic manifestations. Iodine 
supplementation of bread, salt, and other foods has mark-
edly decreased the rates of this disease. Beriberi disease is 
a nervous system ailment caused by a thiamine deficiency 
in the diet. Scurvy is due to vitamin C deficiency. Folate 
deficiency in pregnant women is associated with an 
increased risk of preterm labor and a number of con-
genital malformations, most notably involving the neural 
tube. Folate supplementation can lower the risk of spina 
bifida, anencephaly, congenital heart disease, cleft lips, 
and limb deformities. Vitamin A deficiency is a common 
cause of blindness in the developing world.
	18.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 4) T4 is secreted from the thyroid gland in approx-
imately 20-fold greater quantities than T3. Both hor-
mones are bound to plasma proteins including albumin, 
transthyretin, and thyroxine-binding protein. Thyroxine-
binding protein has a high affinity for T4; thus despite its 
low concentration it carries 80% of the plasma hormone. 
It is followed by albumin and then transthyretin. Pregnant 
women may be euthyroid with elevated levels of total 
T4 because of the increase in thyroid-binding globulin. 
T3 is less protein bound than T4. Unbound hormone is 
thought to be biologically available to tissues, and nor-
malization of the unbound fraction is the primary goal of 
homeostatic mechanisms. Measurement of free T4 is bio-
logically more relevant than total T4. Thyroid peroxidase 
is an enzyme within the thyroid involved in the organi-
fication of iodine.
	19.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 4) There are a number of conditions associated 
with normal thyroid function, but hyperthyroxinemia. 
Although some of these are associated with clinical hyper-
thyroidism, many simply have elevated levels of total T4 
and normal conversion to T3 and thus are clinically nor-
mal. Anything that increases liver production of thyroid-
binding globulin will produce elevated total T4 levels and 
normal free T4 and T3 levels. In this category are preg-
nancy, estrogen-containing oral contraceptives, cirrhosis, 
and familial excess thyroid-binding globulin production. 
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia results in an 
albumin mutation and increased T4 with normal free T4 
and T3 levels. Sick-euthyroid syndrome occurs during 
acute medical and psychiatric illness. In this syndrome, 
there is transiently increased unbound T4 and decreased 
TSH. Total T4 and T3 may be decreased, particularly 
later in the course of disease.
	20.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 4) Iodine deficiency remains the most common 
cause of hypothyroidism worldwide. It is present at rela-
tively high levels even in the developed world includ-
ing Europe. In areas of iodine sufficiency, autoimmune 
disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) and iatrogenic hypo-
thyroidism (treatment of hyperthyroidism) are the most 
common causes.
	21.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 4) There are a number of important effects of 
thyroid hormone (or its absence) on the cardiovascular 
system. Importantly, hypothyroidism is associated with 
bradycardia and reduced myocardial contractility, and 
thereby reduced stroke volume. Increased peripheral 
resistance may be accompanied by systemic hypertension, 
particularly diastolic hypertension in hypothyroidism. 
Pericardial effusions are found in up to 30% of patients 
with hypothyroidism, though they rarely cause decreased 
cardiac function. Finally, in hypothyroid patients, blood 
flow is directed away from the skin and thus produces 
cool extremities.
	22.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 4) The most common cause of hypothyroidism 
in the United States is autoimmune thyroiditis, as it is 
an iodine-replete area. Although earlier in the disease 
a radioiodine uptake scan may have shown diffusely 
increased uptake from lymphocytic infiltration, at this 
point in the disease when the infiltrate is “burned out” 
there is likely to be little found on the scan. Likewise, a 
thyroid ultrasound would only be useful for presumed 
multinodular goiter. Antithyroid peroxidase antibod-
ies are commonly found in patients with autoimmune 
thyroiditis, while antithyroglobulin antibodies are found 
less commonly. Antithyroglobulin antibodies are also 
found in other thyroid disorders (Graves’ disease, thyro-
toxicosis) as well as systemic autoimmune diseases (SLEs). 
Thyroglobulin is released from the thyroid in all types 
of thyrotoxicosis with the exception of factitious disease. 
This patient, however, was hypothyroid, and thus serum 
thyroglobulin levels are unlikely to be helpful.
	23.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 4) An increase in TSH in a patient with hypo-
thyroidism that was previously stable in dosing for many 
years suggests either a failure of taking the medication, 
difficulty with absorption from bowel disease, or medica-
tion interaction or drug-drug interaction affecting clear-
ance. Patients with normal body weight taking more than 
200 μg of levothyroxine per day who have elevated TSH 
strongly suggests noncompliance. Such patients should 
Review and Self-Assessment
508
be encouraged to take two tablets at one time on the 
day they remember, to attempt to reach the weekly tar-
get dose; the long drug half-life makes this practice safe. 
Other causes of increased thyroxine requirements include 
malabsorption, such as with celiac disease or small bowel 
surgery, estrogen therapy, and drugs that interfere with 
T4 absorption (e.g., ferrous sulfate and cholestyramine) 
or clearance, such as lovastatin, amiodarone, carbamaze-
pine, and phenytoin.
	24.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 4) The patient has myxedema coma. This con-
dition of profound hypothyroidism most commonly 
occurs in the elderly, and often a precipitating condi-
tion may be identified such as myocardial infarction or 
infection. Clinical manifestations include altered level of 
consciousness, bradycardia, and hypothermia. Manage-
ment includes repletion of thyroid hormone through IV 
levothyroxine, but also supplementation of glucocorti-
coids because there is impaired adrenal reserve in severe 
hypothyroidism. Care must be taken with rewarming 
as it may precipitate cardiovascular collapse. Therefore, 
external warming is indicated only if the temperature 
is below 30°C. Hypertonic saline and glucose may be 
used if hyponatremia or hypoglycemia is severe; how-
ever, hypotonic solutions should be avoided as they 
may worsen fluid retention. Because the metabolism of 
many substances is markedly reduced, sedation should be 
avoided or minimized. Similarly, blood levels of drugs 
should be monitored when available.
	25.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 4) Patients with Graves’ disease produce thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulins. They subsequently pro-
duce higher levels of T4 compared with the normal 
population. As a result, many patients with Graves’ dis-
ease are mildly iodine deficient, and T4 production is 
somewhat limited by the availability of iodine. Expo-
sure to iodinated contrast thus reverses iodine defi-
ciency and may precipitate worsening hyperthyroidism. 
Additionally, the reversal of mild iodine deficiency may 
make I-125 therapy for Graves’ disease less successful 
because thyroid iodine uptake is lessened in the iodine-
replete state.
	26.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 4) Hyperthyroidism is associated with a number 
of cardiovascular complications including tachycardia, 
palpitations, high cardiac output with bounding pulse, 
widened pulse pressure, and aortic systolic murmur. This 
may lead to worsened angina in predisposed patients. 
Atrial fibrillation is more common in patients greater than 
50 years of age, and treatment of thyroid state alone will 
lead to the reversal of atrial fibrillation in half of patients, 
suggesting underlying cardiac disorder in the remainder 
of unconverted patients.
	27.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 4) Although lid retraction can occur in any type 
of hyperthyroidism, Graves’ disease is associated with 
specific eye signs that are thought to be due to the inter-
action of autoantibodies with periorbital muscles. The 
onset of Graves’ ophthalmopathy may occur before or 
after hyperthyroidism, and rarely may not be associated 
with hyperthyroidism at all, but simply the effects of the 
presence of autoantibodies on the periorbital muscles. 
Subtle features are eye grittiness, discomfort, and excess 
tearing. Proptosis occurs in one-third of patients and may 
result in corneal abrasion if there is a failure of closure 
of the eyelids, particularly during sleep. The most seri-
ous manifestation is compression of the optic nerve at 
the apex of the orbit, which can lead to papilledema and 
permanent vision loss if left untreated.
	28.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 4) The main antithyroid drugs used in the 
treatment of Graves’ disease are propylthiouracil, car-
bimazole, and the active metabolite of carbimazole, 
methimazole. All act to inhibit the function of thyroid 
peroxidase. While propylthiouracil also reduces the 
peripheral conversion of T4 to T3, this is not its major 
mechanism of action and is not responsible for the major-
ity of the drug’s utility in the therapy of Graves’ disease.
	29.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 4) Sick-euthyroid syndrome can occur in the set-
ting of any acute, severe illness. Abnormalities in the levels 
of circulating TSH and thyroid hormone are thought to 
result from the release of cytokines in response to severe 
stress. Multiple abnormalities may occur. The most com-
mon hormone pattern is a decrease in total and unbound 
T3 levels as peripheral conversion of T4 to T3 is impaired. 
Teleologically, the fall in T3, the most active thyroid 
hormone, is thought to limit catabolism in starved or ill 
patients. TSH levels may vary dramatically, from 0.1 to 
above 20 mU/L, depending on when they are measured 
during the course of illness. Very sick patients may have 
a decrease in T4 levels. This patient undoubtedly has 
abnormal thyroid function tests as a result of his injuries 
from the motor vehicle accident. There is no indication 
for obtaining further imaging in this case. Steroids have 
no role. The most appropriate management consists of 
simple observation. Over the course of weeks to months, 
as the patient recovers, thyroid function will return to 
normal.
	30 and 31.  The answers are E and B, respectively. 
(Chap. 4) Subacute thyroiditis, also known as de Quer-
vain’s thyroiditis, granulomatous thyroiditis, or viral 
thyroiditis, is a multiphase illness that occurs three times 
more frequently in women than men. Multiple viruses 
have been implicated, but none have been defini-
tively identified as the trigger for subacute thyroiditis. 
Review and Self-Assessment
509
The diagnosis can be overlooked in patients as the symp-
toms mimic pharyngitis, and it frequently has a similarly 
benign course. In this patient, Graves’ disease is unlikely 
given her elevated TSH and negative antibody panel. 
Autoimmune hypothyroidism should be considered; how-
ever, the tempo of her illness, the tenderness of the thyroid 
on examination, and her preceding viral illness make this 
diagnosis less likely. Ludwig’s angina is a potentially life-
threatening bacterial infection of the retropharyngeal and 
submandibular spaces, often caused by preceding den-
tal infection. Cat-scratch fever is a usually benign illness 
that presents with lymphadenopathy, fever, and malaise. 
It is caused by Bartonella henselae and is frequently trans-
mitted from cat scratches that penetrate the epidermis. 
It will not cause an elevated TSH. Subacute thyroiditis 
can present with hypothyroidism, thyrotoxicosis, or nei-
ther. In the first phase of the disease, thyroid inflamma-
tion leads to follicle destruction and release of thyroid 
hormone. Thyrotoxicosis ensues. In the second phase, 
the thyroid is depleted of hormone and hypothyroid-
ism results. A recovery phase typically follows in which 
decreased inflammation allows the follicles to heal and 
regenerate hormone.
	32.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 4) Subacute thyroiditis, also known as de Quer-
vain’s thyroiditis, granulomatous thyroiditis, and viral 
thyroiditis, is characterized clinically by fever, constitu-
tional symptoms, and a painful, enlarged thyroid. The 
etiology is thought to be a viral infection. The peak inci-
dence is between 30 and 50 years of age, and women 
are affected more frequently than men. The symptoms 
depend on the phase of the illness. During the ini-
tial phase of follicular destruction, there is a release of 
thyroglobulin and thyroid hormones. As a result, there 
is increased circulating T4 and T3, with concomitant 
suppression of TSH. Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis pre-
dominate at this point. Radioiodine uptake is low or 
undetectable. After several weeks, thyroid hormone is 
depleted and a phase of hypothyroidism ensues, with 
low unbound T4 levels and moderate elevations of TSH. 
Radioiodine uptake returns to normal. Finally, after 4–6 
months, thyroid hormone and TSH levels return to nor-
mal as the disease subsides. Patient A is consistent with 
the thyrotoxic phase of subacute thyroiditis except for 
the increased radioiodine uptake scan. Patient C is more 
consistent with Graves’ disease with suppression of TSH, 
an elevated uptake scan, and elevated thyroid hormones 
as a result of stimulating immunoglobulin. Patient D is 
consistent with a neoplasm. Patient E is consistent with 
central hypothyroidism.
	33.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 4) Thyroid nodules are found in 5% of patients. 
Nodules are more common with age, in women, and in 
iodine-deficient areas. Given their prevalence, the cost of 
screening, and the generally benign course of most nod-
ules, the choice and order of screening tests have been 
very contentious. A small percentage of incidentally dis-
covered nodules will represent thyroid cancer, however. 
A TSH should be the first test to check after detection of 
a thyroid nodule. A majority of patients will have nor-
mal thyroid function tests. In the case of a normal TSH, 
fine-needle aspiration or ultrasound-guided biopsy can 
be pursued. If the TSH is low, a radionuclide scan should 
be performed to determine if the nodule is the source of 
thyroid hyperfunction (a “hot” nodule). In this case, this 
is the best course of action. “Hot” nodules can be treated 
medically, resected, or ablated with radioactive iodine. 
“Cold” nodules should be further evaluated with a fine-
needle aspiration. Four percent of nodules undergoing 
biopsy are malignant, 10% are suspicious for malignancy, 
and 86% are indeterminate or benign.
	34.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 5) The adrenal gland has three major functions: 
glucocorticoid synthesis, aldosterone synthesis, and 
androgen precursor synthesis. Glucocorticoid synthesis 
is controlled by the pituitary secretion of ACTH. The 
primary stimulus for aldosterone synthesis is the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system, which is independent 
of the pituitary. Thus, morning cortisol secretion and 
release of cortisol in response to stress are regulated by 
the pituitary gland, while regulation of sodium retention 
and potassium excretion by aldosterone is independent 
of the pituitary and would be preserved in this patient.
	35.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 5) Cushing’s syndrome is a constellation of fea-
tures that result from chronic exposure to elevated levels 
of cortisol from any etiology. Although the most com-
mon etiology is ACTH-producing pituitary adenoma, 
which accounts for 75% of Cushing’s syndrome, 15% is 
due to ectopic ACTH syndromes such as bronchial or 
pancreatic tumors, small cell lung cancer, and others. 
ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome is much more 
rare. Adrenocortical adenoma underlies 5–10% of cases, 
and adrenocortical carcinoma is present in 1% of Cushing’s 
cases. McCune-Albright syndrome is a genetic cause of 
bone abnormalities, skin lesions (cafe au lait), and prema-
ture puberty, particularly in girls. Interestingly, it is caused 
by a sporadic in utero mutation, not an inherited disorder, 
and thus will not be passed on to progeny.
	36.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 5) Conn’s syndrome refers to an aldosterone-
producing adrenal adenoma. Although it accounts for 40% 
of hyperaldosterone states, bilateral micronodular adrenal 
hyperplasia is more common. Other causes of hyperaldo-
steronism are substantially more rare, accounting for less 
than 1% of disease. The hallmark of Conn’s syndrome 
is hypertension with hypokalemia. Because aldosterone 
Review and Self-Assessment
510
stimulates sodium retention and potassium excretion, 
all patients should be hypokalemic at presentation. 
Serum sodium is usually normal because of concurrent 
fluid retention. Hypokalemia may be associated with 
muscle weakness, proximal myopathy, or even paralysis. 
Hypokalemia may be exacerbated by thiazide diuretics. 
Additional features include metabolic alkalosis that may 
contribute to muscle cramps and tetany.
	37.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 5) Incidental adrenal masses are often discov-
ered during radiographic testing for another condition 
and are found in approximately 6% of adult subjects at 
autopsy. Fifty percent of patients with a history of malig-
nancy and a newly discovered adrenal mass will actually 
have an adrenal metastasis. Fine-needle aspiration of a 
suspected metastatic malignancy will often be diagnostic. 
In the absence of a suspected nonadrenal malignancy, 
most adrenal incidentalomas are benign. Primary adrenal 
malignancies are uncommon (<0.01%), and fine-needle 
aspiration is not useful to distinguish between benign 
and malignant primary adrenal tumors. Although 90% of 
these masses are nonsecretory, patients with an inciden-
taloma should be screened for pheochromocytoma and 
hypercortisolism with plasma free metanephrines and an 
overnight dexamethasone suppression test, respectively. 
When radiographic features suggest a benign neoplasm 
(<3 cm), scanning should be repeated in 3–6 months. 
When masses are larger than 6 cm, surgical removal 
(if more likely to be primary adrenal malignancy) or fine-
needle aspiration (if more likely to be metastatic malig-
nancy) is preferred.
	38.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 6) When the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is 
entertained the first step is measurement of catecholamines 
and/or metanephrines. This can be achieved by urinary 
tests for vanillylmandelic acid, catecholamines, fractionated 
metanephrines, or total metanephrines. Total metaneph-
rines have a high sensitivity and therefore are frequently 
used. A value of three times the upper limit of normal 
is highly suggestive of pheochromocytoma. Borderline 
elevations, as this patient had, are likely to be false posi-
tives. The next most appropriate step is to remove poten-
tially confounding dietary or drug exposures, if possible, 
and repeat the test. Likely culprit drugs include levodopa, 
sympathomimetics, diuretics, tricyclic antidepressants, and 
alpha and beta blockers (labetalol in this case). Sertraline 
is an SSRI antidepressant, not a tricyclic. Alternatively, a 
clonidine suppression test may be ordered.
	39.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 6) Complete removal of the pheochromocy-
toma is the only therapy that leads to a long-term cure, 
although 90% of tumors are benign. However, preop-
erative control of hypertension is necessary to prevent 
surgical complications and lower mortality. This patient 
is presenting with encephalopathy in a hypertensive cri-
sis. The hypertension should be managed initially with 
IV medications to lower the mean arterial pressure by 
approximately 20% over the initial 24-hour period. 
Medications that can be used for hypertensive crisis in 
pheochromocytoma include nitroprusside, nicardipine, 
and phentolamine. Once the acute hypertensive crisis has 
resolved, transition to oral α-adrenergic blockers is indi-
cated. Phenoxybenzamine is the most commonly used 
drug and is started at low doses (5–10 mg three times 
daily) and titrated to the maximum tolerated dose (usu-
ally 20–30 mg daily). Once alpha blockers have been 
initiated, beta blockade can safely be utilized and is par-
ticularly indicated for ongoing tachycardia. Liberal salt 
and fluid intake helps expand plasma volume and treat 
orthostatic hypotension. Once blood pressure is main-
tained below 160/100 mmHg with moderate orthostasis, 
it is safe to proceed to surgery. If blood pressure remains 
elevated despite treatment with alpha blockade, addition 
of calcium channel blockers, angiotensin receptor block-
ers, or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors should 
be considered. Diuretics should be avoided, as they will 
exacerbate orthostasis.
	40.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 19) The risk of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus is rising in all populations, but the risk of type 2 
diabetes is rising at a substantially faster rate. In the United 
States, the age-adjusted prevalence of diabetes mellitus is 
7.1% in non-Hispanic whites, 7.5% in Asian Americans, 
11.8% in Hispanics, and 12.6% in non-Hispanic blacks. 
Comparable data are not available for individuals belong-
ing to American Indian, Alaska Native, or Pacific Islander 
populations, but the prevalence is thought to be even 
higher than that in the non-Hispanic black population.
	41.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 19) Glucose tolerance is classified into three catego-
ries: normal glucose tolerance, impaired glucose homeo-
stasis, and diabetes mellitus. Normal glucose tolerance is 
defined by the following: fasting plasma glucose below 
100 mg/dL, plasma glucose below 140 mg/dL following 
an oral glucose challenge, and hemoglobin A1C less than 
5.6%. Abnormal glucose homeostasis is defined as fast-
ing plasma glucose 100–125 mmol/dL or plasma glucose 
140–199 following oral glucose tolerance test or hemoglo-
bin A1C of 5.7–6.4%. Actual diabetes mellitus is defined 
by either a fasting plasma glucose above 126 mg/dL, glu-
cose of 200 mg/dL after oral glucose tolerance test, or 
hemoglobin A1C of 6.5% or above.
	42.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 19) Because the patient has symptoms, she is not 
being screened for diabetes mellitus. For screening, the fast-
ing plasma glucose or hemoglobin A1C is recommended. 
Review and Self-Assessment
511
Because the patient has symptoms, a random plasma glu-
cose of greater than 200 mg/dL is adequate to diagnose 
diabetes mellitus. Other criteria include fasting plasma glu-
cose above 126 mg/dL or hemoglobin A1C above 6.4% 
or 2-hour plasma glucose above 200 during an oral glucose 
tolerance test. C peptide is a useful tool to determine if the 
normal cleavage of insulin from its precursor is occurring. 
A normal C-peptide level with hypoglycemia suggests sur-
reptitious insulin use, and a low C-peptide with hypergly-
cemia suggests pancreatic failure.
	43.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 19) Risk factors for type 2 diabetes mellitus 
include family history of diabetes mellitus, including 
parent or sibling, BMI greater than 25 kg/m2, physical 
inactivity, race/ethnicity, previously identified impaired 
fasting glucose or hemoglobin A1C 5.7–6.4%, systemic 
hypertension, history of gestational diabetes or delivery 
of a baby greater than 4 kg, HDL less than 35 mmol/L 
and/or triglyceride level greater than 250 mg/dL, poly-
cystic ovarian disease or acanthosis nigricans, and history 
of cardiovascular disease.
	44.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 19) Type 1 diabetes mellitus often has a more 
severe presentation with diabetic ketoacidosis and 
often presents in younger individuals compared with 
type 2 diabetes; however, there are some cases where 
the distinction of type 1 from type 2 is not straightfor-
ward. There is HLA-DR3 localization preferences for 
type 1 diabetes; several haplotypes are present in 40% 
of children with type 1 diabetes mellitus, but it is still 
the minority. Immunologic destruction of the beta cell 
is the primary cause of disease in type 1 diabetes, and 
islet cell antibodies are commonly present. GAD, insulin, 
IA/ICA-512, and ZnT-8 are the most common targets. 
Commercially available assays for GAD-65 autoantibod-
ies are widely available and can demonstrate antibod-
ies in more than 85% of individuals with recent-onset 
type 1 diabetes. These autoantibodies are infrequently 
present in type 2 diabetes; mellitus at 5–10%. There may 
be some residual insulin in the plasma in early type 1 
diabetes; thus this will not distinguish the two conditions 
reliably. Polymorphisms of the peroxisome proliferator–
activated receptor γ-2 have been described in type 2 dia-
betes mellitus, but cannot distinguish the two conditions.
	45.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 19) Type 2 diabetes mellitus is preceded by a period 
of impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance, 
and a number of agents and interventions have been stud-
ied in this period to prevent progression to frank diabetes 
mellitus. The Diabetes Prevention Program demonstrated 
that intensive lifestyle changes including diet and exercise 
prevented or delayed the development of diabetes melli-
tus by 58% compared to placebo. Metformin was used in 
the same study and prevented the development of diabe-
tes by 31%. Other drug therapies have been studied and 
showed delayed progression including alpha-glucosidase 
inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, and orlistat, though none 
are approved for this purpose, and the American Diabetes 
Association recommends only metformin for therapy in 
impaired glucose tolerance. Sulfonylureas, such as gly-
buride, stimulate glucose secretion and have not been 
shown to delay progression to type 2 diabetes.
	46.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 19) Diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic 
hyperosmolar state exist on a spectrum, with diabetic 
ketoacidosis being more common in patients with type 1 
diabetes mellitus, but it does occur with some frequency 
in patients with type 2 diabetes. Both conditions include 
hyperglycemia, dehydration, absolute or relative insulin 
deficiency, and acid-base abnormalities. Ketosis is more 
common in diabetic ketoacidosis. In diabetic ketoacidosis, 
glucose normally ranges from 250 to 600 mg/dL, while 
it is frequently 600–1200 mg/dL in the hyperglycemic 
hyperosmolar state. Sodium is often mildly depressed in 
ketoacidosis and is preserved in the hyperosmolar state. 
Potassium is normal to elevated in diabetic ketoacido-
sis and normal in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar patients. 
Magnesium, chloride, and phosphate are normal in both 
conditions. Creatinine may be slightly elevated in dia-
betic ketoacidosis, but is often moderately elevated in the 
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state. Plasma ketones may be 
slightly positive in hyperosmolar patients, but are always 
strongly positive in diabetic ketoacidosis. Because hyper-
osmolarity is the hallmark of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar 
patients, they have an osmolarity of 330–380 mosm/mL, 
while patients with diabetic ketoacidosis have a plasma 
osmolarity ranging from 300 to 320 mosm/mL. Serum 
bicarbonate is markedly depressed in diabetic ketoacidosis 
and normal or slightly depressed in the hyperosmolar state. 
Arterial pH is depressed at less than 7.3 in ketoacidosis and 
more than 7.3 in the hyperosmolar state. Finally, the anion 
gap is wide in diabetic ketoacidosis and normal to slightly 
elevated in the hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state.
	47.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 19) Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of 
blindness in adults aged 20–74 years in the United States. 
Blindness is the result of macular edema and progressive 
retinopathy, which can be divided into nonproliferative 
and proliferative retinopathy. Nonproliferative retinopa-
thy tends to occur in the first and early second decades 
after diagnosis and is characterized by retinal vascular 
microaneurysms, blot hemorrhages, and cotton-wool 
spots. Neovascularization is the hallmark of proliferative 
retinopathy and occurs in response to retinal hypoxemia. 
Newly formed vessels occur in the retina and, because 
they are fragile, rupture easily and cause vitreous hemor-
rhage, fibrosis, and ultimately retinal detachment.
Review and Self-Assessment
512
	48.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 19) Diabetic ulcers represent a major source of 
morbidity and even mortality in patients with diabetes 
mellitus. Although a number of interventions have been 
tried, only six interventions are recommended by the 
American Diabetes Association for demonstrated efficacy 
in the management of diabetic foot wounds: (1) off- 
loading, (2) debridement, (3) wound dressings, (4) appropri-
ate use of antibiotics, (5) revascularization, and (6) limited 
amputation. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been used 
and is widely promoted through marketing, but rigorous 
proof of efficacy is lacking.
	49.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 19) Insulin preparations can be divided into short-
acting and long-acting insulins. The short-acting insulins 
include regular and new preparations including aspart, glu-
lisine, and lispro. Regular insulin has an onset of action of 
0.5–1 hour and is effective for 4–6 hours. The other three 
short-acting insulins have an onset of action of less than 
0.25 hours and are effective for 3–4 hours. Long-acting 
insulins include detemir, glargine, and NPH. Detemir and 
glargine have an onset of action of 1–4 hours and last up to 
24 hours, while NPH has an onset of action of 1–4 hours 
and is effective for 10–16 hours. These insulins have a 
number of combination preparations that take advantage 
of the different durations of onset and action to provide 
optimal efficacy and compliance.
	50.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 19) First-line oral therapy for patients with type 
2 diabetes mellitus is metformin. It is contraindicated in 
patients with GFR less than 60 mL/min, any form of 
acidosis, congestive heart failure, liver disease, or severe 
hypoxemia, but is well tolerated in most individuals. 
Insulin secretagogues, biguanides, alpha-glucosidase 
inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, GLP-1 agonists, DPP-IV 
inhibitors, and insulin have all been approved as mono-
therapy for type 2 diabetes. Because of extensive clinical 
experience with metformin, favorable side effect profile, 
and relatively low cost, it is the recommended first-line 
agent. It has additional benefits of promotion of mild 
weight loss, lower insulin levels, and mild improve-
ments in lipid profile. Sulfonylureas such as glyburide, 
GLP-1 agonists such as exenatide, and insulin dipeptidyl 
peptidase-4 inhibitors such as sitagliptin may be appro-
priate as combination therapy, but are not considered 
first-line therapy for most patients.
	51.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 19) The Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT) found definitive proof that a reduction 
in chronic hyperglycemia can prevent many of the com-
plications of type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM). This multi-
center randomized trial enrolled over 1400 patients with 
type 1 DM to either intensive or conventional diabetes 
management and prospectively evaluated the develop-
ment of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. The 
intensive group received multiple administrations of insu-
lin daily along with education and psychological counsel-
ing. The intensive group achieved a mean hemoglobin 
A1C of 7.3% versus 9.1% in the conventional group. 
Improvement in glycemic control resulted in a 47% 
reduction in retinopathy, a 54% reduction in nephropa-
thy, and a 60% reduction in neuropathy. There was a 
nonsignificant trend toward improvement in macrovas-
cular complications. The results of the DCCT showed 
that individuals in the intensive group would attain up to 
7 more years of intact vision and up to 5 more years free 
from lower limb amputation. Later, the United Kingdom 
Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) studied over 5000 
individuals with type 2 DM. Individuals receiving inten-
sive glycemic control had a reduction in microvascular 
events but no significant change in macrovascular com-
plications. These two trials were pivotal in showing a 
benefit of glycemic control in reducing microvascular 
complications in patients with type 1 and type 2 DM, 
respectively. Another result from the UKPDS was that 
strict blood pressure control resulted in an improvement 
in macrovascular complications.
	52.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 19) Tight glycemic control with a hemoglobin A1C 
of 7% or less has been shown in the Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial (DCCT) in type 1 diabetic patients 
and the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study 
(UKPDS) in type 2 diabetic patients to lead to improve-
ments in microvascular disease. Notably, a decreased inci-
dence of neuropathy, retinopathy, microalbuminuria, and 
nephropathy was shown in individuals with tight glyce-
mic control. Interestingly, glycemic control had no effect 
on macrovascular outcomes. Instead, it was blood pressure 
control to at least moderate goals (142/88 mmHg) in the 
UKPDS that resulted in a decreased incidence of mac-
rovascular outcomes, namely, DM-related death, stroke, 
and heart failure. Improved blood pressure control also 
resulted in improved microvascular outcomes.
	53.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 19) Diabetic ketoacidosis is an acute complication 
of diabetes mellitus. It results from a relative or absolute 
deficiency of insulin combined with a counterregulatory 
hormone excess. In particular, a decrease in the ratio of 
insulin to glucagons promotes gluconeogenesis, glycoge-
nolysis, and the formation of ketone bodies in the liver. 
Ketosis results from an increase in the release of free 
fatty acids from adipocytes, with a resultant shift toward 
ketone body synthesis in the liver. This is mediated by 
the relationship between insulin and the enzyme carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase I. At physiologic pH, ketone bodies 
exist as ketoacids, which are neutralized by bicarbon-
ate. As bicarbonate stores are depleted, acidosis develops. 
Review and Self-Assessment
513
Clinically, these patients have nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain. They are dehydrated and may be hypoten-
sive. Lethargy and severe central nervous system depression 
may occur. The treatment focuses on replacement of the 
body’s insulin, which will result in cessation of the forma-
tion of ketoacids and improvement of the acidotic state. 
Assessment of the level of acidosis may be done with an 
arterial blood gas. These patients have an anion gap acidosis 
and often a concomitant metabolic alkalosis resulting from 
volume depletion. Volume resuscitation with intravenous 
fluids is critical. Many electrolyte abnormalities may occur. 
Patients are total-body sodium, potassium, and magnesium 
depleted. As a result of the acidosis, intracellular potassium 
may shift out of cells and cause a normal or even elevated 
potassium level. However, with improvement in the aci-
dosis, the serum potassium rapidly falls. Therefore, potas-
sium repletion is critical despite the presence of a “normal” 
level. Because of the osmolar effects of glucose, fluid is 
drawn into the intravascular space. This results in a drop in 
the measured serum sodium. There is a drop of 1.6 meq/L 
in serum sodium for each rise of 100 mg/dL in serum glu-
cose. In this case, the serum sodium will improve with 
hydration alone. The use of 3% saline is not indicated 
because the patient has no neurologic deficits, and the 
expectation is for rapid resolution with IV fluids alone.
	54.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 19; Nathan, N Engl J Med 328:1676–1685, 
1993.) Nephropathy is a leading cause of death in diabetic 
patients. Diabetic nephropathy may be functionally silent 
for 10–15 years. Clinically detectable diabetic nephropa-
thy begins with the development of microalbuminuria 
(30–300 mg of albumin per 24 hours). The glomerular 
filtration rate actually may be elevated at this stage. Only 
after the passage of additional time will the proteinuria 
be overt enough (0.5 g/L) to be detectable on standard 
urine dipsticks. Microalbuminuria precedes nephropathy 
in patients with both non–insulin-dependent and insulin- 
dependent diabetes. An increase in kidney size also may 
accompany the initial hyperfiltration stage. Once the pro-
teinuria becomes significant enough to be detected by 
dipstick, a steady decline in renal function occurs, with the 
glomerular filtration rate falling an average of 1 mL/min 
per month. Therefore, azotemia begins about 12 years 
after the diagnosis of diabetes. Hypertension clearly is an 
exacerbating factor for diabetic nephropathy.
	55.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 20) Maintenance of euglycemia involves a num-
ber of systems to lower elevated blood glucose, but also 
to restore normal levels when hypoglycemia is present 
or impending. Decreased insulin secretion is the primary 
glucose regulator factor and its secretion is inhibited with 
a plasma glucose of 80–85 mg/dL. Glucagon secretion is 
the second defense against hypoglycemia, secreted at a glu-
cose of 65–70 mg/dL. Epinephrine and cortisol secretion 
are third and are released at a glucose of 65–70 mg/dL. 
Finally, symptoms develop with a glucose of 50–55 mg/
dL that will lead the patient to find a source of food, 
and decreased cognition occurs with glucose less than 
50 mg/dL.
	56.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 20) The patient presents with recurrent episodes 
of hypoglycemia that meet Whipple’s triad of symptoms, 
documented low glucose at the time of symptoms, and 
reversal of symptoms upon administration of glucose. 
The differential starts with measuring insulin levels dur-
ing hypoglycemia. The levels must be obtained during an 
episode to be interpretable. If insulin is elevated, it sug-
gests either endogenous hyperproduction from an insu-
lin-secreting tumor or exogenous administration causing 
factitious hypoglycemia. Because C peptide is cleaved from 
native proinsulin to make the secreted product, it will be 
high in the case of endogenous hyperinsulinemia and low 
during an episode of factitious hypoglycemia. Surrepti-
tious ingestion of sulfonylurea could cause hypoglycemia 
along with high insulin and C-peptide levels since the 
drugs stimulate pancreatic insulin secretion. In this case, 
a sulfonylurea drug screen would be indicated. Red flags 
in this case that point to surreptitious insulin use include 
the patient being a health care worker and the presence 
of symptoms only at work. Other groups in which this is 
common is relatives of patients with diabetes and patients 
with a history of other factitious disorders. It is possible 
that she has an insulin-secreting beta-cell tumor, but this is 
much less likely, and symptoms would be present during 
times other than work. Evaluation is aimed at demonstrat-
ing that pancreatic insulin secretion is suppressed during 
the episode of hypoglycemia. Although a failure of coun-
terregulatory hormones can produce hypoglycemia, this is 
a very rare cause of hypoglycemia, and evaluation should 
be aimed at this only after surreptitious use is ruled out.
	57.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 20) The most common cause of hypoglycemia is 
related to the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Individuals 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) have more symp-
tomatic hypoglycemia than individuals with type 2 dia-
betes mellitus (T2DM). On average, those with T1DM 
experience two episodes of symptomatic hypoglyce-
mia weekly, and at least once yearly, individuals with 
T1DM will have a severe episode of hypoglycemia that 
is at least temporarily disabling. It is estimated that 2–4% 
of individuals with T1DM will die from hypoglyce-
mia. In addition, recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia in 
T1DM contribute to the development of hypoglycemia- 
associated autonomic failure. Clinically, this is manifested as 
hypoglycemia unawareness and defective glucose counter-
regulation, with lack of glucagon and epinephrine secretion 
as glucose levels fall. Individuals with T2DM are less likely 
to develop hypoglycemia. Medications that are associated 
Review and Self-Assessment
514
with hypoglycemia in T2DM are insulin and insulin secre-
tagogues, such as sulfonylureas. Metformin, thiazolidin-
ediones, α-glucosidase inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor agonists, and dipeptidyl peptidase-IV inhibitors do 
not cause hypoglycemia.
	58.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 8) Gynecomastia is a relatively common complaint 
in men and may be caused by either obesity with adipose 
tissue expansion in the breast or by an increased estrogen/
androgen ratio in which there is true glandular enlarge-
ment, as in this case. If the breast is unilaterally enlarged or 
if it is hard or fixed to underlying tissue, mammography is 
indicated. Alternatively, if cirrhosis or a causative drug is 
present, these may be adequate explanations, particularly 
when gynecomastia develops later in life in previously fer-
tile men. If the breast tissue is greater than 4 cm or there is 
evidence of very small testes and no causative drugs or liver 
disease, a search for alterations in serum testosterone, LH, 
FSH estradiol, and hCG levels should be undertaken. An 
androgen deficiency or resistance syndrome may be pres-
ent or an hCG-secreting tumor may be found. In this case, 
spironolactone is the likely culprit, and it may be stopped 
or switched to eplerenone and gynecomastia reassessed.
	59.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 8) Many drugs may interfere with testicular func-
tion through a variety of mechanisms. Cyclophosphamide 
damages the seminiferous tubules in a dose- and time-
dependent fashion and causes azoospermia within a few 
weeks of initiation. This effect is reversible in approxi-
mately half of these patients. Ketoconazole inhibits tes-
tosterone synthesis. Spironolactone causes a blockade of 
androgen action, which may also cause gynecomastia. 
Glucocorticoids lead to hypogonadism predominantly 
through inhibition of hypothalamic-pituitary function. 
Sexual dysfunction has been described as a side effect of 
therapy with beta blockers. However, there is no evi-
dence of an effect on testicular function. Most reports of 
sexual dysfunction were in patients receiving older beta 
blockers such as propranolol and timolol.
	60.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 10) Women who have regular monthly bleeding 
cycles that do not vary by more than 4 days generally 
have ovulatory cycles, but several other indicators sug-
gest that ovulation is likely. These include the presence 
of mittelschmerz, which is described as midcycle pelvic dis-
comfort that is thought to be caused by rapid expansion of 
the dominant follicle at the time of ovulation, or premen-
strual symptoms such as breast tenderness, bloating, and 
food cravings. Additional objective parameters suggest 
the presence of ovulation including a progesterone level 
greater than 5 ng/mL 7 days before expected menses, an 
increase in basal body temperature more than 0.5°F in 
the second half of the menstrual cycle, and detection of 
urinary LH surge. Estrogen levels are elevated at the time 
of ovulation and during the secretory phase of the men-
strual cycle, but are not useful in detection of ovulation.
	61.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 10) Infertility, defined as the inability to conceive 
after 12 months of unprotected intercourse, is a common 
problem in the United States with estimates of 15% of 
couples affected. Initial evaluation should include an eval-
uation of current menstrual history, counseling regard-
ing the appropriate timing of intercourse, and education 
regarding modifiable risk factors such as drug use, alcohol 
intake, smoking, caffeine, and obesity. Male factors are at 
the root of approximately 25% of cases of infertility; unex-
plained infertility is found in 17% of cases; and female 
causes underlie 58% of infertility. Among the female 
causes, the most common is amenorrhea/ovulatory dys-
function, which is present in 46% of cases. This is most 
frequently due to hypothalamic or pituitary cases or poly-
cystic ovary syndrome. Tubal defects and endometriosis 
are less common.
	62.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 10) Evaluation of infertility should include evalu-
ation of common male and female factors that could be 
contributing. Abnormalities of menstrual function are 
the most common cause of female infertility, and ini-
tial evaluation of infertility should include evaluation of 
ovulation and assessment of tubal and uterine patency. 
The female partner reports an episode of gonococcal 
infection with symptoms of pelvic inflammatory disease, 
which would increase her risk of infertility due to tubal 
scarring and occlusion. A hysterosalpingogram is indi-
cated. If there is evidence of tubal abnormalities, many 
experts recommend in vitro fertilization for conception, 
as these women are at increased risk of ectopic pregnancy 
if conception occurs. The female partner reports some 
irregularity of her menses, suggesting anovulatory cycles, 
and thus evidence of ovulation should be determined 
by assessing hormonal levels. There is no evidence that 
prolonged use of oral contraceptives affects fertility 
adversely (A Farrow, et al: Hum Reprod 17: 2754, 2002). 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, including 
lisinopril, are known teratogens when taken by women 
but have no effects on chromosomal abnormalities in men. 
Recent marijuana use may be associated with increased 
risk of infertility, and in vitro studies of human sperm 
exposed to a cannabinoid derivative showed decreased 
motility (LB Whan, et al: Fertil Steril 85: 653, 2006). 
However, no studies have shown long-term decreased 
fertility in men who previously used marijuana.
	63.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 10) All of the choices have a theoretical efficacy in 
preventing pregnancy of more than 90%. However, the 
actual effectiveness can vary widely. Spermicides have the 
Review and Self-Assessment
515
greatest failure rate of 21%. Barrier methods (condoms, 
cervical cap, diaphragm) have an actual efficacy between 
82% and 88%. Oral contraceptives and intrauterine 
devices perform similarly, with 97% efficacy in prevent-
ing pregnancy in clinical practice.
	64.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 10) Pathologic gynecomastia develops when the 
effective testosterone-to-estrogen ratio is decreased owing 
to diminished testosterone production (as in primary tes-
ticular failure) or increased estrogen production. The latter 
may arise from direct estradiol secretion by a testis stimu-
lated by LH or hCG, or from an increase in peripheral 
aromatization of precursor steroids, most notably andro-
stenedione. Elevated androstenedione levels may result 
from increased secretion by an adrenal tumor (leading to 
an elevated level of urinary 17-ketosteroids) or decreased 
hepatic clearance in patients with chronic liver disease. 
A variety of drugs, including diethylstilbestrol, heroin, 
digitalis, spironolactone, cimetidine, isoniazid, and tricy-
clic antidepressants, also can cause gynecomastia. In this 
patient, the history of paternity and the otherwise normal 
physical examination indicate that a karyotype is unnec-
essary, and the bilateral breast enlargement essentially 
excludes the presence of carcinoma and thus the need for 
biopsy. The presence of a low LH and testosterone sug-
gests either estrogen or hCG production. Because of the 
normal testicular examination, a primary testicular tumor 
is not suspected. Carcinoma of the lung and germ cell 
tumors both can produce hCG, causing gynecomastia.
	65.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 12) The Women’s Health Initiative was the larg-
est study of hormone therapy to date including 27,000 
postmenopausal women aged 50–79 for an average of 
5–7 years. This trial was stopped early because of an unfa-
vorable risk-to-benefit ratio in the estrogen-progestin arm 
and an increased risk of stroke that was not offset by lower 
coronary heart disease in the estrogen-only arm. Endo-
metrial cancer risk was higher in patients with estrogen 
only and uterus. Use of progesterone eliminates this risk. 
Unopposed estrogen was associated with increased risk of 
stroke that far outweighed the decreased risk of coronary 
heart disease. Estrogen-progestin together was associated 
with an increased risk of coronary heart disease. Osteo-
porosis risk was decreased in both estrogen and estrogen-
progestin groups. Venous thromboembolism risk was 
higher in both treatment groups as well. These therapies 
do reduce important menopausal symptoms such as hot 
flashes and vaginal drying. This seminal study caused a 
dramatic reevaluation of the use of estrogen/progesterone 
in postmenopausal women to reduce cardiovascular risk.
	66.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 7) Klinefelter’s syndrome is a chromosomal dis-
order with 47,XXY. Because the primary feature of this 
disorder is gonadal failure, low testosterone is present and 
thus increased LH and FSH are produced in an attempt 
to increase testosterone production in the feedback loop 
of sex hormones. Increased estrogen is often produced 
because of chronic Leydig cell stimulation by LH and 
because of aromatization of androstenedione by adipose 
tissue. The lower testosterone:estrogen ratio results in 
mild feminization with gynecomastia. Features of low 
testosterone are small testes and “eunuchoid” propor-
tions with long legs and incomplete virilization. Biopsy 
of the testes, though rarely performed, shows hyalin-
ization of the seminiferous tubules and azoospermia. 
Although severe cases are diagnosed prepubertally with 
small testes and impaired androgenization, approximately 
75% of cases are not diagnosed and the frequency in the 
general population is 1/1000. Patients with Klinefelter’s 
syndrome are at increased risk of breast tumors, throm-
boembolic disease, learning difficulties, obesity, diabetes 
mellitus, and varicose veins.
	67.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 7) Turner’s syndrome most frequently results 
from a 45,X karyotype, but mosaicism (45,X/46,XX) 
also can result in this disorder. Clinically, Turner’s syn-
drome manifests as short stature and primary amenorrhea 
if presenting in young adulthood. In addition, chronic 
lymphedema of the hands and feet, nuchal folds, a low 
hairline, and high arched palate are also common fea-
tures. To diagnose Turner’s syndrome, karyotype analysis 
should be performed. A Barr body results from inacti-
vation of one of the X chromosomes in women and is 
not seen in males. In Turner’s syndrome, the Barr body 
should be absent, but only 50% of individuals with 
Turner’s syndrome have the 45,X karyotype. Thus, the 
diagnosis could be missed in those with mosaicism or 
other structural abnormalities of the X chromosome.
Multiple comorbid conditions are found in individu-
als with Turner’s syndrome, and appropriate screening 
is recommended. Congenital heart defects affect 30% of 
women with Turner’s syndrome, including bicuspid aor-
tic valve, coarctation of the aorta, and aortic root dilata-
tion. An echocardiogram should be performed, and the 
individual should be assessed with blood pressures in the 
arms and legs. Hypertension can also be associated with 
structural abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract, 
most commonly horseshoe kidney. A renal ultrasound is 
also recommended. Autoimmune thyroid disease affects 
15–30% of women with Turner’s syndrome and should 
be assessed by screening TSH. Other comorbidities that 
may occur include sensorineural hearing loss, elevated 
liver function enzymes, osteoporosis, and celiac disease.
	68.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 22) The patient presents with recurrent peptic 
ulcers without evidence of H. pylori infection. The diag-
nosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome should be obtained. 
Review and Self-Assessment
516
Additional features that suggest nonclassic idiopathic 
ulcer disease include the presence of diarrhea, which is 
commonly present in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, but 
not idiopathic ulcers. The diagnosis is commonly made 
through measurement of plasma gastrin levels, which 
should be markedly elevated, but common use of pro-
ton pump inhibitors (PPIs) that potently suppress gas-
tric acid secretion confound this measurement. Because 
PPI use suppresses gastric acid production, gastrin rises. 
Thus PPI use should be discontinued for 1 week prior 
to measurement of gastrin in plasma. Often this requires 
collaboration with gastroenterologists to ensure safety 
and potentially offer alternative pharmacology during 
this time. Once hypergastrinemia is confirmed, the pres-
ence of low gastric pH must be confirmed, as the most 
common cause of elevated gastrin is achlorhydria due 
to pernicious anemia. Imaging of the abdomen is indi-
cated after demonstration of hypergastrinemia. Finally, 
although Zollinger-Ellison syndrome may be associated 
with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, which often 
has parathyroid hyperplasia or adenoma, this is less likely 
than isolated Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
69 and 70.  The answers are E and E, respectively. 
(Chap. 22) In patients with a nonmetastatic carcinoid, 
surgery is the only potentially curative therapy. The 
extent of surgical resection depends on the size of the 
primary tumor because the risk of metastasis is related to 
the size of the tumor. Symptomatic treatment is aimed 
at decreasing the amount and effect of circulating sub-
stances. Drugs that inhibit the serotonin 5-HT1 and 
5-HT2 receptors (methysergide, cyproheptadine, ket-
anserin) may control diarrhea but not flushing. 5-HT3 
receptor antagonists (ondansetron, tropisetron, alose-
tron) control nausea and diarrhea in up to 100% of these 
patients and may alleviate flushing. A combination of 
histamine H1 and H2 receptor antagonists may control 
flushing, particularly in patients with foregut carcinoid 
tumors. Somatostatin analogues (octreotide, lanreotide) 
are the most effective and widely used agents to control 
the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome, decreasing urinary 
5-HIAA excretion and symptoms in 70–80% of patients. 
Interferon α, alone or combined with hepatic artery 
embolization, controls flushing and diarrhea in 40–85% 
of these patients. Phenoxybenzamine is an α1-adrenergic 
receptor blocker that is used in the treatment of pheo-
chromocytoma.
Carcinoid crisis is a life-threatening complication 
of carcinoid syndrome. It is most common in patients 
with intense symptoms from foregut tumors or mark-
edly high levels of urinary 5-HIAA. The crisis may 
be provoked by surgery, stress, anesthesia, chemo-
therapy, or physical trauma to the tumor (biopsy or, in 
this case, physical compression of liver lesions). These 
patients develop severe typical symptoms plus sys-
temic symptoms such as hypotension and hypertension 
with tachycardia. Synthetic analogues of somatostatin 
(octreotide, lanreotide) are the treatment of choice 
for carcinoid crisis. They are also effective in prevent-
ing crises when administered before a known inciting 
event. Octreotide 150–250 μg subcutaneously every 
6–8 hours should be started 24–48 hours before a pro-
cedure that is likely to precipitate a carcinoid crisis.
	71.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 22) This patient presents with the classic find-
ings of a VIPoma, including large-volume watery diar-
rhea, hypokalemia, dehydration, and hypochlorhydria 
(WDHA, or Verner-Morrison syndrome). Abdominal 
pain is unusual. The presence of a secretory diarrhea is 
confirmed by a stool osmolal gap [2(stool Na + stool K) – 
(stool osmolality)] below 35 and persistence during fast-
ing. In osmotic or laxative-induced diarrhea, the stool 
osmolal gap is over 100. In adults, over 80% of VIPomas 
are solitary pancreatic masses that usually are larger than 
3 cm at diagnosis. Metastases to the liver are common 
and preclude curative surgical resection. The differential 
diagnosis includes gastrinoma, laxative abuse, carcinoid 
syndrome, and systemic mastocytosis. Diagnosis serum 
VIP. CT scan of the abdomen will often demonstrate the 
pancreatic mass and liver metastases.
	72.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 23) Multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome is 
defined as a disorder with neoplasms affecting two or more 
hormonal tissues in several members of the family. The 
most common of these is MEN 1, which is caused by the 
gene coding the nuclear protein called Menin. MEN 1 is 
associated with tumors or hyperplasia of the parathyroid, 
pancreas, pituitary, adrenal cortex, and foregut, and/or 
subcutaneous or visceral lipomas. The most common and 
earliest manifestation is hyperparathyroidism with symp-
tomatic hypercalcemia. This most commonly occurs in 
the late teenage years and 93–100% of mutation carri-
ers develop this complication. Gastrinomas, insulinomas, 
and prolactinomas are less common and tend to occur in 
patients in their 20s, 30s, and 40s. Pheochromocytoma 
may occur in MEN 1, but is more commonly found in 
MEN 2A or von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.
	73.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 23) This patient’s clinical scenario is most consis-
tent with MEN 1, or the “3 Ps”: parathyroid, pituitary, 
and pancreas. MEN 1 is an autosomal dominant genetic 
syndrome characterized by neoplasia of the parathyroid, 
pituitary, and pancreatic islet cells. Hyperparathyroidism 
is the most common manifestation of MEN 1. The neo-
plastic changes affect multiple parathyroid glands, mak-
ing surgical care difficult. Pancreatic islet cell neoplasia 
is the second most common manifestation of MEN 1. 
Increased pancreatic islet cell hormones include pancreatic 
polypeptide, gastrin, insulin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, 
Review and Self-Assessment
517
glucagons, and somatostatin. Pancreatic tumors may be 
multicentric, and up to 30% are malignant, with the liver 
being the first site of metastases. The symptoms depend 
on the type of hormone secreted. The Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome (ZES) causes elevations of gastrin, resulting in 
an ulcer diathesis. Conservative therapy is often unsuc-
cessful. Insulinoma results in documented hypoglycemia 
with elevated insulin and C-peptide levels. Glucagonoma 
results in hyperglycemia, skin rash, anorexia, glossitis, and 
diarrhea. Elevations in vasoactive intestinal peptide result 
in profuse watery diarrhea. Pituitary tumors occur in up 
to half of patients with MEN 1. Prolactinomas are the 
most common. The multicentricity of the tumors makes 
resection difficult. Growth hormone–secreting tumors 
are the next most common, with ACTH- and corti-
cotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)-secreting tumors 
being more rare. Carcinoid tumors may also occur in the 
thymus, lung, stomach, and duodenum.
74 and 75.  The answers are D and C, respectively. 
(Chap. 25) Hypophosphatemia results from one of three 
mechanisms: inadequate intestinal phosphate absorption, 
excessive renal phosphate excretion, and rapid redistribu-
tion of phosphate from the extracellular space into bone 
or soft tissue. Inadequate intestinal absorption is rare since 
antacids containing aluminum hydroxide are no longer 
commonly prescribed. Malnutrition from fasting or star-
vation may result in depletion of phosphate. This is also 
commonly seen in alcoholism. In hospitalized patients, 
redistribution is the main cause. Insulin promotes phos-
phate entry into cells along with glucose. When nutri-
tion is initiated, refeeding further increases redistribution 
of phosphate into cells and is more pronounced when IV 
glucose is used alone. Sepsis may cause destruction of cells 
and metabolic acidosis, resulting in a net shift of phos-
phate from the extracellular space into cells. Renal failure 
is associated with hyperphosphatemia, not hypophospha-
temia, and initial prerenal azotemia, such as in this presen-
tation, can obscure underlying phosphate depletion.
The approach to treating hypophosphatemia should 
take into account several factors, including the likelihood 
(and magnitude) of underlying phosphate depletion, 
renal function, serum calcium levels, and the concur-
rent administration of parenteral glucose. In addition, the 
treating physician should assess the patient for complica-
tions of hypophosphatemia, which can include neuro-
muscular weakness, cardiac dysfunction, hemolysis, and 
platelet dysfunction. Severe hypophosphatemia generally 
occurs when the serum concentration falls below 2 mg/
dL (<0.75 mmol/L). This becomes particularly dangerous 
when there is underlying chronic phosphate depletion. 
However, there is no simple formula to determine the 
body’s phosphate needs from measurement of the serum 
phosphate levels because most phosphate is intracellu-
lar. It is generally recommended to use oral phosphate 
repletion when the serum phosphate levels are greater 
than 1.5–2.5 mg/dL (0.5–0.8 mmol/L). The dose of oral 
phosphate is 750–2000 mg daily of elemental phosphate 
given in divided doses. More severe hypophosphatemia, 
as in the case presented, requires intravenous repletion. 
Intravenous phosphate repletion is given as neutral mix-
tures of sodium and potassium phosphate salts at doses 
of 0.2–0.8 mmol/kg given over 6 hours. Table 25-2 
outlines the total dose and recommended infusion rates 
for a range of phosphate levels. In this patient with a 
level of 1.0 mg/dL, the recommended infusion rate is 
8 mmol/h over 6 hours for a total dose of 48 mmol. 
Until the underlying hypophosphatemia is corrected, 
one should measure phosphate and calcium levels every 
6 hours. The infusion should be stopped if the calcium 
phosphate product rises to higher than 50 to decrease the 
risk of heterotopic calcification. Alternatively, if hypocal-
cemia is present coincident with the hypophosphatemia, 
it is important to correct the calcium prior to administer-
ing phosphate.
	76.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 25) Magnesium sulfate is first-line therapy for sei-
zures associated with eclampsia of pregnancy. A pregnant 
woman presenting with seizures and hypertension is ini-
tially treated with a bolus of magnesium sulfate at a dose 
of approximately 4 g followed by a continuous infusion at 
1 g/h. While definitive treatment of eclampsia is delivery 
of the baby, ongoing therapy with magnesium sulfate for 
24 hours following the last seizure is recommended. 
Patients should be monitored throughout the infusion for 
signs of hypermagnesemia, and levels should be measured 
at least every 6 hours. The usual magnesium concentra-
tion is 0.7–1 mmol/L (1.5–2 meq/L), and the desired level 
for treatment of preeclampsia is usually 1.7–3.5 mmol/L, 
although signs and symptoms of hypermagnesemia can 
develop with levels of 2 mmol/L or higher. The initial 
signs of hypermagnesemia include prolongation of the 
QRS complex, depression of deep tendon reflexes, and 
hypotension that is refractory to vasopressors. At con-
centrations greater than 4 mmol/L, nausea, lethargy, and 
weakness can appear and progress to paralysis and respira-
tory failure. The symptoms become increasingly severe, 
and asystole occurs when levels approach 10 mmol/L.
	77.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 25) Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent in 
the United States and is most common in older individu-
als who are hospitalized or institutionalized. Vitamin D 
deficiency can occur as a result of inadequate dietary 
intake, decreased production in the skin, decreased intes-
tinal absorption, accelerated losses, or impaired vitamin D 
activation in the liver or kidney. Clinically, vitamin D 
deficiency in older individuals is most often silent. Often 
practitioners fail to consider vitamin D deficiency until a 
patient has been diagnosed with osteoporosis or suffered 
a fracture. However, some individuals can experience 
Review and Self-Assessment
518
diffuse muscle and bone pain. When assessing vitamin D 
levels, the appropriate test is 25-hydroxy vitamin D 
[25(OH)D] levels. Optimal 25(OH)D levels are greater 
than 80 nmol/L (32 ng/mL); however, an individual 
is not considered deficient until the level is less than 
37 nmol/L (15 ng/mL). When the 25(OH)D level 
falls below this level, parathyroid hormone (PTH) may 
rise, and it is also associated with a lower bone density. 
Vitamin D deficiency leads to decreased intestinal absorp-
tion of calcium with resultant hypocalcemia and secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. In response to this, there is higher 
bone turnover, which can be associated with an increase 
in alkaline phosphatase levels. In addition, elevated PTH 
stimulates renal conversion of 25-hydroxy vitamin D to 
1,25-hydroxy vitamin D, the activated form of vitamin D. 
Thus, even in the face of severe vitamin D deficiency, 
the activated 1,25(OH)D levels may be normal and do 
not accurately reflect vitamin D stores. Thus, 1,25(OH)D 
should not be used to make a diagnosis of vitamin D defi-
ciency. While vitamin D deficiency may be associated 
with abnormalities in PTH, alkaline phosphatase, and cal-
cium levels, these biochemical abnormalities are seen in 
many other diseases and are neither sensitive nor specific 
for the diagnosis of vitamin D deficiency.
	78.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 27) Granulomatous disorders including sarcoid-
osis, tuberculosis, and fungal infections can be associ-
ated with hypercalcemia-caused increased synthesis of 
1,25-hydroxy vitamin D by macrophages within the 
granulomas. This process bypasses the normal feedback 
mechanisms, and elevated levels of both 25-hydroxy 
and 1,25-hydroxy vitamin D can be seen. This does not 
normally occur as 1,25-hydroxy-vitamin D levels are nor-
mally tightly controlled through feedback mechanisms on 
renal 1-hydroxylase, the primary producer of activated 
vitamin D in normal circumstances. In addition, the nor-
mal feedback provided by parathyroid hormone concen-
trations is also bypassed and the PTH level may below.
	79.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 27) This patient demonstrates evidence of ter-
tiary hyperparathyroidism, with inappropriate elevations 
in parathyroid hormone despite increases in calcium 
and phosphate. In addition, the patient is demonstrat-
ing clinical evidence of disease including bony pain and 
ectopic calcification. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism most 
commonly develops in individuals with long-standing 
renal failure who have been nonadherent to therapy. In 
this case scenario, the hypoxemia and ground-glass infil-
trates on chest CT represent ectopic calcification of the 
lungs. This can be difficult to identify with typical imag-
ing, and a technetium-99 bone scan will show increased 
uptake in the lungs. Treatment of tertiary hyperpara-
thyroidism with severe clinical manifestations requires 
parathyroidectomy.
	80.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 27) Hypocalcemia can be a life-threatening con-
sequence of thyroidectomy if the parathyroid glands are 
inadvertently removed during the surgery, as the four 
parathyroid glands are located immediately posterior to the 
thyroid gland. This is an infrequent occurrence currently 
as the parathyroid glands can be better identified both 
before and during surgery. However, hypoparathyroidism 
may occur even if the parathyroid glands are not removed 
by thyroidectomy due to devascularization or trauma to 
the parathyroid glands. Hypocalcemia following removal 
of the parathyroid glands may begin any time during the 
first 24–72 hours, and monitoring of serial calcium levels 
is recommended for the first 72 hours. The earliest symp-
toms of hypocalcemia are typically circumoral paresthesias 
and paresthesias with a “pins-and-needles” sensation in 
the fingers and toes. The development of carpal spasms 
upon inflation of the blood pressure cuff is a classic sign of 
hypocalcemia and is known as Trousseau sign. Chvostek 
sign is the other classic sign of hypocalcemia and is elic-
ited by tapping the facial nerve in the preauricular area 
causing spasm of the facial muscles. A prolongation of the 
QT interval on ECG suggests life-threatening hypocal-
cemia that may progress to fatal arrhythmia, and treat-
ment should not be delayed for serum testing to occur in 
a patient with a known cause of hypocalcemia. Immediate 
treatment with IV calcium should be initiated. Mainte-
nance therapy with calcitriol and vitamin D is necessary 
for ongoing treatment of acquired hypoparathyroidism. 
Alternatively, surgeons may implant parathyroid tissue 
into the soft tissue of the forearm, if it is thought that 
the parathyroid glands will be removed. Hypomagnese-
mia can cause hypocalcemia by suppressing parathyroid 
hormone release despite the presence of hypocalcemia. 
However, in this patient, hypomagnesemia is not sus-
pected after thyroidectomy, and magnesium administra-
tion is not indicated. Benztropine is a centrally acting 
anticholinergic medication that is used in the treatment 
of dystonic reactions that can occur after taking centrally 
acting antiemetic medications with dopaminergic activity, 
such as metoclopramide or Compazine. Dystonic reac-
tions involve focal spasms of the face, neck, and extremi-
ties. While this patient has taken a medication (morphine) 
that can cause a dystonic reaction, the spasms that she is 
experiencing are more consistent with tetanic contrac-
tions of hypocalcemia than dystonic reactions. Finally, 
measurement of forced vital capacity is most commonly 
used as a measurement of disease severity in myasthenia 
gravis or Guillain-Barré syndrome. Muscle weakness is a 
typical presenting feature but not paresthesias.
	81.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 27) Malignancy can cause hypercalcemia by sev-
eral different mechanisms, including metastasis to bone, 
cytokine stimulation of bone turnover, and production of 
a protein structurally similar to parathyroid hormone by 
Review and Self-Assessment
519
the tumor. This protein is called parathyroid hormone–
related peptide (PTHrp) and acts at the same receptors as 
parathyroid hormone (PTH). Squamous cell carcinoma 
of the lung is the most common tumor associated with 
the production of PTHrp. Serum calcium levels can 
become quite high in malignancy because of unregu-
lated production of PTHrp that is outside of the nega-
tive feedback control that normally results in the setting 
of hypercalcemia. PTH hormone levels should be quite 
low or undetectable in this setting. When hypercalce-
mia is severe (>15 mg/dL), symptoms frequently include 
dehydration and altered mental status. The electrocardio-
gram may show a shortened QTc interval. Initial therapy 
includes large-volume fluid administration to reverse the 
dehydration that results from hypercalciuria. In addition, 
furosemide is added to promote further calciuria. If the 
calcium remains elevated, as in this patient, additional 
measures should be undertaken to decrease the serum 
calcium. Calcitonin has a rapid onset of action with a 
decrease in serum calcium seen within hours. However, 
tachyphylaxis develops, and the duration of benefit is lim-
ited. Pamidronate is a bisphosphonate that is useful for the 
hypercalcemia of malignancy. It decreases serum calcium 
by preventing bone resorption and release of calcium from 
the bone. After IV administration, the onset of action 
of pamidronate is 1–2 days with a duration of action of 
at least 2 weeks. Thus, in this patient with ongoing severe 
symptomatic hypercalcemia, addition of both calcitonin 
and pamidronate is the best treatment. The patient should 
continue to receive IV fluids and furosemide. The addi-
tion of a thiazide diuretic is contraindicated because thia-
zides cause increased calcium resorption in the kidney and 
would worsen hypercalcemia.
	82.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 27) Hyperparathyroidism is the most common 
cause of hypercalcemia and is the most likely cause in an 
adult who is asymptomatic. Cancer is the second most 
common cause of hypercalcemia but usually is associ-
ated with symptomatic hypercalcemia. In addition, there 
are frequently symptoms from the malignancy itself that 
dominate the clinical picture. Primary hyperparathyroid-
ism results from autonomous secretion of parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) that is no longer regulated by serum cal-
cium levels, usually related to the development of parathy-
roid adenomas. Most patients are asymptomatic or have 
minimal symptoms at the time of diagnosis. When pres-
ent, symptoms include recurrent nephrolithiasis, peptic 
ulcers, dehydration, constipation, and altered mental sta-
tus. Laboratory studies show elevated serum calcium with 
decreased serum phosphate. Diagnosis can be confirmed 
with measurement of parathyroid hormone levels. Surgi-
cal removal of autonomous adenomas is generally cura-
tive, but not all patients need to be treated surgically. It is 
recommended that individuals below age 50 undergo pri-
mary surgical resection. However, in those above 50 years, 
a cautious approach with frequent laboratory monitor-
ing is often used. Surgery can then be undertaken if a 
patient develops symptomatic or worsening hypercalce-
mia or complications such as osteopenia. Breast cancer is 
a frequent cause of hypercalcemia because of metastatic 
disease to the bone. In this patient who has received 
routine mammography as part of age-appropriate cancer 
screening and is asymptomatic, this would be unlikely. 
Multiple myeloma is another malignancy frequently asso-
ciated with hypercalcemia that is thought to be due to 
the production of cytokines and humoral mediators by 
the tumor. Multiple myeloma should not present with 
isolated hypercalcemia and is associated with anemia and 
elevations in creatinine.
Approximately 20% of individuals with hyperthyroid-
ism develop hypercalcemia related to increased bone 
turnover. This patient exhibits no signs or symptoms of 
hyperthyroidism, making the diagnosis unlikely. Vitamin D 
intoxication is a rare cause of hypercalcemia. An individual 
must ingest 40–100 times the recommended daily amount 
in order to develop hypercalcemia. Because vitamin D acts 
to increase both calcium and phosphate absorption from 
the intestine, serum levels of both minerals would be ele-
vated, which is not seen in this case.
	83.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 27) Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is produced by 
the four small parathyroid glands that lie posterior to the 
thyroid gland and is the primary hormone responsible 
for regulating serum calcium and phosphate balance. 
PTH secretion is tightly regulated with negative feed-
back to the parathyroid glands by serum calcium and 
vitamin D levels. PTH primarily affects serum calcium 
and phosphate levels through its action in the bone and 
the kidney. In the bone, PTH increases bone remodeling 
through its actions on the osteoblasts and osteoclasts. It 
directly stimulates osteoblasts to increase bone formation, 
and this action of PTH has been utilized in the treat-
ment of osteoporosis. Its action on osteoclasts, however, 
is indirect and likely is mediated through its actions on 
the osteoblasts. The osteoclast has no receptors for PTH. 
It has been hypothesized that cytokines produced by 
osteoblasts are responsible for increased osteoclastic activ-
ity that is seen after PTH administration, as PTH fails 
to have an effect on osteoclasts in the absence of osteo-
blasts. The net effect of PTH on the bone is to increase 
bone remodeling. Ultimately, this leads to an increase in 
serum calcium, an effect that can be seen within hours of 
drug administration. In the kidney, PTH acts to increase 
calcium reabsorption while increasing phosphate excre-
tion. At the proximal tubule, PTH acts to decrease phos-
phate transport, thus facilitating its excretion. Calcium 
reabsorption is increased by the action of PTH on the 
distal tubule. A final action of PTH in the kidney is to 
increase the production of 1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol, 
the activated form of vitamin D, through stimulation 
Review and Self-Assessment
520
of 1-α-hydroxylase. Activated vitamin D then helps to 
increase calcium levels by increasing intestinal absorption 
of both calcium and phosphate.
	84.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 28) Osteoporosis refers to a chronic condition 
characterized by decreased bone strength and frequently 
manifests as vertebral and hip fractures. In the United 
States, about 8 million women have osteoporosis com-
pared to about 2 million men, for a ratio between women 
and men of 4 to 1. An additional 18 million individuals 
are estimated to have osteopenia. The risk of osteopo-
rosis increases with advancing age and rapidly worsens 
following menopause in women. Most women meet the 
diagnostic criteria for osteoporosis between the ages of 
70 and 80. White women have an increased risk for osteo-
porosis when compared to African-American women.
The epidemiology for bone fractures follows the epi-
demiology for osteoporosis. Fractures of the distal radius 
(Colles’ fracture) increases up to age 50 and plateaus by 
age 60, and there is only a modest increase in risk there-
after. This is contrasted with the risk of hip fractures. 
Incidence rates for hip fractures double every 5 years 
after the age of 70. This change in fracture pattern is not 
entirely due to osteoporosis, but is also related to the fact 
that fewer falls in the elderly occur onto an outstretched 
arm and are more likely to occur directly onto the hip. 
Black women experience hip fractures at approximately 
half the rate as white women. The mortality rate in the 
year following a hip fracture is 5–20%. Vertebral fractures 
are also common manifestations of osteoporosis. While 
most are found incidentally on chest radiograph, severe 
cases can lead to height loss, pulmonary restriction, and 
respiratory morbidity.
	85.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 28) There are multiple risks for osteoporotic bone 
fractures that can be either modifiable or nonmodifi-
able. These are outlined in Table 28-1. Nonmodifiable 
risk factors include a previous history of fracture as an 
adult, female sex, white race, dementia, advanced age, 
and history of fracture (but not osteoporosis) in a first-
degree relative. Risk factors that are potentially modifi-
able include body weight less than 58 kg (127 lb), low 
calcium intake, alcoholism, impaired eyesight, recurrent 
falls, inadequate physical activity, poor health, and estro-
gen deficiency including menopause prior to age 45 or 
prolonged premenstrual amenorrhea. Current cigarette 
smoking is a risk factor for osteoporosis-related fracture 
while a prior history of cigarette use is not.
	86.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 28) A variety of diseases in adults increase the risk 
of osteoporosis. First, diseases that lead to estrogen defi-
ciency or hypogonadism can lead to osteoporosis. This 
would include Turner’s syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome, 
and hyperprolactinemia, among others. A wide range of 
endocrine disorders can also lead to abnormal bone metab-
olism, especially hyperparathyroidism and thyrotoxicosis. 
Poor nutrition and gastrointestinal disorders increase the 
likelihood of developing osteoporosis. Anorexia nervosa 
causes both hypogonadism and poor nutritional status. 
Malabsorption syndromes lead to decreased intake of cal-
cium and vitamin D, which are essential to good bone 
health. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease also has a 
high prevalence of osteoporosis, which may be related to 
a chronic inflammatory state with high bone turnover that 
is exacerbated by frequent corticosteroid use, frequent 
vitamin D deficiency, and low activity states. Other broad 
categories of disease that can lead to osteoporosis include 
rheumatologic disorders, hematologic malignancies, and 
some inherited disorders such as osteogenesis imperfecta, 
Marfan’s syndrome, and porphyria, among many others. 
It is well known that immobilization, pregnancy, and lac-
tation can lead to osteoporosis as well.
	87.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 28) Osteoporosis is a common disease affecting 
8 million women and 2 million men in the United States. 
It is most common in postmenopausal women, but the 
incidence is also increasing in men. Estrogen loss probably 
causes bone loss by activation of bone remodeling sites and 
exaggeration of the imbalance between bone formation 
and resorption. Osteoporosis is diagnosed by bone mineral 
density scan. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is 
the most accurate test for measuring bone mineral density. 
Clinical determinations of bone density are most com-
monly measured at the lumbar spine and hip. In the DXA 
technique, two x-ray energies are used to measure the area 
of the mineralized tissues and compared to gender- and 
race-matched normative values. The T-score compares 
an individual’s results to a young population, whereas 
the Z-score compares the individual’s results to an age-
matched population. Osteoporosis is diagnosed when the 
T-score is –2.5 SD in the lumbar spine, femoral neck, or 
total hip. An evaluation for secondary causes of osteopo-
rosis should be considered in individuals presenting with 
osteoporotic fractures at a young age and those who have 
very low Z-scores. Initial evaluation should include serum 
and 24-hour urine calcium levels, renal function panel, 
hepatic function panel, serum phosphorous level, and 
vitamin D levels. Other endocrine abnormalities includ-
ing hyperthyroidism and hyperparathyroidism should be 
evaluated, and urinary cortisol levels should be checked 
if there is a clinical suspicion for Cushing’s syndrome. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone 
levels would be elevated but are not useful in this indi-
vidual, as she presents with a known perimenopausal state.
	88.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 28) Determination of when to initiate screening 
for osteoporosis with bone densitometry testing can be 
Review and Self-Assessment
521
complicated by multiple factors. In general, most women 
do not require screening for osteoporosis until after 
completion of menopause unless there have been unex-
plained fractures or other risk factors that would suggest 
osteoporosis. There is no benefit to initiating screening 
for osteoporosis in the perimenopausal period. Indeed 
most expert recommendations do not recommend rou-
tine screening for osteoporosis until age 65 or older 
unless risk factors are present. Risk factors for osteoporo-
sis include advanced age, current cigarette smoking, low 
body weight (<57.7 kg), family history of hip fracture, 
and long-term glucocorticoid use. Inhaled glucocorti-
coids may cause increased loss of bone density, but as this 
patient is on a low dose of inhaled fluticasone and is not 
estrogen deficient, bone mineral densitometry cannot 
be recommended at this time. The risk of osteoporosis 
related to inhaled glucocorticoids is not well defined, but 
most studies suggest that the risk is relatively low. Delay-
ing childbearing until the fourth and fifth decade does 
increase the risk of osteoporosis but does not cause early 
onset of osteoporosis prior to completion of menopause. 
The patient’s family history of menopause likewise does 
not require early screening for osteoporosis.
	89.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 28) Osteoporosis is defined as a reduction of bone 
mass or density or the presence of a fragility fracture. 
Operationally, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
defines osteoporosis as a bone density more than 2.5 SD 
less than the mean for young healthy adults of the same 
race and sex. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) 
is the most widely used study to determine bone density. 
Bone density is expressed as a T-score, that is, the SD 
below the mean of young adults of the same race and 
gender. A T-score higher than 2.5 characterizes osteopo-
rosis, and a T-score less than 1 identifies patients at risk 
of osteoporosis. The Z-score compares individuals with 
those in an age-, race-, and gender-matched population.
	90.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 28) Multiple treatment choices are available to 
prevent fractures and reverse bone loss in osteoporosis, 
and the side-effect profiles should be carefully consid-
ered when making the appropriate choice for this patient. 
Risedronate belongs to a family of drugs called bisphos-
phonates. Bisphosphonates act to inhibit osteoclast activ-
ity to decrease bone resorption and increase bone mass. 
Alendronate, risedronate, and ibandronate are approved 
for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, and 
alendronate and risedronate are also approved for the 
treatment of steroid-induced osteoporosis and osteoporo-
sis in men. In clinical trials, risedronate decreases the risk 
of hip and vertebral fracture in women with osteoporosis 
by about 40% over 3 years. However, risedronate is not 
effective in decreasing hip fracture in women over the age 
of 80 without proven osteoporosis. The major side effect 
of bisphosphonate compounds taken orally is esophagitis. 
These drugs should be taken with a full glass of water, and 
the patient should remain upright for 30 minutes after tak-
ing the drug. There is also some concern about increased 
risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw in individuals treated with 
high doses of IV bisphosphonates or treated with oral ther-
apy for prolonged periods, but in this patient with severe 
osteoporosis and a recent fracture, the benefits outweigh 
potential risks. Estrogens are also effective in preventing 
and treating osteoporosis. Epidemiologic data indicate 
that women taking estrogen have a 50% decreased risk 
of hip fracture. Raloxifene is a selective estrogen recep-
tor modulator (SERM). The effect of raloxifene on bone 
density is somewhat less than that of estrogen, but it does 
decrease the risk of vertebral fracture by 30–50%. How-
ever, both drugs are contraindicated in this patient because 
of the recent occurrence of venous thromboembolic dis-
ease. Both estrogen and SERMs increase the risk of DVT 
and pulmonary embolus several-fold. If estrogen is to be 
used, it should be used in combination with a progestin 
compound in women with an intact uterus to decrease the 
risk of uterine cancer associated with unopposed estrogen 
stimulation. Both calcium and vitamin D supplementation 
are recommended as supplemental therapy, but given the 
degree of osteoporosis are inadequate alone. Calcitonin is 
available as an intranasal spray and produces small increases 
in bone density, but it has no proven effectiveness on the 
prevention of fractures.
91 and 92.  The answers are B and C, respectively. 
(Chap. 29) The most likely diagnosis in this case is Paget’s 
disease. A normal level of γ-glutamyl transferase localizes 
the cause of the elevated alkaline phosphatase to the bone. 
Thus, diseases of the liver and biliary tree are excluded. 
While both vertebral osteomyelitis and Paget’s disease 
could cause elevations in alkaline phosphatase, the patient 
has no symptoms of systemic illness that one would typi-
cally expect with vertebral osteomyelitis. Paget’s disease 
is a common dysplasia of the bone associated with local-
ized bone remodeling that can affect numerous discreet 
areas of the skeleton. This disorder is relatively common. 
In autopsy series, Paget’s lesions can be demonstrated 
in about 3% of individuals older than 40 years of age, 
although clinical manifestations of the disease are far less 
common. Diagnosis is most often made in individuals 
with asymptomatic elevations of alkaline phosphatase or 
through characteristic radiographic changes in individu-
als who underwent biochemical or radiographic testing 
for other reasons. In symptomatic individuals, localized 
pain is most commonly seen. The bones most often 
affected include the femur, skull, pelvis, vertebral bodies, 
and tibia, and the specific symptoms depend on the loca-
tion of the Paget’s lesion. When the vertebral bodies are 
involved, back pain can result from enlarged vertebrae, 
compression fractures of the spine, and spinal stenosis. In 
rare instances, spinal cord compression can occur. In this 
Review and Self-Assessment
522
scenario, it is possible that the patient’s back pain is due to 
undiagnosed Paget’s disease. Diagnosis is typically made 
based on typical findings on radiographs and biochemi-
cal testing. Radiographs may demonstrate the enlarge-
ment or expansion of an entire bone, cortical thickening, 
coarsening of the trabecular markings, and both lytic and 
sclerotic changes. Characteristic findings of the vertebrae 
include cortical thickening of the superior and inferior 
endplates, creating a “picture frame” vertebra. If a ver-
tebra is diffusely enlarged, the radiodensity created is 
known as an “ivory vertebra.” An elevation in alkaline 
phosphatase is the classic finding in Paget’s disease and is 
the test of choice for both diagnosis and assessing response 
to therapy. Serum osteocalcin, a marker of bone forma-
tion, is not always elevated in Paget’s disease for unknown 
reasons and is not recommended for either diagnosis or 
response to therapy. Serum or urine N-telopeptide or 
C-telopeptide are also bone resorption markers and are 
elevated in active Paget’s disease. These markers decrease 
more rapidly in response to therapy than alkaline phos-
phatase. Serum calcium and phosphate levels are normal 
in Paget’s disease unless a patient becomes immobilized.
	93.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 29) Paget’s disease of the bone is associated with 
localized bone dysplasia that can occur in numerous dis-
creet areas of bone. Pathologically, the disease is initi-
ated by overactivity of osteoclasts leading to high bone 
turnover and a subsequent increase in osteoblastic activ-
ity, resulting in both lytic and sclerotic lesions in bone. 
Biochemically, there is typically evidence of high bone 
turnover, with an elevation in alkaline phosphatase being 
the characteristic biochemical abnormality that is used 
for both diagnosis of Paget’s disease and response to 
treatment. Other markers of high bone resorption are the 
C- and N-telopeptides, which are typically elevated in 
both the serum and urine. These proteins decline more 
rapidly in response to therapy than alkaline phosphatase. 
Serum osteocalcin is also a marker of high bone turnover, 
and it may be elevated or normal in those with Paget’s 
disease. However, serum calcium is always normal in 
those with Paget’s disease unless the person becomes 
immobilized.
	94.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 29) Despite her lack of symptoms this patient has 
enough evidence to diagnose her with Paget’s disease. 
Her radiographs show characteristic changes of active 
disease in the pelvis, which is one of the most common 
areas for Paget’s disease to present. Her elevated alka-
line phosphatase provides further evidence of active bone 
turnover. The normal serum calcium and phosphate lev-
els are characteristic for Paget’s disease. Management of 
asymptomatic Paget’s disease has changed since effective 
treatments have become available. Treatment should be 
initiated in all symptomatic patients and in asymptomatic 
patients who have evidence of active disease (high alka-
line phosphatase or urine hydroxyproline) or disease 
adjacent to weight-bearing structures, vertebrae, or the 
skull. Second-generation oral bisphosphonates such as 
tiludronate, alendronate, and risedronate are excellent 
choices due to their ability to decrease bone turnover. 
The major side effect from these agents is esophageal 
ulceration and reflux. They should be taken in the morn-
ing, on an empty stomach, and sitting upright to mini-
mize the risk of reflux. Duration of use depends on the 
clinical response; typically 3–6 months are needed to see 
the alkaline phosphatase begin to normalize. Intravenous 
zoledronate and pamidronate are adequate alternatives 
to oral bisphosphonates. While their IV administration 
avoids the risk of reflux, there is a potential of developing 
a flulike syndrome within 24 hours of use. The presence 
of this side effect does not require drug discontinuation. 
The same time to response can be expected from these 
agents.
	95.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 21) Mutation of the LDL receptor results in hyper-
cholesterolemia. This mutation may be homozygous or 
heterozygous and occurs in approximately 1 in 500 people 
in its heterozygous form. Homozygous disease is more 
severe, with the development of symptomatic coronary 
atherosclerosis in childhood, while heterozygous patients 
have hypercholesterolemia from birth, and disease rec-
ognition is usually not until adulthood when patients are 
found to have tendon xanthomas or coronary artery dis-
ease. In patients with heterozygous disease, there is gen-
erally a family history on at least one side of the family. 
In familial hypercholesterolemia, there is an elevation of 
LDL-C between 200 and 400 mg/dL without alterations 
in chylomicrons or VLDL. Familial defective apoB-100 
has a similar presentation but is less common (1/1000). 
Autosomal dominant history may be present in this fam-
ily to suggest autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia; 
however, this condition is quite rare (<1/1,000,000) and 
therefore much less likely. Familial hepatic lipase defi-
ciency and lipoprotein lipase deficiency are associated 
with increased chylomicrons, not LDL-C, and present 
with eruptive xanthomas, hepatosplenomegaly, and pan-
creatitis. These conditions occur rarely (<1/1,000,000).
	96.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 21) There are many secondary forms of elevated 
LDL that warrant consideration in a patient found to 
have abnormal LDL. These include hypothyroidism, 
nephritic syndrome, cholestasis, acute intermittent por-
phyria, anorexia nervosa, hepatoma, and drugs such as 
thiazides, cyclosporine, and Tegretol. Cirrhosis is associ-
ated with reduced LDL because of inadequate produc-
tion. Malabsorption, malnutrition, Gaucher’s disease, 
chronic infectious disease, hyperthyroidism, and niacin 
toxicity are all similarly associated with reduced LDL.
Review and Self-Assessment
523
	97.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 21) This patient has signs and symptoms of famil-
ial hypercholesterolemia (FH) with elevated plasma LDL, 
normal triglycerides, tendon xanthomas, and premature 
coronary artery disease. FH is an autosomal codomi-
nant lipoprotein disorder that is the most common of 
these syndromes caused by a single gene disorder. It has 
a higher prevalence in Afrikaners, Christian Lebanese, 
and French Canadians. There is no definitive diagnostic 
test for FH. It may be diagnosed with a skin biopsy that 
shows reduced LDL receptor activity in cultured fibro-
blasts (although there is considerable overlap with nor-
mals). FH is predominantly a clinical diagnosis, although 
molecular diagnostics are being developed. Hemolysis is 
not a feature of FH. Sitosterolemia is distinguished from 
FH by episodes of hemolysis. It is a rare autosomal reces-
sive disorder that causes a marked increase in the dietary 
absorption of plant sterols. Hemolysis is due to incorpo-
ration of plant sterols into the red blood cell membrane. 
Sitosterolemia is confirmed by demonstrating an increase 
in the plasma levels of sitosterol using gas chromatogra-
phy. CT scanning of the liver does not sufficiently dif-
ferentiate between the hyperlipoproteinemias. Many of 
the primary lipoproteinemias, including sitosterolemia, 
are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, and 
thus a pedigree analysis would not be likely to isolate 
the disorder.
	98.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 21) This patient has nephrotic syndrome, which is 
likely a result of multiple myeloma. The hyperlipidemia 
of nephrotic syndrome appears to be due to a combina-
tion of increased hepatic production and decreased clear-
ance of very low-density lipoproteins, with increased 
LDL production. It is usually mixed but can manifest 
as hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyceridemia. Effec-
tive treatment of the underlying renal disease normalizes 
the lipid profile. Of the choices presented, HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors would be the most effective to reduce 
this patient’s LDL. Dietary management is an important 
component of lifestyle modification but seldom results in 
a greater than 10% fall in LDL. Niacin and fibrates would 
be indicated if the triglycerides were higher, but the LDL 
is the more important lipid abnormality to address at this 
time. Lipid apheresis is reserved for patients who cannot 
tolerate the lipid-lowering drugs or who have a genetic 
lipid disorder refractory to medication. Cholesterol ester 
transfer protein inhibitors have been shown to raise high-
density lipoprotein levels, and their role in the treatment 
of lipoproteinemias is still under investigation.
	99.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 9) Ninety percent of persons with nonsemino-
matous germ cell tumors produce either α-fetoprotein 
(AFP) or beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG); 
in contrast, persons with pure seminomas usually 
produce neither. These tumor markers are present for 
some time after surgery; if the presurgical levels are high, 
30 days or more may be required before meaningful post-
surgical levels can be obtained. The half-lives of AFP and 
β-hCG are 6 days and 1 day, respectively. After treat-
ment, unequal reduction of β-hCG and AFP may occur, 
suggesting that the two markers are synthesized by het-
erogeneous clones of cells within the tumor; thus, both 
markers should be followed. β-hCG is similar to lutein-
izing hormone except for its distinctive beta subunit.
100.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 9) Testicular cancer occurs most commonly in the 
second and third decades of life. The treatment depends 
on the underlying pathology and the stage of the dis-
ease. Germ cell tumors are divided into seminomatous 
and nonseminomatous subtypes. Although the pathol-
ogy of this patient’s tumor was seminoma, the presence 
of α-fetoprotein (AFP) is suggestive of occult nonsemi-
nomatous components. If there are any nonseminomatous 
components, the treatment follows that of a nonsemino-
matous germ cell tumor. This patient therefore has a clini-
cal stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumor. Because 
his AFP returned to normal after orchiectomy, there is no 
obvious occult disease. However, between 20% and 50% 
of these patients will have disease in the retroperitoneal 
lymph nodes. Numerous trials have indicated no overall 
survival difference in this cohort between observation and 
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND). Because 
of the potential side effects of RPLND, the choice of sur-
veillance or RPLND is based on the pathology of the pri-
mary tumor. If the primary tumor shows no evidence for 
lymphatic or vascular invasion and is limited to the testis, 
then either option is reasonable. If lymphatic or vascular 
invasion is present or the tumor extends into the tunica, 
spermatic cord, or scrotum, then surveillance should not 
be offered. Either approach should cure more than 95% of 
patients. Radiation therapy is the appropriate choice for 
stage I and stage II seminoma. It has no role in nonsemino-
matous lesions. Adjuvant chemotherapy is not indicated in 
early-stage testicular cancer. Hormonal therapy is effective 
for prostate cancer and receptor-positive breast cancer but 
has no role in testicular cancer. Positron emission tomog-
raphy may be used to locate viable seminoma in residua, 
which mandates surgical excision or biopsy.
101.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 14) Approximately 10% of women with ovarian 
cancer have a somatic mutation in one of two DNA repair 
genes, BRCA1 (chromosome 17q12-21) or BRCA2 
(chromosome 13q12-13). Individuals inheriting a single 
copy of a mutant allele have a very high incidence of 
breast and ovarian cancer. Most of these women have a 
family history that is notable for multiple cases of breast 
or ovarian cancer (or both), although inheritance through 
male members of the family can camouflage this genotype 
Review and Self-Assessment
524
through several generations. The most common malig-
nancy in these women is breast carcinoma, although 
women harboring germ-line BRCA1 mutations have a 
marked increased risk of developing ovarian malignan-
cies in their forties and fifties with a 30% to 50% lifetime 
risk of developing ovarian cancer. Women harboring a 
mutation in BRCA2 have a lower penetrance of ovarian 
cancer with perhaps a 20% to 40% chance of developing 
this malignancy, with onset typically in their fifties or six-
ties. Women with a BRCA2 mutation also are at slightly 
increased risk of pancreatic cancer. Screening studies in 
this select population suggest that current screening tech-
niques, including serial evaluation of the CA-125 tumor 
marker and ultrasound, are insufficient at detecting early-
stage and curable disease, so women with these germ-line 
mutations are advised to undergo prophylactic removal of 
their ovaries and fallopian tubes typically after completing 
childbearing and ideally before ages 35 to 40 years. Early 
prophylactic oophorectomy also protects these women 
from subsequent breast cancer with a reduction of breast 
cancer risk of approximately 50%.
102.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 14) Endometrial carcinoma is the most common 
gynecologic malignancy in the United States. Most are 
adenocarcinomas. Development of these tumors is a mul-
tistep process with estrogen playing an important early 
role in driving endometrial gland proliferation. Relative 
overexposure to this class of hormones is a risk factor for 
the subsequent development of endometrial tumors. In 
contrast, progestins drive glandular maturation and are 
protective. Hence, women with high endogenous or 
pharmacologic exposure to estrogens, especially if unop-
posed by progesterone, are at high risk for endometrial 
cancer. Obese women, women treated with unopposed 
estrogens, and women with estrogen-producing tumors 
(e.g., granulosa cell tumors of the ovary) are at higher 
risk for endometrial cancer. In addition, treatment with 
tamoxifen, which has anti-estrogenic effects in breast tis-
sue but estrogenic effects in uterine epithelium, is associ-
ated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer. The 
majority of women with tumors of the uterine corpus 
present with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding caused 
by shedding of the malignant endometrial lining. Pre-
menopausal women often present with atypical bleeding 
between typical menstrual cycles. These signs typically 
bring a woman to the attention of a health care profes-
sional, and hence the majority of women present with early- 
stage disease in which the tumor is confined to the 
uterine corpus. For patients with disease confined to 
the uterus, hysterectomy with removal of the fallopian tubes 
and ovaries results in approximately 90% 5-year survival.
103.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) In 2007–2008, the National Health and Nutri-
tion Examination Surveys (NHANES) found that 68% of 
the adult population of the United States was overweight 
or obese [body mass index (BMI) >25 kg/m2]. Under-
standing the worsening of obesity in the United States 
requires understanding both the genetic and environmen-
tal factors that contribute to the development of obesity. 
It is clear that the rapid increase in obesity in this county 
is far greater than can be attributed to changes in genet-
ics. However, certain genetic factors certainly increase 
the risk of obesity. Obesity generally is inherited in a 
non-Mendelian pattern similar to that of height. Adopted 
children have BMIs more closely related to their biologic 
parents than their adopted parents. Likewise, monozy-
gotic twins have BMIs more similar than dizygotic twins. 
Some of the genes that are known to play a role in the 
development of obesity include genes for leptin, pro-
opiomelanocortin (POMC), and melanin-concentrating 
hormone, among others. Leptin is an important hormone 
in obesity. Produced by adipocytes, this hormone acts at 
the hypothalamus to decrease appetite and increase energy 
expenditure. In humans, mutations of the ob gene lead 
to decreased leptin production, and mutations of the db 
gene cause leptin resistance. The result of these mutations 
can be either decreased leptin production or resistance to 
leptin, which causes failure of the brain to recognize sati-
ety. These mutations are generally associated with severe 
obesity beginning shortly after birth.
104.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 16) Several syndromes have been recognized 
as being associated with the development of obesity. 
Prader-Willi syndrome falls into a category of syndromes 
of obesity associated with mental retardation. Individu-
als with Prader-Willi syndrome are of short stature with 
small hands and feet. They exhibit hyperphagia, obesity, 
and neurodevelopmental delay in association with hypo-
gonadotropic hypogonadism. Endocrine abnormalities 
or abnormalities of the hypothalamus are also commonly 
associated with obesity. Patients with Cushing’s syn-
drome have central obesity, hypertension, and glucose 
intolerance. Hypothyroidism is associated with obesity 
due to decreases in metabolic rate; however, it is a rare 
cause of obesity. Individuals with insulinoma often are 
obese, as they increase their caloric intake to try to pre-
vent hypoglycemia episodes. Finally, individuals with 
hypothalamic dysfunction due to craniopharyngioma or 
other disorders lack the ability to respond to typical hor-
monal signals that indicate satiety, and therefore develop 
obesity. Acromegaly is not associated with obesity.
105.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) With over 60% of the U.S. population being 
overweight or obese, the primary care physician should 
be monitoring weight and BMI at every visit and making 
recommendations for weight loss to prevent long-term 
complications of obesity, including hypertension, hyper-
cholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus. Despite the very 
Review and Self-Assessment
525
simple concept that energy output needs to be greater 
than caloric intake, it is very difficult for individuals to 
achieve and sustain weight loss. One initial factor that 
predisposes an individual to fail at attempts to lose weight 
is failure to understand what is a reasonable goal and time 
frame for weight loss. The initial target for weight loss 
should be about 10% over 6 months. In this patient, that 
would be an approximately 24- to 25-lb weight loss over 
6 months. She would not realistically be able to achieve 
her prepregnancy weight of 70 kg for at least 18–24 
months. Many individuals find diet therapy difficult to 
sustain for an extended period, especially when a specific 
and limited diet is prescribed. It is more important for 
the individual to think of the dietary changes that occur 
concurrently with weight loss as a lifestyle change. To 
achieve a weight loss of 0.5–1 kg weekly, caloric intake 
needs to decrease by about 500–1000 kcal daily. The 
specific dietary intervention to undertake depends on 
personal factors. Studies show that low-carbohydrate, 
high-protein diets (Atkins, South Beach, etc.) lead to 
greater weight loss, improved satiety, and decreased 
coronary disease risk factors in the short term, but at 
12 months there is no difference among diets. Very low 
calorie diets (≤800 kcal/d) are a very aggressive form of 
dietary therapy with proprietary formulas. These diets are 
designed to cause weight loss of 13–23 kg over a 3- to 
6-month period and should be utilized only in individu-
als with obesity and medical comorbidities for whom 
conservative approaches have failed. In combination 
with dietary changes, it should also be recommended that 
individuals begin an exercise program. Although exer-
cise alone can lead to some weight loss, it should not be 
the only strategy for losing weight. The recommended 
amount of physical activity is 150 minutes of moderate-
intensity activity or 75 minutes of high-intensity activity 
weekly. Pharmacotherapy for obesity can be consid-
ered in individuals with a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2. 
However, options for pharmacotherapy are limited at 
the present time. Many new medications are undergoing 
clinical trials and may play a role in weight loss in the 
future. Bariatric surgery should not be considered unless 
conservative strategies for weight loss have failed.
106.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 17) Bariatric surgery should be considered for 
individuals who have a BMI of 40 kg/m2 or greater, 
or a BMI of 35.0 kg/m2 or greater if there are serious 
comorbid medical conditions including diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, or hypercholesterolemia. Surgical weight 
loss therapy achieves weight loss through reducing the 
capability for calorie intake and may also cause malabsorp-
tion depending on the procedure chosen. There are two 
broad categories of weight loss procedures: restrictive and 
restrictive-malabsorptive. Restrictive surgeries decrease 
the size of the stomach to generate feelings of early sati-
ety. The original procedure was the vertical-banded 
gastroplasty, but this procedure has been abandoned due 
to lack of effectiveness in long-term trials. It has been 
replaced by laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric band-
ing (LASGB). With this type of bariatric surgery, there is 
a subcutaneous reservoir into which saline can be injected 
or removed to change the size of the gastric open-
ing. Restrictive-malabsorptive procedures include the 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, biliopancreatic diversion, 
and biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. 
The Roux-en-Y procedure is the most common bypass 
procedure. The average weight loss following bariat-
ric surgery is 30–35% of total body weight, and 60% of 
individuals are able to maintain this at 5 years. The 
restrictive-malabsorptive procedures achieve greater 
weight loss than restrictive procedures. Moreover, bar-
iatric procedures lead to improvement in obesity-related 
comorbid conditions. The overall mortality rate from 
bariatric surgery is less than 1%, but increases with age and 
comorbid conditions. Approximately 5–15% of individuals 
develop stomal stenosis or marginal ulcers following the 
surgery that present as prolonged nausea and vomiting. 
Malabsorption does not occur following restrictive pro-
cedures. Individuals who have restrictive-malabsorptive 
procedures have an increased risk for micronutrient defi-
ciency including vitamin B12, iron, folate, calcium, and 
vitamin D. Lifelong supplementation of these vitamins 
will be required.
107.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 24) Hypercalcemia is a common oncologic com-
plication of metastatic cancer. Symptoms include confu-
sion, lethargy, change in mental status, fatigue, polyuria, 
and constipation. Regardless of the underlying disease, 
the treatment is similar. These patients are often dehy-
drated because hypercalcemia may cause nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus and are often unable to take fluids 
orally. Therefore, the primary management entails rees-
tablishment of euvolemia. Often hypercalcemia resolves 
with hydration alone. Patients should be monitored for 
hypophosphatemia. Bisphosphonates are now the main-
stay of therapy because they stabilize osteoclast resorption 
of calcium from the bone. However, their effects may 
take 1 to 2 days to manifest. Care must be taken in cases of 
renal insufficiency because rapid administration of pami-
dronate may exacerbate renal failure. When euvolemia 
is achieved, furosemide may be given to increase calci-
uresis. Nasal or subcutaneous calcitonin further aids the 
shift of calcium out of the intravascular space. Since the 
advent of bisphosphonates, calcitonin is only used in 
severe cases of hypercalcemia because of its rapid effect. 
Glucocorticoids may be useful in patients with lymphoid 
malignancies because the mechanism of hypercalcemia in 
these conditions is often related to excess hydroxylation 
of vitamin D. However, in this patient with prostate can-
cer, dexamethasone will have little effect on the calcium 
level and may exacerbate the altered mental status.
Review and Self-Assessment
526
108.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 24) A variety of hormones are produced ectopi-
cally by tumors that may cause symptomatic disease. 
Eutopic production of parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
by the parathyroid gland is the most common cause of 
hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia may rarely be produced 
by ectopic hyperparathyroid production but is most 
often caused by parathyroid hormone–related protein 
(PTH-rp) production by squamous cell (head and neck, 
lung, skin), breast, genitourinary, and gastrointestinal 
tumors. This protein can be measured as a serum assay. 
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), causing hyponatremia, 
is commonly produced by lung (squamous, small cell), 
gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and ovarian tumors. 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), causing Cush-
ing’s syndrome, is commonly produced by tumors in the 
lung (small cell, bronchial carcinoid, adenocarcinoma, 
squamous), thymus, pancreatic islet, and medullary thyroid 
carcinoma. Insulin-like growth factor secreted by mesen-
chymal tumors, sarcomas, and adrenal, hepatic, gastroin-
testinal, kidney, or prostate tumors may cause symptomatic 
hypoglycemia.
Bold page number indicates the start of the main discussion of the topic; page numbers with “f” and “t” refer to figures and tables, respectively.
527
A1C. See Hemoglobin A1c
ABCA1 deficiency (Tangier disease), 329
Abetalipoproteinemia, 328–329
Absent (vanishing) testis syndrome, 142
Acanthosis nigricans
in diabetes mellitus, 288
in metabolic syndrome, 257
in obesity, 243
Acarbose, for diabetes mellitus, 299t, 300
ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Achondrodysplasia, 468–469
Aclasis, diaphyseal, 469
Acne, 145
Acromegaly, 39
clinical features of, 39–40, 40f
diagnosis of, 39–40, 488, 505
etiology of, 39, 39t
familial, 24
hirsutism in, 209
laboratory evaluation of, 40
paraneoplastic, 377t
screening tests for, 28t
treatment of, 40–42, 41f
Acropachy, thyroid, 79f, 80
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH)
ACTH-independent macronodular 
hyperplasia (AIMAH), 107
ACTHoma, 344t
Acupuncture, for dysmenorrhea, 199
Acute pancreatitis, hypocalcemia in, 405, 
429
ADAMTS13, 471t
Addison’s disease. See Adrenal insufficiency
Adenocarcinoma
cervix, 220
endometrial, 221
Adenoma, pituitary. See Pituitary tumors 
(adenomas)
Adenomyosis, 199
Adipocytes, 236–237, 237f
Adiponectin, 237, 257
Adipose tissue, 236–237
Adipostat, 240
Adipsic hypernatremia, 56
clinical features of, 56
differential diagnosis of, 57
etiology of, 56
pathophysiology of, 56–57, 57f
treatment of, 57–58
Adipsin, 237
Adnexal mass, 216, 219
Adnexal pathology, pelvic pain in, 198
Adrenal cortex
disorders of, 100
hormones produced by, 100
Adrenalectomy
for Cushing’s syndrome, 46, 111
for ectopic ACTH syndrome, 380
for mineralocorticoid excess, 114, 114f
Adrenal gland, 100, 491, 509
Adrenal hyperplasia
congenital. See Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH)
macronodular, 377t
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita, 119t,  
157–158
Adrenal insufficiency, 118
acute, 121
chronic, 121
clinical features of, 121, 121t
diagnosis of, 121–123, 123f
epidemiology of, 118–119
etiology of, 119–121, 119t, 120t
hypoglycemia in, 313
primary, 119–120, 119t
secondary, 120–121, 120t
treatment of, 123–124, 123f
Adrenal mass, incidentally discovered
differential diagnosis of, 115–117, 116f, 
492, 510
epidemiology of, 115
etiology of, 115, 115t
treatment of, 117
Adrenal steroidogenesis, 100, 101f
ACTH effects on, 100–102, 102f
ACTH stimulation in, 103–104,  
104f
RAA system regulation in, 102–103,  
103f
regulatory control of, 100–103, 102f
synthesis, metabolism, and action in, 
103–105, 104f, 105f
Adrenal vein sampling, 113–114, 114f
Adrenocortical carcinoma, 115, 117–118, 
117t, 118f
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 42
action of, 4, 43
in adrenal steroidogenesis control,  
100–102, 102f
deficiency of, 23t, 43
ectopic production of, 45t, 375, 377t, 379
clinical features of, 379
diagnosis of, 379–380
etiology of, 379
treatment of, 380
laboratory evaluation of, 22t
secretion of, 42–43
synthesis of, 42
Adrenoleukodystrophy, 119t, 120
Adult growth hormone deficiency. See 
Growth hormone (GH) deficiency, 
in adults
Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma, 
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 376
Advanced glycosylation end products 
(AGEs), 277–278
AEDs. See Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs)
Aging, metabolic syndrome and, 254
Agouti-related peptide (AgRP), 236, 238t, 
239, 239f
Ahlstrom’s syndrome, 240t
AIMAH (ACTH-independent 
macronodular hyperplasia), 107
AIRE (autoimmune regulator), 119t, 431
AIS. See Androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(AIS)
Albers-Schonberg disease, 464
Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy, 434
Albumin, in hypercalcemia, 403
Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism)
adverse effects of, 160, 227t, 230t
erectile dysfunction in, 226
hypoglycemia in, 313
Alcohol use
lipoprotein metabolism and, 331–332
testicular dysfunction due to, 160
Aldosterone
in adrenal steroidogenesis, 105, 105f
excess of, glucocorticoid-remediable, 112, 
114–115
Aldosterone-renin-ratio (ARR), 113, 115t
Alendronate
adverse effects of, 452
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
452, 453f, 458
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463t
Alkylating agents, adverse effects of, 230t
Alopecia, androgenetic, 209
α-Adrenergic antagonists, aldosterone-renin 
ratio effects of, 115t
α Fetoprotein, 172, 375
α-Glucosidase inhibitors, for type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, 299t, 300
17α-Hydroxylase deficiency
clinical features of, 125t, 142, 143t
diagnostic markers of, 125t
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism in, 197
α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)
appetite control and, 236, 238, 238t, 239f
ectopic ATCH production and, 379
α-Methyldopa, adverse effects of, 227t
5α-Reductase, 210
5α-Reductase inhibitors, adverse effects of, 
227t
5α-Reductase type 2 deficiency, 142
Alprostadil, for erectile dysfunction,  
229–230
Aluminum toxicity, hypercalcemia due to, 
424
INDEX
Index
528
Amenorrhea
diagnosis of, 195, 196f
in disorders of ovulation, 196–197
in disorders of uterus or outflow tract, 
195–196
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in, 
195, 195f
primary, 194
secondary, 194
Amiloride
for Liddle’s syndrome, 115
for mineralocorticoid excess, 114
Aminoglutethimide, for Cushing’s 
syndrome, 46
Amiodarone, adverse effects of, 87–88
Amyl/butyl nitrate, 229
Amylin, in glucose control, 297
Anagen, 209
Anandamide, 250
Androgen(s)
abuse of, 170–171
action of
disorders of, 142–145, 143t
in testicular function regulation, 151, 
151f
adrenal, for adrenal insufficiency, 124
in adrenal steroidogenesis, 101f
deficiency of
approach to the patient, 163–164,  
163f
gynecomastia due to, 160
pathophysiology of, 162–163
excess of, 125, 210–213
in hair growth and differentiation,  
209
metabolism of, 150–151, 151f
pharmacologic uses of, 167–168
synthesis of
disorders of, 142, 143t
pathways for, 144f
in testicular function regulation,  
149–150, 150f
Androgen abuse, 170–171
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS)
amenorrhea in, 195–196
clinical features of, 143t, 144–145
complete, 144
genetic factors in, 144–145
gynecomastia due to, 161
partial, 144–145
testicular dysfunction due to, 161
Androgen therapy. See also Testosterone 
therapy
adverse effects of, 168–170, 169–170t
contraindications to, 168, 169t
for female sexual dysfunction, 232
novel formulations of, 167
pharmacologic uses of, 167–168
recommended regimens, 168
Andropause, 162
Androstenedione, in hirsutism, 210
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors
adverse effects of, 226
for diabetic nephropathy, 282
for hypertension in metabolic syndrome, 
259
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
aldosterone-renin ratio effects of, 115t
for diabetic nephropathy, 282
for hypertension in metabolic syndrome, 
259
Anorexiants
for metabolic syndrome, 258
for weight loss, 250
Anovulation, 194
Anterior pituitary. See also Pituitary gland
disorders of
insufficiency. See Hypopituitarism
tumors. See Pituitary tumors 
(adenomas)
hormone expression and regulation in, 
16–17, 16t
Anthropometrics, 234, 244–246
Antiandrogens, for hirsutism, 213–214
Antibody(ies), insulin resistance due to, 
373–374
Anticholinergics, adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 227t
female sexual dysfunction, 230t
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), adverse effects 
of
erectile dysfunction, 227t
osteoporosis, 444
Antihistamines, adverse effects of, 230t
Antiphospholipid antibody(ies), laboratory 
evaluation of, 471t
Antithyroid antibodies, hypothyroidism and, 
374
Antithyroid drugs
actions of, 491, 508
adverse effects of, 82
for Graves’ disease, 81–82
Anxiety
erectile dysfunction and, 226
female sexual dysfunction and, 231
Apathetic thyrotoxicosis, 78
APC gene, in thyroid cancer, 94t
APECED (autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-
ectodermal dysplasia) syndrome, 119, 
372, 372t
Apolipoprotein(s), 318, 318t
Apolipoprotein(a), 318t, 320
Apolipoprotein(a)-I deficiency, 329
Apolipoprotein A-V deficiency, 322t, 
325–326
Apolipoprotein B
ApoB-100, familial defective, 322t,  
324
elevated levels of, 322–325, 322t, 327t
low levels of, 328–329
Apolipoprotein C-II deficiency
clinical features of, 322t, 325
genetic factors in, 322t, 325
Apolipoprotein E, 318t
Apoplexy, pituitary, 20–21
Appendiceal carcinoids, 345t, 348, 354
Appetite, 236, 238f
APS (autoimmune polyglandular syndrome), 
119–120, 119t, 197
Aquaporins, 51f, 52
2-Arachidonyl glyceride, 250
Arachnoid cysts, 25
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor blockers 
(ARBs)
Arginine vasopressin (AVP), 50
action of, 51–52, 51f
deficiency of, 23t. See also Adipsic 
hypernatremia; Diabetes insipidus 
(DI)
ectopic production of. See Syndrome of 
inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD)
excess secretion and action of, 58
metabolism of, 52
secretion of, 50–51
structure of, 50f
synthesis of, 50–51
in thirst, 52
Aromatase deficiency, 197
Aromatase inhibitors
adverse effects of, 445
for ovulatory dysfunction, 189
ARR (aldosterone-renin-ratio), 115t
Arsenic exposure/poisoning, 484t
Arterial blood gases, reference values, 475t
Ascites, in ovarian cancer, 216
Asherman syndrome, 195
Aspirin, for subacute thyroiditis, 85
Assisted reproductive technologies, 190
Athlete(s), androgen abuse in, 170–171
Atkins diet, 247
Atorvastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 337t
Autocrine regulation, 9
Autoimmune hypothyroidism, 72
classification of, 72
clinical features of, 72t, 73–74, 74f
differential diagnosis of, 75
laboratory evaluation of, 74–75
pathogenesis of, 72–73
prevalence of, 72
treatment of, 76–77
Autoimmune insulin syndrome, with 
hypoglycemia, 374
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-
candidiasis-ectodermal dysplasia 
(APECED) syndrome, 119, 372, 
372t
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
(APS), 119–120, 119t, 197
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE), 119t, 431
Autonomic failure, hypoglycemia-associated, 
311–312, 311f
Autonomic neuropathy, diabetic, 283
Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia, 
322t, 324
Autosomal dominant hypocalcemic 
hypercalciuria, 431
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia, 
322t, 324
AVP. See Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
Axial osteomalacia, 467
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 19, 239
Bariatric surgery
adjustable gastric banding, 251, 251f
complications of, 252
for metabolic syndrome, 258
for obesity, 248t, 251–252, 251f, 503,  
525
Barrier contraceptives, 190t, 191
Index
529
Calcification
dystrophic, 469t
extraskeletal, 71t, 469–470
metastatic, 469, 469t
Calcinosis, tumoral, 469–470
Calcinosis circumscripta, 470
Calcinosis universalis, 470
Calcitonin, 410
actions of, 410, 454
circulating level of, 410
ectopic production of, 377t
for hypercalcemia, 378, 427t, 428, 519
hypocalcemic activity of, 410
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
454–455
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463–464,  
463t
sources of, 410
Calcitonin gene, 410
Calcitriol
for hypocalcemia, 405, 437–438
for secondary hyperparathyroidism, 424
Calcium, 402
deficiency of. See Hypocalcemia
excess of. See Hypercalcemia
extracellular, 402, 402f
homeostasis of, 387, 387f
intake of, 388
metabolism of, 387, 387f
recommended intake of, 448, 449t, 450
supplements
for hypocalcemia, 405
oral preparations, content of, 449t
for osteoporosis management/
prevention, 448–450, 449t
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs)
adverse effects of, 226
erectile dysfunction, 227t
female sexual dysfunction, 230t
peripheral edema, 244
aldosterone-renin ratio effects of, 115t
Calcium gluconate, for hypocalcemia,  
405
Calcium-sensing receptors, 402
Camurati-Engelmann disease, 465
Cancer. See also specific sites and types
obesity and, 243
paraneoplastic syndromes, 375, 377t
Cancer chemotherapy
intraperitoneal, 217
reproductive/endocrine complications 
of, 160
Candida spp. infections, in diabetes mellitus, 
288
Cannabinoid(s), 250
Cannabinoid receptor(s), 250
Cannabinoid receptor antagonists, for 
weight loss, 250
Carbamazepine, adverse effects of, 244
Carbimazole
adverse effects of, 82
for Graves’ disease, 81
Carboplatin
for ovarian cancer, 217
for testicular cancer, 175, 177
Carboxypeptidase E, 238t, 239
Carcinoid crisis, 496–497, 516
metabolism of, 384
mineral phase of, 384
new, 386
osteoblasts in, 384–385, 385f, 387f
osteoclasts in, 385f, 386, 387f
remodeling of, 386, 387f, 441–442,  
441f
resorption of, 441–442, 443f
structure of, 384
turnover of, 423
woven, 386
Bone disease
marble, 464
Paget’s disease. See Paget’s disease of bone
sclerosing, 464
HCV infection–associated, 466
hyperostosis corticalis generalisata,  
465
melorheostosis, 465–466
osteopetrosis. See Osteopetrosis
osteopoikilosis, 466
progressive diaphyseal dysplasia, 465
pyknodysostosis, 465
Bone loss, prevention of, 448. See also 
Osteoporosis, treatment of
Bone mass/strength, measurement of,  
445–446, 445f, 446t
Bone remodeling, 441–442, 441f
Bone scan, in Paget’s disease of bone,  
462
Bone spurs, 445
Bourneville’s disease. See Tuberous sclerosis
BRAF oncogene, 94t, 95
Brain germ cell tumors, 26
BRCA gene mutations
in fallopian tube cancer, 219
in ovarian cancer, 216, 503, 523–524
Breast cancer
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
postmenopausal hormone therapy and, 
202, 203t, 204
Brenner tumor, 215
Broad β disease (familial 
dysbetalipoproteinemia), 322t,  
326
Bromocriptine
for acromegaly, 42
adverse effects of, 34
for prolactinoma, 34
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 299t, 301
Bronchial carcinoids, 345t, 349
Brown adipose tissue, 236
Buccal adhesive testosterone, 165t, 167
Bupropion, 251
Burnett’s syndrome, 425
Burn patient, hypocalcemia in, 405
Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome, 466
CA-125, in ovarian cancer, 216
Cabergoline
for acromegaly, 42
adverse effects of, 34
for prolactinoma, 33–34
CAD. See Coronary artery disease (CAD)
Cadmium exposure/poisoning, 484t
CAH. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH) 
Bartter’s syndrome, 431
Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), 24
Behavioral modification/behavioral therapy, 
for female sexual dysfunction, 
231–232
Benzphetamine, for weight loss, 250
BEP regimen
for ovarian germ cell tumors, 219
for testicular cancer, 175–176
Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy, 
254
β-Adrenergic antagonists (beta blockers)
adverse effects of, 226, 227t
aldosterone-renin ratio effects of, 115t
for pheochromocytoma, 129–130
11β-Hydroxylase, 104
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency
clinical features of, 125t
diagnostic markers of, 125t
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency, 125t, 142, 143t
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2, 105, 
379
Bevacizumab, for ovarian cancer, 217
bFGF (basic fibroblast growth factor), 24
Bicarbonate therapy, for DKA, 275
Biguanides
action of, 299t
adverse effects of, 298, 299t
contraindications to, 299t
for insulin resistance, 260
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 298, 299t
Bile acid sequestrants
adverse effects of, 259, 299t, 301, 337
for lipoprotein disorders, 336–337, 337t
for metabolic syndrome, 259
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 299t, 301
Biliopancreatic diversion, 251, 251f
Bisphosphonates
action of, 452
for hypercalcemia, 378, 404, 427–428, 
427t
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
452–454, 453f, 458, 521
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463, 463t, 522
Bleomycin
adverse effects of, 175–176
for gestational trophoblastic disease, 223
for ovarian germ cell tumors, 219
for testicular cancer, 175
Blomstrand’s lethal chondrodysplasia, 420f
Blood, laboratory evaluation of, 471–474t
Blood glucose monitoring, 292–293. See also 
Glycemic control
Blue halo effect, 229
Body fat
abdominal subcutaneous, 234, 241
distribution of, 234, 244
intraabdominal, 241
measurement of, 234, 244
upper body, 234
Body mass index (BMI), 234, 235f, 244, 
245t
Bone
extracellular components of, 384
inadequate mineralization of, 400
lamellar, 386
Index
530
Circadian rhythmicity, cortisol in, 102f
Cirrhosis
gynecomastia in, 160
testicular atrophy in, 160
Cisplatin
adverse effects of, 175–176
for cervical cancer, 221
for gestational trophoblastic disease, 223
for ovarian germ cell tumors, 219
for testicular cancer, 175, 177
CKD. See Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
c-kit variations, in ovarian germ cell tumors, 
219
CLAH (congenital lipoid adrenal 
hyperplasia), 119t
Cleidocranial dysplasia, 385
Clinical laboratory tests, reference values
cholesterol, 485t
clinical chemistry and immunology, 
474–481t
hematology and coagulation, 471–474t
toxicology and therapeutic drug 
monitoring, 482–484t
vitamins and trace minerals, 484t
Clitoral engorgement, 231
Clitoral vacuum device, 232
Clomiphene citrate
for ovulatory dysfunction, 189
for polycystic ovarian syndrome, 197
Clonidine
adverse effects of, 227t
for menopausal symptoms, 202
c-MYC oncogene, 94t
Coagulation disorders, laboratory evaluation 
of, 471–474t
Cobalamin (vitamin B12), reference range 
for, 484t
Cocaine, adverse effects of, 227t
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), for 
obesity, 249
Cognitive function, postmenopausal 
hormone therapy and, 204t, 206
Cohen’s syndrome, 240t
Colesevelam
adverse effects of, 299t, 301, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 299t, 301
Colestipol
adverse effects of, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
for metabolic syndrome, 259
Colles’ fracture, 439f
Colloid goiter, 88
Colorectal cancer, prevention of, 204t,  
206
Combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), 
adverse effects of, 254, 307
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency 
(CPHD), 120t
Computed tomography (CT)
in bone mass measurement, 445
in CAH, 126f
in Cushing’s syndrome, 110f, 111
in MEN 1, 367
in mineralocorticoid excess, 113
in pancreatic endocrine tumors, 360–361, 
360f
genetic factors in, 220
global considerations, 219
HPV in, 220
incidence of, 219
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
prevention of, 220
prognosis of, 217t
risk factors for, 220
screening for, 220
staging of, 217t, 220–221, 220f
treatment of, 221
Cervical stenosis, 199
CETP (cholesteryl ester transfer protein), 
320f
deficiency of, 330
Children, Graves’ disease in, 83
Chloramphenicol, therapeutic monitoring 
of, 482t
Chloroquine, for hypercalcemia, 404
Cholecystitis, fasting-induced, 243
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 236
Cholesterol, reverse transport of, 320–321, 
320f
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors, 336, 337t
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), 
320f
deficiency of, 330
Cholestyramine
adverse effects of, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
for metabolic syndrome, 259
Chordoma, 25
Choriocarcinoma. See also Gestational 
trophoblastic disease
ovarian, 218–219
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
parasellar, 26
testicular, 173
Chromosomal sex, 136, 136f
Chromosome abnormalities/disorders
in sex chromosomes, 137t, 138, 138f
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
calcium and phosphate metabolism 
disorders in
secondary hyperparathyroidism, 
423–424
treatment of, 433
in diabetes mellitus. See Diabetic 
nephropathy
fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders 
in
hypercalcemia, 423–424
hyperphosphatemia, 433
hypocalcemia, 433
treatment of, 433
lipoprotein disorders in, 331
Chvostek’s sign, 405, 518
Chylomicron(s)
characteristics of, 318t
elevated, 325, 327t
Cigarette smoking. See Smoking
Cimetidine
adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 227t
female sexual dysfunction, 230t
drug interactions of, 229
Circadian cycle, 9
Carcinoid syndrome, 350
atypical, 352
carcinoid tumors associated with,  
342–343, 345t, 348–349
clinical features of, 344t, 349t, 350–351, 
496–497, 516
diagnosis of, 352
incidence of, 344t
pathobiology of, 344t, 345f, 351–352
treatment of, 352–354, 353f, 516
tumor locations in, 344t
Carcinoid tumors, 348
appendiceal, 345t, 348
bronchial, 345t, 349
with carcinoid syndrome, 342–343, 345t, 
348–349
characteristics of, 343t
classification of, 342–343, 346
diagnosis of, 352, 360–361, 360f
gastric, 345t, 349
general characteristics of, 348–349
genetic syndromes associated with,  
347–348, 347t
incidence of, 346–347
in MEN 1, 366
metastatic
prevalence of, 345t
treatment of, 361–362, 361f
nonmetastatic, treatment of, 354
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t, 379
prognostic factors in, 346t
rectal, 345t, 349
sites of, 343, 345t
small intestinal, 345t, 348–349, 349t
with systemic symptoms due to secreted 
products, 350
without carcinoid syndrome, 349–350
Cardiovascular disease. See also Coronary 
artery disease (CAD)
in diabetes mellitus
morbidity and mortality data, 284–285
risk factors for, 285–286
treatment of, 285
erectile dysfunction in, 225
hyperthyroidism and, 490, 508
hypothyroidism and, 490, 507
metabolic syndrome and, 257
obesity and, 242
in Paget’s disease of bone, 461
testosterone therapy and, 170
Carney syndrome
clinical features of, 24t, 371
genetic factors in, 371
nodular adrenal disease in, 107
pituitary tumors in, 24, 24t
Carpenter’s syndrome, 240t
cART (combination antiretroviral therapy), 
adverse effects of, 254, 307
Catagen, 209
CCBs. See Calcium channel blockers 
(CCBs)
CCK (cholecystokinin), 236
Central precocious puberty, 154
Cervical cancer, 219
clinical features of, 220
epidemiology of, 219
etiology of, 220
Index
531
Delayed puberty
female, 186–187, 186t, 187t
male, 154t, 156–157
Demeclocycline, for SIAD, 61, 379–380
Dementia, prevention of, 204t, 206
Denosumab
action of, 455
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
455, 455f
Densitometry, 234
Dent’s disease
clinical features of, 391
genetic factors in, 391
Deoxycorticosterone (DOC), 101f, 105, 112
Depilatory, 213
Depression/depressive disorders, sexual 
dysfunction in, 226, 231
de Quervain’s thyroiditis, 84–85, 491, 
508–509
Dermatofibrosis lenticularis disseminata, 466
Dermoid cysts, 218
Dermopathy, thyroid, 79f, 80, 83–84
Desmopressin (DDAVP)
for adipsic hypernatremia, 57
for diabetes insipidus, 55–56, 56f
structure of, 50f
Destructive thyroiditis, 84
Detumescence, 225f, 226
DEXA. See Dual-energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA)
Dexamethasone, for CAH, 125, 213
Dexamethasone suppression test, 212, 239
Diabetes insipidus (DI), 52
clinical features of, 52, 489, 506
differential diagnosis of, 54–55, 55f, 489
dipsogenic, 53
etiology of, 52–54, 53t
nephrogenic, 53t, 54, 506
pathophysiology of, 54
pituitary (central, neurohypophyseal), 
52–53, 53t
treatment of, 55–56, 56f, 489, 506
Diabetes mellitus (DM), 261
approach to the patient, 289–290
cardiovascular disease in
morbidity and mortality data, 284–285
risk factors for, 285–286
classification of, 261, 262f, 262t
complications of
acute, 272
chronic, 277, 277t
glycemic control and, 278–279, 279f
lower extremity, 286–288, 304, 493, 
512
mechanisms of, 277–278
renal. See Diabetic nephropathy
retinopathy. See Diabetic retinopathy
definition of, 261
diagnosis of, 264, 264f, 264t, 493, 
510–511
DKA due to. See Diabetic ketoacidosis 
(DKA)
dyslipidemia in, 285–286
epidemiology of, 263, 492, 510
erectile dysfunction in, 225, 226, 284
etiology of, 262t
female sexual dysfunction in, 231
Cryptorchidism, 159–160
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
Cushing’s disease
definition of, 105
screening tests for, 28t
treatment of, 111
vs. Cushing’s syndrome, 105
Cushing’s syndrome, 43, 105
ACTH-dependent vs. ACTH-
independent, 44, 45t
caused by ectopic ACTH production, 
377t, 379
clinical features of, 379
diagnosis of, 379–380
etiology of, 379, 492, 509
treatment of, 380
clinical features of, 43–44, 44t, 107–108, 
108f, 108t, 488, 505–506
diagnosis of, 43–44, 45t, 108–109, 109f, 
110f, 488, 505, 506
differential diagnosis of, 110–111
epidemiology of, 106
etiology of, 43, 106t, 107, 492, 509
hirsutism in, 210, 212
inferior petrosal venous sampling in,  
44–45
lipoprotein disorders in, 332
obesity/abdominal fat in, 239, 244
pancreatic endocrine tumors and,  
359–360
prevalence of, 43
treatment of, 45–46, 45f, 109f
vs. Cushing’s disease, 105
Cyclic GMP, in male sexual function, 224, 
225f
Cyclophosphamide
adverse effects of, 227t, 496, 514
for gestational trophoblastic disease, 223
for malignant pheochromocytoma, 130
for testicular cancer, 177
Cyclosporine
adverse effects of, 210
therapeutic monitoring of, 482t
CYP11B1 gene, 144f, 146t
CYP19 gene, 146t, 147, 161
CYP21A2 gene, in CAH, 124, 125t, 144f, 
146t
Cyproheptadine, for Cushing’s syndrome, 
46
Cyproterone acetate
adverse effects of, 213–214, 227t
for hirsutism, 213
Cystopathy, diabetic, 284
Cytokine(s)
in metabolic syndrome, 256–257
in thyroid hormone synthesis, 66
Cytokine receptors, 2t, 5f, 6
Dacarbazine, for malignant 
pheochromocytoma, 130
DAX1, 100
DDAVP. See Desmopressin (DDAVP)
Dehalogenase 1, 63t
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
for adrenal insufficiency, 124
in hirsutism, 210
Deiodinase(s), 62f, 68
Congenital absence of vagina, 147
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 124
androgens and, 145, 146t
clinical features of, 125, 145
etiology of, 124–125, 145
genetic factors in, 124, 125t, 145, 146t
hirsutism in, 209, 212–213
imaging in, 125, 126f
male, 155
treatment of, 125–126, 146–147, 213
variants of, 124, 125t, 145
Congenital heart disease (CHD), in Turner’s 
syndrome, 141
Congenital hypothyroidism, 63, 63t, 71–72
Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia 
(CLAH), 119t
Conivaptan, for SIAD, 61, 379
Conn’s syndrome, 111, 492, 509–510.  
See also Mineralocorticoid excess
Contraception, 190
barrier methods, 190t, 191
effectiveness of, 190t, 191–193, 496, 
514–515
hormonal methods, 190t, 191–192, 192t
long-term, 190t, 192
male, 168
new methods, 190t, 192
weekly patch, 190t, 192
IUDs, 190t, 191
obesity effects on, 193
postcoital, 192–193
sterilization, 190t, 191
Copper, reference values, 484t
Coronary artery disease (CAD). See also 
Cardiovascular disease
metabolic syndrome and, 254
obesity and, 247
prevention of
dyslipidemia management in, 333–334
postmenopausal hormone therapy in, 
203t, 205–206
Corticosteroids. See Glucocorticoid(s)
Corticotrope, 16t, 23t
Corticotropin-releasing hormone, ectopic 
production of, 377t, 379
Cortisol
in adrenal steroidogenesis, 104–105, 105f, 
106f
deficiency, hypoglycemia in, 313
laboratory evaluation of, 101–102, 122
Cortisol circadian rhythm, 102f
C-peptide, 314
CPHD (combined pituitary hormone 
deficiency), 120t
Craniopharyngioma
clinical features of, 25
obesity in, 239–240
treatment of, 25
C-reactive protein (CRP), reference values, 
476t
Creatine kinase, CK-MB, reference values, 
476t
Cretinism, 65, 489, 507
Critically ill patient, hypoglycemia in, 308t, 
313
Crow-Fukase syndrome (POEMS 
syndrome), 374
Index
532
Diet
energy density of, 247
for lipoprotein disorders, 335
Diethylpropion, for weight loss, 250
DiGeorge syndrome, 430
Dihydrotestosterone, 210
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D. See also Vitamin D
action of, 397f, 398–399, 398f, 402, 402f
overproduction of, 376, 377t, 402, 403t, 
404
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, for 
diabetes mellitus, 299t, 300, 300t
Disopyramide, adverse effects of, 227t
Disorders of sex development (DSDs), 138. 
See also specific disorders
global considerations, 147
ovotesticular, 140t, 141
Diuresis
for hypercalcemia, 427, 427t
water, 51, 51f
Diuretics
adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 227t
female sexual dysfunction, 230t
aldosterone-renin ratio effects of, 115t
DM. See Diabetes mellitus (DM)
DOC (deoxycorticosterone), 101f, 105, 112
Domperidone, for gastrointestinal 
dysfunction in diabetes mellitus, 284
Dopamine agonists
for acromegaly, 42
adverse effects of, 34
for ovulatory dysfunction, 189
for prolactinoma, 33–34
Doxorubicin, for ovarian cancer, 217
Drospirenone, for hirsutism, 213
Drug(s), therapeutic monitoring, 482–484t
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
in bone mass measurement, 441, 497, 517
in hyperparathyroidism, 415
Duloxetine, for diabetic neuropathy, 283
Dunnigan familial partial lipodystrophy, 254
Dysbetalipoproteinemia, familial, 322t, 326
Dyschondroplasia, 469
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding, 194
Dysgerminoma
brain, 26
ovarian, 218–219
Dyslipidemia. See Lipoprotein disorders
Dysmenorrhea, 199
Dyspareunia, 231
Dysplasia(s)
of bone
fibrous. See Fibrous dysplasia
McCune-Albright syndrome. See 
McCune-Albright syndrome
osteochondrodysplasias, 468–469
pachydermoperiostosis, 468
progressive diaphyseal, 465
cleidocranial, 385
pituitary, 19
Dystrophic calcification, 469t, 470
E6 gene, 220
E7 gene, 220
Ectopic ossification, 469t, 470
Ectopic pregnancy, 198
type 2
genetic factors in, 269
hepatic glucose production in, 271
hypertension in, 282
impaired insulin secretion in, 270–271, 
270f
insulin resistance syndromes in, 271
lipid production in, 271
metabolic abnormalities in, 269–271, 
270f
muscle and fat metabolism in,  
269–270
obesity and, 241–242
pathophysiology of, 269, 270f
prevalence of, 13t
prevention of, 204t, 206, 271, 493, 511
risk factors for, 264, 265t, 493, 511
screening and assessment of, 13t
treatment of, 297, 297f, 493, 512
α-glucosidase inhibitors, 299t, 300
biguanides, 298, 299t
bile acid–binding resins, 299t, 301
bromocriptine, 299t, 301
combination therapy, 302–303
glucose-lowering agents, 298–301, 
299t, 300t, 303f
insulin secretagogues, 298–300, 299t, 
300t
insulin therapy, 299t, 301–302
selection of initial agents, 302, 303f
thiazolidinediones, 299t, 301
type(s) of, 261, 262t
Diabetic foot, 286–288
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 272
clinical features of, 272–273, 273t, 494, 
512–513
diagnosis of, 272t, 273–274, 493, 511
mortality data, 275–276
pathophysiology of, 273, 512
treatment of, 274–276, 274t, 513
Diabetic nephropathy, 280
glycemic control and, 278–279, 279f
laboratory evaluation of, 494, 513
microalbuminuria in, 281–282, 281f
natural history of, 280–281, 281f
pathogenesis of, 280, 513
treatment of, 281–282
in type 1 vs. type 2 diabetes mellitus,  
281
Diabetic neuropathy, 282
autonomic, 283
mononeuropathy, 283
polyneuropathy, 282–283
prevalence of, 282
risk factors for, 282
treatment of, 283
Diabetic polyradiculopathy, 282–283
Diabetic retinopathy
clinical features of, 279–280, 280f, 493, 
511
glycemic control and, 278–279, 279f
incidence of, 279
treatment of, 280
“Diabetic skin spots,” 288
Diaphyseal aclasis, 469
Diarrhea, paraneoplastic, 377t
Diazoxide, for insulinoma, 356
Diabetes mellitus (DM) (Cont.):
fulminant, 262
gastrointestinal disease in, 283–284
genetic factors in, 271
genitourinary disease in, 283–284
gestational, 262, 306–307
global considerations, 263, 263f
glucose homeostasis of, 261, 261f
HHS due to. See Hyperglycemic 
hyperosmolar state (HHS)
history in, 289
in hospitalized patients, 305–306
hypertension and, 286
hypoglycemia in. See Hypoglycemia, in 
diabetes mellitus
incidence of, 263, 263f
infections in, 288
insulin biosynthesis, secretion, and action 
in, 265–277, 266f
insulin-resistant, 373–374
ketoacidosis in. See Diabetic ketoacidosis 
(DKA)
laboratory evaluation of, 264t, 299
lipodystrophic, 307
lipoprotein disorders in, 331
metabolic syndrome and, 254, 257
parenteral nutrition in patient with, 306
physical examination in, 289
prevalence of, 263f
psychosocial aspects of, 304–305
reproductive issues in, 306–307
retrograde ejaculation in, 284
screening for, 265
skin manifestations of, 288–299
treatment of, 289
blood glucose monitoring in, 292–293
complications of, 303–304
comprehensive care in, 290
emerging therapies, 303
exercise in, 292
glucocorticoid therapy and, 306
glycemic control in, 292–293
goals for, 290, 290t
in hospitalized patients, 305–306
medical nutrition therapy in, 291–292, 
291t
multidisciplinary team in, 290
ongoing aspects of, 304, 304t
during parenteral nutrition therapy, 306
patient education in, 290–292
principles of, 290
type 1
environmental factors in, 267f, 269
genetic factors in, 267–268
hypertension in, 282
immunologic markers in, 268, 493, 511
pathophysiology of, 267, 267f
prevention of, 269
treatment of, 294
amylin for, 297
general aspects of, 290t, 294
glucose control agents for, 297
insulin preparations, 294–295, 295t
insulin regimens, 295–297, 296t
intensive management, 294, 493, 512
pramlintide for, 297
target level of glycemic control, 294
Index
533
Eunuchoid proportions, 152
Euthyroid hyperthyroxinemia, 67, 67t
Exenatide, for diabetes mellitus, 298, 299t, 
300, 300t
Exercise
for diabetes mellitus, 292
for dysmenorrhea, 199
gonadotropin deficiency due to, 158
for lipoprotein disorders, 335
for metabolic syndrome, 258
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
450
for weight loss, 248t, 249
Exocrine, 1
Exostoses, multiple, 469
Ezetimibe
adverse effects of, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
for metabolic syndrome, 259
Factor V, screening assays, 472t
Factor VII, screening assays, 472t
Factor VIII, screening assays, 472t
Fallopian tube cancer, 219
Familial chylomicronemia syndrome, 325
Familial combined hypertriglyceridemia, 
327–328
Familial defective ApoB-100, 322t, 324
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia 
(FDH), 67, 67t
Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (broad β 
disease), 322t, 326
Familial hepatic lipase deficiency, 322t, 326
Familial hypercholesterolemia, 322–324, 
322t, 502, 522, 523
Familial hypertriglyceridemia, 326–327
Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia, 328
Fat(s), metabolism in type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, 269–270
Fat gene, 238t, 239
Fatty acid(s), free, in insulin resistance, 255
FDH (familial dysalbuminemic 
hyperthyroxinemia), 67, 67t
Fecundability, 187
Feedback control
in hormone regulation, 8–9, 9f
negative, 8–9, 487, 504
positive, 9
Female pseudohermaphroditism, 145, 146t
Female reproductive disorders
primary ovarian failure, 196–197
Female sexual dysfunction, 230
approach to the patient, 231
epidemiology of, 230
physiology of, 230–231
risk factors for, 230t
treatment of, 231–232
Fenofibrate
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
for metabolic syndrome, 259
Ferriman and Gallwey scale for hirsutism, 
210, 211f
α Fetoprotein, 172, 375
Fibric acid derivatives
adverse effects of, 337t, 338
for lipoprotein disorders, 337t, 338
for metabolic syndrome, 259
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), in thyroid 
hormone synthesis, 66
Epilatory, 213
Eplerenone, for mineralocorticoid excess, 
114
Erectile dysfunction (ED), 225
approach to the patient, 13t, 227–228, 
227f
in diabetes mellitus, 225, 226, 284
drug-related, 226–227, 227t
endocrinologic, 226
epidemiology of, 225
history in, 227–228
neurogenic, 226
pathophysiology of, 226
physical examination in, 228
prevalence of, 13t
psychogenic, 226
treatment of, 228–230, 229t
alprostadil, 229–230
androgen therapy, 229
oral agents, 228–229
patient education, 228
penile prosthesis, 230
sex therapy, 230
vacuum constriction devices, 229
vasculogenic, 226
Erection, 224, 225f
Erythrocytosis, testosterone therapy and, 
169–170
Erythromycin
drug interactions of, 229
for gastrointestinal dysfunction in diabetes 
mellitus, 284
Estrogen(s)
bone effects of, 451
deficiency of, 443–444, 443f
excess of, 161
lipoprotein metabolism effects of, 332
in perimenopause, 200
production of, 181–182, 182f
Estrogen therapy. See also Postmenopausal 
hormone therapy
adverse effects of, 226, 227t
for amenorrhea, 197
for contraception, 191–192
endometrial cancer and, 21
for female sexual dysfunction, 232
for hirsutism, 213
for Turner’s syndrome, 141
Ethinyl estradiol
for hirsutism, 213
in oral contraceptives, 191–192
Ethnic groups, waist circumference values 
in, 246t
Ethynodiol diacetate, for hirsutism, 213
Etidronate
for hypercalcemia, 404
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
454
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463, 463t
Etomidate, for Cushing’s syndrome, 46,  
111
Etoposide
adverse effects of, 175–176
for ovarian germ cell tumors, 219
for testicular cancer, 175, 177
ED. See Erectile dysfunction (ED)
Eflornithine cream, for hirsutism, 214
Ejaculation, 225
Elderly, vitamin D deficiency in, 399
Electrolysis, for hair removal, 213
Embryonal carcinoma
ovarian, 218–219
parasellar, 26
testicular, 173
Embryonal tumor, paraneoplastic syndromes 
in, 377t
Emergency contraception, 192–193
Empty sella, 21, 489, 506
Enchondromatosis, 469
Endocannabinoids, 250
Endocrine, 1
Endocrine disorders
approach to the patient, 11–12, 13t
etiology of, 10t
paraneoplastic, 375, 377t
pathophysiology of, 10
screening and assessment of, 12, 13t
types of, 10, 10t
Endocrine glands, 1
Endocrine tumors
gastrointestinal, 342, 343t. See also 
Carcinoid tumors
of pancreas. See Pancreatic endocrine 
tumors
Endocrinology, principles of, 1–2
Endodermal sinus tumor, testicular, 173
Endometrial cancer, 221
clinical features of, 222
epidemiology of, 221–222
genetic factors in, 221–222
granulosa cell tumor and, 218
pathology of, 220
postmenopausal hormone therapy and, 
202, 203t
prognosis of, 217t, 222
risk factors for, 221–222, 503, 524
staging of, 217t, 222
treatment of, 222, 524
Endometriosis
clinical features of, 199
definition of, 188
dysmenorrhea in, 199
etiology of, 199
infertility due to, 188
treatment of, 189
Endometritis, pelvic pain in, 198
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), in pancreatic 
endocrine tumors, 360
Endothelial lipase, 321
Endothelin(s)
in male sexual function, 224, 225f
in thyroid function, 66
End-stage renal disease (ESRD). See 
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Energy balance, physiologic regulation of, 
235–236, 238f
Energy density, of food, 247
Energy expenditure, 236, 241
Environmental factors
in obesity, 237
testicular dysfunction due to, 160
in type 1 diabetes mellitus, 267f, 269
Index
534
Glucagonoma, 357
clinical features of, 344t, 357
diagnosis of, 357
in MEN 1, 365
treatment of, 357
Glucagonoma syndrome, 365
Glucocorticoid(s)
for ACTH deficiency, 43
actions of, 100
for adrenal insufficiency, 123–124, 123f
adverse effects of, 227t
for CAH, 125, 213
diabetes mellitus management of and, 306
for ectopic ACTH syndrome, 380
equipotency, 124
for Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 83
for hypercalcemia, 404, 427t, 428
for hypercalcemia of malignancy, 378
osteoporosis induced by, 444, 444t,  
457–458
synthesis of, 100–101, 101f, 144f
Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism 
(GRA), 112, 114–115
Gluconeogenesis, 308–309
Glucose
balance, 308–309, 309f, 310t
blood, monitoring of, 292–293. See also 
Glycemic control
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G6PD) deficiency, 472t
counterregulation, 308–309, 309f,  
310t
homeostasis, 261, 261f, 266–267
insulin secretion and, 265, 266f
tolerance
impaired, 256
normal, 492, 510
Glyburide, for diabetes mellitus, 300t
Glycemic control
in diabetes mellitus, 278–279,  
292–294
diabetic nephropathy and, 282
diabetic retinopathy and, 278, 279f
long-term, assessment of, 293
in metabolic syndrome, 260
Glycoprotein hormones, 2
GNAS gene, 107, 435–436, 435f
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH)
GnRH1 gene, 158
Goiter, 88
colloid, 88
diffuse nontoxic (simple)
clinical features of, 89
etiology of, 88–89
treatment of, 89
juvenile, 88
nontoxic multinodular, 89–90
sporadic, 88
substernal, 89
toxic multinodular, 90
Goitrogens, 89
Gonadal development, 136–137, 138f
Gonadal dysgenesis, 142, 143t
Gonadal sex, 136–137, 136f, 138f
Gonadectomy, 196
Gonadotrope, 16t, 23t
Galactorrhea, 31–32
Galactosemia, primary ovarian insufficiency 
in, 197
Gallbladder disease, postmenopausal 
hormone therapy and, 203t, 205
Gallium nitrate, for hypercalcemia, 428
Gallstone(s)
obesity and, 243
prevention with ursodeoxycholic acid, 
249
Gangliocytomas, 25
Gastric carcinoids, 345t, 349, 354
Gastric inhibitory peptide, ectopic 
production of, 377t, 379
Gastrinoma. See also Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome (ZES)
clinical features of, 354–355
diagnosis of, 355
in MEN 1, 355, 364, 364f
treatment of, 355–356
Gastrointestinal disease, in diabetes mellitus, 
283–284
Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors, 
342, 343t, 344–345t. See also 
Carcinoid tumors; Pancreatic 
endocrine tumors
Gastroparesis, in diabetes mellitus, 283–284
Gastroplasty, vertical banded, 251
Gemcitabine, for ovarian cancer, 217
Gemfibrozil
adverse effects of, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
for metabolic syndrome, 259
Germ cell(s)
ovarian, 179–180, 180f
primordial, 178, 179f
Germ cell tumor
extragonadal, 177
ovarian, 218–219
Germinoma
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
parasellar, 26
Gestational diabetes mellitus, 262,  
306–307
Gestational trophoblastic disease, 222
clinical features of, 223
global considerations, 222
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
risk factors for, 222–223
treatment of, 223
GH. See Growth hormone (GH)
Ghrelin, 35, 236
GHRH (growth hormone-releasing 
hormone), 35
Giant cell tumor, paraneoplastic syndromes 
in, 377t
Glimepiride, for diabetes mellitus, 298,  
300t
Glioma
hypothalamic, 25
optic, 25
Glipizide, for diabetes mellitus, 298, 300t
Global health
cervical cancer, 219
developmental sexual disorders, 147
diabetes mellitus, 263, 263f
hyponatremia, 61
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva, 470
Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium, 467
Fibroids, uterine, 199
Fibroma
ovarian, 218–219
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
Fibrosis, osteitis, 437
Fibrous dysplasia
clinical features of, 467
genetic factors in, 467
laboratory evaluation of, 468
radiography of, 467–468, 468f
treatment of, 468
Finasteride, for hirsutism, 214
Fish-eye disease, 330
Fish oil supplements, for lipoprotein 
disorders, 337t, 338
Fludrocortisone
for adrenal insufficiency, 124
for SIAD, 61
Fludrocortisone suppression test, 113
Fluid therapy
for DKA, 274–275
for HHS, 276–277
for hypercalcemia, 404
Fluoride, for osteoporosis management/
prevention, 456–457
Flutamide, for hirsutism, 214
Fluvastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 337t
Folate, reference values, 484t
Follicle(s)
Graffian, 180f
mature, 179–180, 179f
ovarian, 179–180, 180f
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 46
action of, 46
deficiency of, 23t
laboratory evaluation of, 22t, 48
during neonatal period, 181, 181f
recombinant, 164, 189
reference values, 477t
secretion of, 46
synthesis of, 46
Follicular growth, 179–180, 179f
Food intake, in obesity, 241
Food pyramid, 247
Foot ulcers, in diabetes mellitus, 287–288, 
493, 512
Fracture(s). See also specific types and sites
osteoporotic. See Osteoporosis, fractures 
associated with
Paget’s disease of bone and, 461
Fragile X syndrome, 197
FRAX calculators, in fracture risk 
assessment, 448, 449f
Frederickson classification, of 
hyperlipoproteinemias, 321–322,  
321t
Free T3 index, 70
Free T4 index, 70
Furosemide
for hypercalcemia of malignancy, 378
for SIAD, 379
Gabapentin
adverse effects of, 244
for menopausal symptoms, 202
Index
535
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT), for osteopetrosis, 464
Hemochromatosis, hypogonadism and,  
159
Hemodialysis
for hypercalcemia, 427t, 429
of malignancy, 378
for hypermagnesemia, 396
Hemoglobin
normal, 473t
testosterone therapy and, 169–170
Hemoglobin A1c, in diabetes mellitus, 290, 
290t, 293–294
Heparin, monitoring treatment with,  
472t
Hepatic artery embolization, for carcinoid 
syndrome, 353, 362
Hepatic lipase deficiency, familial, 322t,  
326
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, 
osteosclerosis and, 466
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
Hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor 
(HNF), 272
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer 
(HNPCC)
endometrial cancer in, 221–222
ovarian cancer in, 216
type II, 216
Hermaphroditism. See Ovotesticular 
disorders of sexual development
HESX1 gene, 19, 120t
Heterosexual precocity, 154, 186
Hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(H6PDH), 104
HHS (hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state). 
See Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar 
state (HHS)
High-density lipoprotein (HDL)
composition of, 317, 317f
high levels of, 327t, 330
low levels of, 327t, 329–330. See also 
Lipoprotein disorders
in metabolic syndrome, 256
metabolism of, 320–321, 320f
therapy to increase levels of, 259, 339
Hip fracture, 439–440, 439f
Hirsutism, 209
after menopause, 212
approach to the patient, 13t, 209–210, 
212f
drug-induced, 210, 210t
etiology of, 210t
hormonal evaluation in, 210–213
in 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 145
prevalence of, 13t
scoring scale of Ferriman and Gallwey, 
210, 211f
treatment of, 213–214
Histamine H2 receptor antagonists, 227t
Histiocytosis X, 20, 25
HIV infection, lipodystrophy in, 254
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. See Statins
HNF (hepatocyte nuclear transcription 
factor), 272
Homeostasis, 7–8
Growth hormone (GH), 34
action of, 35
ectopic production of, 377t
insensitivity to, 36–37
laboratory evaluation of, 22t
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
457
secretion of, 35
signal transduction pathway for, 2t
synthesis of, 34–35
Growth hormone (GH) deficiency
in adults
clinical features of, 37, 38t, 488,  
505
diagnosis of, 37–38, 38t
treatment of, 23t, 38–39, 39f
in children
clinical features of, 37
laboratory evaluation of, 37
pathophysiology of, 36–37
treatment of, 23t, 37
idiopathic, 36
Growth hormone (GH) receptor 
antagonists, for acromegaly, 42
Growth hormone–releasing factor tumors 
(GRFomas), 344t, 359
Growth hormone-releasing hormone 
(GHRH), 35, 377t
agonists, 226, 227t, 230t
receptor mutations, 36
Growth plate, inadequate mineralization of, 
400
Guanethidine, adverse effects of, 227t
Gynecomastia, 161
in cirrhosis, 160
etiology of, 161–162, 496, 514, 515
evaluation of, 13t, 161–162, 162f, 495, 
514
in Klinefelter syndrome, 139, 159
obesity and, 242
pathologic, 161–162, 162f
prevalence of, 13t, 161
treatment of, 139, 162
H6PDH (hexose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase), 104
Hair
growth cycle of, 209
removal, 213
terminal, 209
vellus, 209
Half-life, circulating hormone, 4
Hamartoma, hypothalamic, 25
Hand-Schüller-Christian disease, 25
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 72, 86, 88
Haversian systems, 384, 386
hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG)
HDL. See High-density lipoprotein (HDL)
Head and neck cancer, paraneoplastic 
syndromes in, 377t
Heart disease. See Cardiovascular disease
Heat therapy, for dysmenorrhea, 199
Hemangiopericytoma, 377t
Hematocrit, normal, 473t
Hematologic disease, reference values, 
471–474t
Gonadotropin(s), 46. See also 
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH); 
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
action of, 46
for age-related reproductive dysfunction, 
164
deficiency of, 46–47
acquired causes of, 158–159
congenital disorders associated with, 
155t, 157–158
treatment of, 47
in male reproductive function, 152
for ovulatory dysfunction, 189
pituitary tumor production of, 47–48
synthesis of, 46
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
agonists, 46, 487, 504
agonist test, 212
defective synthesis of. See Kallmann 
syndrome
for hypogonadism, 47
hypothalamic, 17–18, 18f, 46
in ovarian function regulation, 180–181, 181f
receptor mutations, 158
stimulation test, 152–153
Gorlin’s syndrome (nevoid basal cell 
carcinoma syndrome), 218
Gout, obesity and, 244
GPIHP1 deficiency, 322t, 326
G protein(s), 5f, 6
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), 2–3, 
2t, 5–6
GRA (glucocorticoid-remediable 
aldosteronism), 112, 114–115
Graffian follicle, 180f
Granuloma annulare, 288
Granulomatous thyroiditis, 84–85
Granulosa cell tumor, of ovary, 218
Graves’ disease, 77
in children, 83
clinical course of, 81
clinical features of, 78–80, 78t,  
79f, 88
differential diagnosis of, 80–81
epidemiology of, 77–78
hyperthyroidism of, 81–82
laboratory evaluation of, 80, 80f, 490, 508
pathogenesis of, 78
prevalence of, 13t
remission rates, 81, 82
screening and assessment of, 13t
thyrotoxic crisis in, 83
treatment of
antithyroid drugs, 81–82, 491,  
508
in pregnancy, 83
propranolol, 82
radioiodine, 82
thyroidectomy, 82–83
Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 79, 79f, 83, 491, 
508
GRFomas (growth hormone–releasing 
factor tumors), 344t, 359
Growth
disorders of, 36–37
hormones in, 7
somatic, skeletal maturation and, 3
Index
536
Hyperemesis gravidarum, 88
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS)
clinical features of, 276
laboratory evaluation of, 272t, 276, 511
pathophysiology of, 276
treatment of, 276–277
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, 197
Hyperinsulinemia
in hirsutism, 210
insulin resistance and, 271
obesity and, 241–242
Hyperinsulinism, endogenous, 308t,  
314–315
Hyperlipidemia. See Lipoprotein disorders
Hyperlipoproteinemia. See Lipoprotein 
disorders
Hypermagnesemia, 396
clinical features of, 396
etiology of, 396
laboratory findings in, 396
treatment of, 396
Hypernatremia, adipsic, 56–58, 57f
Hyperostosis corticalis generalisata, 465
Hyperparathyroidism
asymptomatic, 411–412, 414
hereditary, 412
osteitis fibrosa cystica in, 414–415
prevalence of, 13t
primary, 411
clinical features of, 414–416, 519
diagnosis of, 415t, 416, 416f, 425f, 499, 
519
etiology of, 411t, 412, 519
genetic factors in, 413–414, 413f
incidence of, 412
magnesium deficiency in, 418
in MEN syndromes, 364, 368, 371, 
412
natural history of, 412
pathology of, 412
PTH levels in, 416, 416f
solitary adenomas and, 412
treatment of
medical, 418
in MEN syndromes, 366–367, 371
monitoring in, 415t
surgical, 415t, 417–418
screening and assessment of, 13t
secondary
in chronic kidney disease, 423–424
clinical features of, 423–424
etiology of, 404t
hypocalcemia and, 404t
pathogenesis of, 424
treatment of, 424
tertiary, 424, 499, 518
Hyperparathyroidism jaw tumor (HPT-JT) 
syndrome, 412, 414
Hyperparathyroid-like syndromes,  
419–420
Hyperphosphatemia, 393
in chronic kidney disease, 433
clinical features of, 393–394
etiology of, 393, 393t
hypocalcemia and, 436
severe acute, 436
treatment of, 394
diagnosis of, 213
diagnostic markers of, 125t
salt-wasting, 145
17-Hydroxyprogesterone, in CAH, 126
Hymen, imperforate, 195
Hyperaldosteronism
glucocorticoid-remediable, 112, 114–115
mineralocorticoid excess in. See 
Mineralocorticoid excess
Hyperalphalipoproteinemia, familial, 330
Hyperandrogenism, ovarian, 212
Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia, 328
Hypercalcemia, 402, 410
aluminum intoxication and, 424
asymptomatic, 425
bone turnover–associated, 423
chronic, 425, 425f
in chronic kidney disease, 423–424
clinical features of, 403, 411
diagnosis of, 403–404, 411, 425–426,  
425f
differential diagnosis of, 411, 425–426,  
425f
etiology of, 402, 403t, 411, 411t, 426, 
504, 526
familial benign, 419
familial hypocalciuric, 402, 419
hyperthyroidism and, 423
idiopathic, of infancy, 422–423
immobilization and, 423
lithium and, 418–419
malignancy-associated, 376, 377t, 411t
clinical features of, 376
clinical syndromes related to, 420–421
diagnosis of, 376, 421
etiology of, 376, 518–519
mechanisms of, 421
treatment of, 378, 421–422, 499, 504, 
518–519, 525
milk-alkali syndrome and, 424–425
in Paget’s disease of bone, 462
primary hyperparathyroidism and. See 
Hyperparathyroidism, primary
in sarcoidosis, 422
thiazides and, 423
treatment of, 404, 411, 426, 427t
bisphosphonates, 404, 427–428
calcitonin, 428
dialysis, 429
diuresis, 427
gallium nitrate, 428
glucocorticoids, 404, 428
hydration, 404, 426–427
increased salt intake, 427
phosphate therapy, 429
plicamycin, 428
vitamin A intoxication and, 423
vitamin D–related, 422
Hypercalciuria
hypocalcemic, 431
in Paget’s disease of bone, 462
Hypercholesterolemia. See also Lipoprotein 
disorders
autosomal dominant, 322t, 324
autosomal recessive, 322t, 324
familial, 322–324, 322t
polygenic, 325
Hormone(s). See also specific hormones and types
autocrine regulation of, 9
classes of, 2
deficiency of, 11
degradation of, 4–5
ectopic production of, 375–376, 377t
endocrine testing related to, 12
eutopic production of, 375
feedback regulatory systems, 8–9, 9f
functions of, 7–8
half-life of, 4
measurements of, 12
nature of, 2
paracrine regulation of, 9
resistance to, 11, 487, 504
rhythmic patterns of, 9–10
role of, 2
secretion of, 4
synthesis and processing of, 3–4
transport of, 4–5
Hormone receptors
characterization of, 2–3
families of, 2–3, 2t
membrane receptors, 5–6, 5f
nuclear receptors, 6–7, 7f
Hormone replacement therapy
for hypopituitarism, 21, 23t
postmenopausal. See Postmenopausal 
hormone therapy
Hormone resistance syndromes, 11
Howship’s lacunae, 386, 415
HPT-JT (hyperparathyroidism jaw tumor) 
syndrome, 412, 414
HRPT2 gene, 409–410, 409f
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
ectopic production of, 375, 377t,  
380–381
in germ cell tumors, 219
in gestational trophoblastic disease,  
223
reference values, 478t
stimulation test, 153
in testicular cancer, 173
Human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG), 
for gonadotropin deficiency, 164
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 220
infections
cervical cancer and, 220
global considerations, 219
vaccine, 220
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, 421. 
See also Hypercalcemia, malignancy-
associated
Hunger, 236
Hydrocortisone
for ACTH deficiency, 43
for adrenal insufficiency, 123–124
for CAH, 125, 146
for hypercalcemia, 404
for myxedema coma, 77
Hydroxychloroquine, for hypercalcemia, 
404
21-Hydroxylase deficiency
classic. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH)
classic simple virilizing, 145
clinical features of, 125t, 145, 146t
Index
537
differential diagnosis of, 59t, 60
ECFV assessment and, 59, 59t
etiology of, 58–59, 58t
global considerations, 61
paraneoplastic, 376
pathophysiology of, 59–60
treatment of, 60–61
Hypoparathyroidism
acquired, 431–432
chronic, 431
clinical features of, 430
etiology of, 404t
genetic factors in, 430–431
hyperphosphatemia due to, 393, 393t
hypocalcemia and, 404–405, 404t,  
429–430
PTH absent, 428t, 430–432
PTH ineffective, 428t, 432–436, 435f
PTH overwhelmed, 428t, 436–437
transient, 431–432
Hypophosphatasia, 459, 466–467
Hypophosphatemia, 390
chronic, 390–391
clinical features of, 391–392, 498
etiology of, 390–391, 390t, 498, 517
laboratory findings in, 391–392
mechanisms of, 389–390
osteomalacia and, 400
treatment of, 392, 392t, 517
Hypophysitis, 20, 196
Hypopituitarism, 18
acquired causes of, 18t, 20
cranial irradiation, 20
empty sella, 21, 489, 506
hypothalamic infiltration disorders, 20
inflammatory lesions, 20
lymphocytic hypophysitis, 20
pituitary apoplexy, 20–21
clinical features of, 21
developmental and genetic causes of, 18t
developmental hypothalamic 
dysfunction, 19
pituitary dysplasia, 19
Prader-Willi syndrome. See Prader-
Willi syndrome
tissue-specific factor mutations, 19
diagnosis of, 21, 22t, 488, 506
treatment of, 21, 23t
Hypospadias, isolated, 145
Hypothalamic disease
glioma, 25
hamartoma, 25
hypopituitarism due to, 19, 20. See also 
Hypopituitarism
metabolic effects of, 26
obesity in, 239–240, 244
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, 100, 
102f, 487, 504
Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, 195f
Hypothalamic-pituitary-testis axis, 149–150, 
149f
Hypothalamic-pituitary vasculature, 17f
Hypothalamus
developmental dysfunction of, 19
in ovarian function regulation, 180–181,  
181f
vasculature of, 17f
Hypoglycemia, 308
accidental, 315
approach to the patient, 315–316
in autoimmune insulin syndrome, 374
clinical features of, 310
in critical illness, 308t, 313
in diabetes mellitus
autonomic failure associated with, 
311–312, 311f
defective glucose counterregulation 
and, 303, 311–312
impact and frequency of, 310, 513
prevention of, 312
risk factors for, 311, 312, 495, 513–514
unawareness of, 312
diagnosis of, 315, 495, 513
drug-induced, 308t, 313
endogenous hyperinsulinism and, 308t, 
314–315
etiology of, 308, 308t
factitious, 315
hormone action in, 8
hormone deficiencies and, 308t, 313
with non–beta-cell tumors, 313–314
non-diabetic, 308r, 313–315
pathophysiology of, 310–312, 310t, 495, 
513
recognition and documentation of, 315
recurrent, prevention of, 316
treatment of, 315–316
tumor-induced, 377t, 380
Hypogonadism
cryptorchidism and, 159–160
erectile dysfunction in, 226
evaluation of, 163–164, 163f
hypergonadotropic, 197
hypogonadotropic. See Hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism
Klinefelter syndrome and, 159
obesity and, 242
testicular causes of, 159–161
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 157
acquired, 158–159
amenorrhea in, 196–197
clinical features of, 46–47
congenital, 155t, 157–158, 187t
diagnosis of, 47
etiology of, 187t
hemochromatosis and, 159
hyperprolactinemia in, 159
isolated, 46, 196–197
obesity in, 159, 238
pathophysiology of, 157
sellar mass lesions and, 159
treatment of, 47
Hypokalemia
in DKA, 275
in mineralocorticoid excess, 113
Hypomagnesemia, 394, 432
clinical features of, 395
etiology of, 394–395, 395t
laboratory findings in, 394–395
treatment of, 395–396, 432
vitamin D deficiency and, 396
Hyponatremia, 58
in adrenal insufficiency, 121
clinical features of, 58
Hyperpigmentation, in adrenal insufficiency, 
121, 122f
Hyperprolactinemia, 30
clinical features of, 31
diagnosis of, 31, 32, 228
erectile dysfunction in, 226
etiology of, 30–31, 31t, 488, 505
galactorrhea and, 31–32
hirsutism in, 210
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and, 
159
laboratory evaluation of, 32
prevalence of, 13t
screening and assessment of, 13t
treatment of, 32
Hypertension
in diabetes mellitus, 282, 286
erectile dysfunction and, 226
hypokalemic, 113
in metabolic syndrome, 256, 259
obesity and, 242
paraneoplastic, 377t
Hyperthyroidism
cardiovascular complications of, 490,  
508
definition of, 77
evaluation of, 80f
in gestational trophoblastic disease,  
223
hypercalcemia and, 423
lipoprotein disorders in, 331
paraneoplastic, 377t
primary, 77t
secondary, 77t
thyrotoxicosis without, 77t
Hyperthyroxinemia
euthyroid, 67, 67t
familial dysalbuminemic, 67, 67t
Hypertrichosis, 210
Hypertriglyceridemia, familial, 326–327
Hyperuricemia
metabolic syndrome and, 257
Hypoactive sexual desire, female, 231
Hypoalphalipoproteinemia, 330
Hypobetalipoproteinemia, familial, 328
Hypocalcemia, 429
chronic, 429–430
in chronic kidney disease, 433
classification of, 428t, 429–430
clinical features of, 405, 418, 499,  
518
diagnosis of, 405
differential diagnosis of, 437
etiology of, 404–405, 404t, 429–430
genetic abnormalities and, 430–431
genetic patterns in, 435–436, 435f
hyperphosphatemia and, 436
hypomagnesemia and, 432
hypoparathyroidism and, 418, 428t, 499, 
518. See also Hypoparathyroidism
osteoporosis associated with, 442
pancreatitis and, 429
pathophysiology of, 429–430
in PHP, 434–435
transient, 429
treatment of, 405, 418, 437–438
vitamin D deficiency and, 433–434
Index
538
Insulin resistance syndrome. See Metabolic 
syndrome
Insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus,  
373–374
Insulin secretagogues
adverse effects of, 300
properties of, 298–300, 300t
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 298–300, 
299t, 300t
Insulin tolerance test, 102
Interferon-α (IFN-α), for carcinoid 
syndrome, 353
Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs), 
317, 317f, 318t, 327t
Intrauterine devices (IUDs), 190t, 191
Intrauterine growth retardation, testicular 
disorders and, 145
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 189–190
Iodine
deficiency of
clinical features of, 66
global issues, 65, 65f, 489, 507
goiter and, 89
hypothyroidism and, 75
prevention of, 75
excess intake of, 75
metabolism and transport of, 64–65
recommended intake of, 66
Islet cell tumors, in MEN 1, 367
Isosexual precocity, 154
Itraconazole, drug interactions of, 229
“Ivory vertebra,” 462
Jansen’s disease, 419–420, 420f
Jaw, osteonecrosis of, 454
Jod-Basedow effect, 87, 90
Juvenile goiter, 88
Juvenile Paget’s disease, 459
KAL gene, 19
Kallmann syndrome
clinical features of, 19
etiology of, 19
genetic factors in, 19, 157
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
clinical features of, 119t, 431
genetic factors in, 119t
hypocalcemia and, 431
Kenney-Caffey syndrome, 430–431
Ketanserin, for diarrhea in carcinoid 
syndrome, 352
Ketoconazole
adverse effects of, 46
for Cushing’s syndrome, 46, 111
drug interactions of, 229
for ectopic ACTH syndrome, 380
for hypercalcemia, 404
Ketoprofen, for dysmenorrhea, 199
Kidney cancer, paraneoplastic syndromes 
in, 377t
Kidney disease/failure. See Chronic kidney 
disease (CKD)
Kinase inhibitors, for thyroid cancer, 97
Klinefelter syndrome, 138
clinical features of, 138–139, 140t, 159, 
496, 515
genetic factors in, 159
female, 187
hyperprolactinemia and, 31
male, 152, 188, 189
prevalence of, 13t, 187
psychological aspects of, 188
treatment of, 189–190
Inhibin, in male reproductive function, 152
Insulin
action of, 266–267
adverse effects of, 244
biosynthesis of, 265
for DKA, 275
ectopic production of, 377t
secretion of, 265, 266f, 270–271, 270f
signal transduction pathway for, 2t,  
266–267, 266f
structure of, 3
for type 1 diabetes mellitus
continuous subcutaneous infusion, 
296–297, 296f
multiple-component regimens, 296, 
296f
preparations, 294–295, 295t, 493,  
512
twice-daily injections, 296, 296f
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 299t,  
301–302
Insulin aspart, 294–295, 295t
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(IDDM). See Diabetes mellitus, 
type 1
Insulin detemir, 295, 295t, 493, 512
Insulin glargine, 295, 295t, 493, 512
Insulin glulisine, 294–295, 295t
Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I)
adverse effects of, 36
for GH-resistant syndromes, 36
secretion of, 35–36
signal transduction pathway for, 2t
structure of, 3
in thyroid hormone synthesis, 66
Insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II), 377t, 
380
Insulin-like growth factor II gene, 380
Insulin lispro, 294–295, 295t
Insulinoma, 356
clinical features of, 344t, 356
definition of, 356
diagnosis of, 314–315, 356
endogenous hyperinsulinism due to, 
314–315
epidemiology of, 314
incidence of, 314, 344t
in MEN 1, 364f, 365
obesity in, 239
treatment of, 315, 356–357
Insulin resistance
antibodies and, 373–374
autoimmune, 374
free fatty acids in, 255
lipoprotein disorders and, 331
in metabolic syndrome. See Metabolic 
syndrome
obesity and, 237, 241–242
pathophysiology of, 271
syndromes of, 271
treatment of, 260
Hypothyroidism, 62, 71
antithyroxine antibodies and, 374
autoimmune, 72
classification of, 72
clinical features of, 72t, 73–74, 74f
laboratory evaluation of, 73–74, 490, 
507
pathogenesis of, 72–73
prevalence of, 72
cardiovascular effects of, 490, 507
congenital, 63, 63t, 71–72
diagnosis of, 74–75, 75f
differential diagnosis of, 75
diseases associated with, 75
etiology of, 71t, 75
evaluation of, 13t
hirsutism in, 210
iatrogenic, 75
lipoprotein disorders in, 331
obesity in, 239, 244
overt, 72
pathogenesis of, 72–73
in pregnancy, 76, 88
prevalence of, 13t, 72
secondary, 75
subclinical, 72
treatment of, 76–77
Hypoventilation, in obesity, 242
Hysterectomy
for endometrial cancer, 222
for ovarian cancer, 217
Ibandronate, for osteoporosis management/
prevention, 453f, 454
IBMPFD (inclusion body myopathy with 
Paget’s disease and frontotemporal 
dementia), 459
Ibuprofen, for dysmenorrhea, 199
Idiopathic growth hormone deficiency 
(IGHD), 36
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy,  
422–423
IDLs (intermediate-density lipoproteins), 
317, 317f, 318t, 327t
Ifosfamide, for testicular cancer, 177
IGF. See Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
IMAGe syndrome, 119t
Immune response/immune system, 
reference values, 474–481t
Immunoglobulin(s), reference values, 478t
Immunosuppressive therapy, adverse effects 
of, 445
Incidentaloma. See Adrenal mass, 
incidentally discovered
Incretins, for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
298–300
Indomethacin, for nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus, 56
Inferior petrosal venous sampling, in 
Cushing’s syndrome, 44–45, 111
Infertility, 187
after testicular cancer, 177
approach to the patient, 187–188
in CAH, 125
definition of, 187
etiology of, 187, 188f, 496, 514
evaluation of, 13t, 187–188, 496, 514
Index
539
screening for
classification of results, 485t
recommendations, 13t, 332
secondary forms, 327t
alcohol consumption and, 331–332
in Cushing’s syndrome, 332
diabetes mellitus and, 331
drug-related, 327t, 332
estrogen and, 332
liver disorders and, 331
lysosomal storage diseases and, 332
in obesity, 330
renal disorders and, 331, 502, 523
thyroid disease and, 331
treatment of, 334
bile acid sequestrants, 336–337, 337t
for CHD risk reduction, 333–334
cholesterol absorption inhibitors, 336, 
337t
clinical approach to, 334–336
combination drug therapy, 338–339
dietary modification, 335
elevated lipoprotein(a) management, 339
fibric acid derivatives, 337t, 338
foods and dietary additives, 335
LDL apheresis, 339
lifestyle modifications, 335
low HDL–C management, 339
in metabolic syndrome, 259
nicotinic acid, 337–338, 337t
omega-3 fatty acids, 337t, 338
statins, 336, 337t
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL), 255, 319
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency, 322t,  
325
Liraglutide, for diabetes mellitus, 299t, 300, 
300t
Lithium, adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 227t
hypercalcemia, 418–419
obesity, 244
Liver disease/failure
lipoprotein disorders in, 331
obesity and, 242
Liver transplantation, for metastatic NETs, 
362
Locaserin, 251
Loop diuretics. for hypercalcemia of 
malignancy, 378
Looser’s zones, 400
Lovastatin
adverse effects of, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
Low-carbohydrate diet, 247
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
composition of, 317, 317f
elevated
disorders associated with, 322t, 325–328
secondary causes of, 327t, 502, 522
estimation of, 332
goal for, in diabetes mellitus, 258–259, 
286
lowering levels of. See Lipoprotein 
disorders, treatment of
in metabolic syndrome, 256
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) apheresis, 
339
Lipoatrophy
diabetic, 288
in metabolic syndrome, 257
Lipodystrophy
diabetes mellitus associated with, 307
in HIV infection, 254
lipoprotein disorders and, 331
metabolic syndrome and, 254
protease inhibitors and, 307
Lipohypertrophy, diabetic, 288
Lipoprotein(a)
characteristics of, 318t, 320
elevated levels of, 325, 327t, 339
Lipoprotein(s)
classification of, 317–319, 317f, 318t
composition of, 317–319, 318t
metabolism of
endogenous pathway (hepatic lipids), 
320, 320f
exogenous pathway (dietary lipids), 
319–320, 320f
HDL and reverse cholesterol transport, 
320–321, 320f
proteins associated with, 318–319
Lipoprotein disorders, 321
in diabetes mellitus, 285–286. See also 
Metabolic syndrome
diagnosis of, 332–333
with elevated HDL-C
CETP deficiency, 330
familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia, 330
with elevated LDL–C and normal 
triglycerides, 321t, 322–325
autosomal dominant 
hypercholesterolemia due to 
mutations in PCSK9, 324
autosomal recessive 
hypercholesterolemia, 324
familial defective ApoB-100, 324
familial hypercholesterolemia, 322–324
polygenic hypercholesterolemia, 325
sitosterolemia, 324–325
with elevated lipoprotein(a), 325
with elevated triglycerides, 321t, 325–328
ApoA-V deficiency, 325–326
familial chylomicronemia syndrome,  
325
familial combined hyperlipidemia, 
327–328
familial dysbetalipoproteinemia, 326
familial hypertriglyceridemia, 326–327
GPIHBP1 deficiency, 326
hepatic lipase deficiency, 326
in metabolic syndrome, 256, 259
erectile dysfunction in, 226
Frederickson classification of, 321–322, 
321t
with low ApoB
familial hypobetalipoproteinemia, 328
PCSK9 deficiency, 328
with low HDL-C
genetic deficiency of apoA-I, 329
LCAT deficiency, 329–330
primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia,  
330
Tangier disease, 329
prevalence of, 13t
gynecomastia in, 139, 159
hypogonadism due to, 159
pathophysiology of, 138
prevalence of, 13t
screening and assessment of, 13t
treatment of, 139
Krukenberg tumor, 215
Kussmaul respirations, 273
Kyphoplasty, 457
Lactate dehydrogenase, in testicular cancer, 
173
Lactotrope, 16t, 23t
Lamellar bone, 386
Lanreotide
for acromegaly, 41–42
for carcinoid syndrome, 352–353
Laparoscopic adjustable silicon gastric 
banding, 251, 251f, 525
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy, 114, 114f
Laron syndrome, 37
Laser therapy
for hair removal, 213
Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome, 158, 240t
LDL. See Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
Lead poisoning, 484t
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), 
320f
deficiency of, 329–330
Leptin
actions of, 236, 238f
deficiency of, 19
genetics of, 237, 238t
in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 197
mutations, hypopituitarism due to, 19
in obesity, 238t, 241
Leptin receptors, 237–238, 238t, 239f
Leucovorin, for gestational trophoblastic 
disease, 223
Levonorgestrel
in emergency contraception, 193
for hirsutism, 213
in oral contraceptives, 192
Levothyroxine
adverse effects of, 76
for diffuse nontoxic goiter, 89
for hypothyroidism, 76–77
for subacute thyroiditis, 85
Leydig cell
in androgen synthesis, 150
in testicular function regulation, 149–150, 
149f
LH. See Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Libido
female, 230
male, 224, 228
Liddle’s syndrome, 115
Lifestyle modifications
for metabolic syndrome, 258
for obesity, 247
Liothyronine, 76, 77
Lipid(s)
dietary, transport of, 319–320, 320f
hepatic, transport of, 320, 320f
production of, 271
Lipid-modifying therapy. See Lipoprotein 
disorders, treatment of
Index
540
Mercury exposure/poisoning, 484t
Mesenchymal tumor, paraneoplastic 
syndromes in, 377t
Metabolic syndrome, 253
adiponectin in, 257
age and, 254
cardiovascular disease and, 254, 257
clinical features of, 257
cytokines in, 256–257
diabetes mellitus and, 254, 257, 260, 271
diagnosis of, 253t, 258
dyslipidemia in, 256
epidemiology of, 253–254, 254f
fatty liver disease and, 257
glucose intolerance in, 256
hypertension in, 256, 259
hyperuricemia/uric acid stones in, 257
insulin resistance in, 255–256, 260
lipodystrophy and, 254
obesity and, 258
pathophysiology of, 255–257, 255f
polycystic ovary syndrome and, 257
risk factors for, 255
sedentary lifestyle and, 254
sleep apnea and, 257
treatment of, 258–260
waist circumference and, 256
Metastatic calcification, 469, 469t
Metformin
for metabolic syndrome, 260
for polycystic ovarian syndrome, 197
for prediabetes, 271
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 298, 299t, 
302, 493, 512
MET gene, in thyroid cancer, 94t
Methimazole
adverse effects of, 82
for Graves’ disease, 81
Methotrexate
for ectopic pregnancy, 198
erectile dysfunction, 227t
for gestational trophoblastic disease, 223
therapeutic monitoring of, 483t
Methylprednisolone, for Graves, 
ophthalmopathy, 83
Metoclopramide, for gastrointestinal 
dysfunction in diabetes mellitus, 284
Metyrapone
for Cushing’s syndrome, 46, 111
for ectopic ACTH syndrome, 380
Mibefradil, drug interactions of, 229
Microalbuminuria, in diabetic nephropathy, 
281–282, 281f
Midline carcinoma of uncertain histogenesis, 
177
Miglitol, for diabetes mellitus, 299t, 300
Milk-alkali syndrome, 403, 424–425
Mineral(s), reference ranges for, 484t
Mineralization, defective, 466–467
Mineralocorticoid(s)
actions of, 100
for adrenal insufficiency, 123f, 124
production of, 101f, 102–103, 102f
Mineralocorticoid excess, 111
clinical features of, 113
diagnosis of, 113, 114f, 115t
differential diagnosis of, 113–115, 114f
Malnutrition, gonadotropin deficiency due 
to, 158
MAOIs. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs)
Marble bone disease, 464
Marijuana use/abuse, 227t
“Master gland,” 16
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY), 262, 262t
clinical features of, 271–272
genetic factors in, 271–272
Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser 
syndrome, 147, 195
Mazindol, for weight loss, 250
McCune-Albright syndrome
clinical features of, 24, 107, 155, 467
Cushing’s syndrome in, 107
genetic factors in, 107, 154–155, 420f, 467
laboratory findings in, 468
pituitary tumors in, 24
radiographic findings in, 467–468, 468f
treatment of, 468
Mediastinal nonseminoma, 177
Medroxyprogesterone
for contraception, 192
for menorrhagia, 201
for polycystic ovarian syndrome, 197
Mefenamic acid
for dysmenorrhea, 199
for menorrhagia, 201
Megalin, 5
Meige’s disease/syndrome, 218
Melanin-concentrating hormone, 236
MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and 
stroke) syndrome, 431
Melorheostosis, 465–466
Membrane receptor(s), 5–6, 5f
Membrane receptor families, 2–3, 2t
MEN1 gene. See Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1)
Menarche, age at, 185, 185t, 194
Meningioma, sellar, 25
Menopause, 200
hirsutism after, 212
ovarian function during, 443–444
from perimenopause to, 201
screening and assessment of, 13t
symptom relief in, 202
Menorrhagia, 201
Menstrual cycle
duration of, 8, 9
follicular phase of, 183–184, 184f
hormonal integration of, 183, 183f
luteal phase of, 184
relationships between gonadotropins, 
follicle development, gonadal 
secretion, and endometrial changes 
during, 183, 183f
Menstrual disorders, 194
definition of, 194
diagnosis of, 195, 196f
dysmenorrhea, 199
epidemiology of, 194
obesity and, 242
MEN syndromes. See Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN) syndromes
LPL (lipoprotein lipase), 255, 319
deficiency of, 325
Lung cancer, paraneoplastic syndromes in, 
375–376, 377t
Lung disease, obesity and, 242
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 46
action of, 4, 46
deficiency of, 23t
ectopic production of, 377t
laboratory evaluation of, 22t
during neonatal period, 181, 181f
reference values, 479t
secretion of, 46
synthesis of, 46
Luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor, 
disorders of, 142, 143t
Lymphocytic hypophysitis, 20
Lymphoid malignancies
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 376, 377t
in thyroid, 98
Lynch syndrome. See Hereditary 
nonpolyposis colon cancer
Lysosomal storage diseases, lipoprotein 
disorders in, 332
Maffucci syndrome, 218, 469
Magnesium
deficiency of, 418
metabolism of, 394
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
450
Magnesium sulfate, for eclampsia in 
pregnancy, 498, 517
Magnesium-wasting syndrome, 394, 395t
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
in adrenocortical carcinoma, 118f
in CAH, 126f
in Cushing’s syndrome, 110, 110f
in pancreatic endocrine tumors, 360–361
in pituitary tumors, 27, 27f
Male feminization, paraneoplastic, 377t
Male pseudohermaphroditism, 142
Male reproductive disorders, 152
in adulthood, 157
androgen insensitivity syndromes. See 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS)
gynecomastia. See Gynecomastia
hypogonadism. See Hypogonadism
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. See 
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
aging-related, 162
approach to the patient, 163–164, 164f
pathophysiology of, 162–163
treatment of
gonadotropins for, 164
testosterone for. See Testosterone 
therapy
evaluation of
gonadotropin and inhibin 
measurements, 152
history and physical examination, 152
semen analysis, 153
testicular biopsy, 153
testosterone assays, 153
infertility, 152, 189
Malignant pheochromocytoma, 130
Malignant transformation, 177
Index
541
prognostic factors in, 346t
treatment of, 61f, 361–362
well-differentiated, 346
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
carcinoid tumors in, 347t, 348
clinical features of, 130, 131f
genetic factors in, 132, 347t, 348,  
371
pheochromocytoma in, 130, 131f
skin manifestations of, 130, 131f
Neurohypophysis
disorders of
adipsic hypernatremia. See Adipsic 
hypernatremia
diabetes insipidus. See Diabetes 
insipidus (DI)
hormones produced by
oxytocin, 50f, 52
vasopressin. See Arginine vasopressin 
(AVP)
Neuroleptics, adverse effects of, 226
Neurologic disease, testicular dysfunction 
due to, 161
Neuropeptide Y, 236
NF1. See Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
NF1 gene, 130, 132, 134f, 371
Nicotinic acid
adverse effects of, 337t, 338
for lipoprotein disorders, 259, 337–338, 
337t
Nimesulide, for dysmenorrhea, 199
NIS gene, 64
Nitrates, interaction with phosphodiesterase 
type 5 inhibitors, 229
Nitric oxide
in clitoral engorgement, 231
in erection, 224, 225f
Nitroprusside, therapeutic monitoring of, 
483t
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
in metabolic syndrome, 257
obesity and, 242
Nonexercise activity thermogenesis, 241
Non–insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(NIDDM). See Diabetes mellitus, 
type 2
Nonseminoma, mediastinal, 177
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), for dysmenorrhea, 199
Norethindrone acetate, in perimenopause, 
201
Norgestimate, for hirsutism, 213
Norgestrel, for hirsutism, 213
Normal saline, for SIAD, 379
NO SPECS mnemonic, in Graves’ disease, 
79
Nuclear receptor(s), 6–7, 7f
hormone action through, 5
signaling, 6, 7f
Nuclear thyroid hormone receptors, 68–69, 
68f
Nutritional short stature, 37
Nutritional support/therapy
for diabetes mellitus, 291–292, 291t
for lipoprotein disorders, 335
for metabolic syndrome, 258
for obesity, 247–249, 248f, 248t
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2  
(MEN 2), 367
clinical features of, 363t, 367–368
diseases associated with, 363t
genetic factors in, 132, 368–369, 369f
hyperparathyroidism in, 371
medullary thyroid carcinoma in, 130, 
132f, 370–371
pathogenesis of, 11
pheochromocytoma in, 371
screening for, 369–370
treatment of, 370–371
type 2A
clinical features of, 363t, 368, 412
genetic factors in, 368, 369f
hyperparathyroidism in, 412
pheochromocytoma in, 130, 132, 368, 
371
screening for, 369–370
type 2B
clinical features of, 363t, 368, 412
genetic factors in, 368–369, 369f
hyperparathyroidism in, 412
pheochromocytoma in, 130
screening for, 369–370
Multiple exostosis, 469
Multiple myeloma
hypercalcemia in, 376
hyperlipidemia in, 502, 523
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 376
Multiple sclerosis (MS), erectile dysfunction 
in, 226
Mumps, orchitis in, 160
Myocardial infarction (MI), erectile 
dysfunction and, 228
Myositis ossificans, 470
Myositis ossificans progressiva, 470
MyPyramid food guide, 247
Myxedema
characteristics of, 73
in hypothyroidism, 73, 239
Myxedema coma, 77, 490, 508
NAFLD. See Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD)
Naltrexone, 251
Naproxen, for dysmenorrhea, 199
Nateglinide, for diabetes mellitus, 298,  
300t
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum, 288
Nelson’s syndrome, 46
Neonate(s)
diabetes in, 272
FSH levels in, 181, 181f
LH levels in, 181, 181f
Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). See also 
Carcinoid tumors
biology of, 342–348, 343t
classification of, 342–348, 343t
gastrinomas. See Gastrinoma
gastrointestinal, 342, 343t
genetic syndromes associated with,  
347–348, 347t
metastatic, 361–362
pancreatic. See Pancreatic endocrine 
tumors
pathology of, 342–348, 343t
epidemiology of, 111
etiology of, 111–113, 112t, 487, 504
treatment of, 114, 114f
Minoxidil, adverse effects of, 210
Mirtazapine, adverse effects of, 244
Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, 
lactic acidosis, and stroke (MELAS) 
syndrome, 431
Mitochondrial uncoupling protein, 236
Mitotane, for Cushing’s syndrome, 46, 111
Mitotane, for ectopic ACTH syndrome,  
380
Mittelschmerz, 184, 198
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 140t, 141
MODY. See Maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), 
adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 227t
obesity, 244
Mononeuropathy, diabetic, 282–283
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI)
MSH. See α-Melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone (MSH)
Müllerian agenesis, 147, 195–196
Müllerian epithelium, 215
Müllerian inhibiting substance, 218
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 
syndromes
definition of, 363
mixed syndromes, 363t. See also Carney 
syndrome; Neurofibromatosis type 1 
(NF1); von Hippel-Lindau disease
type 1. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 1 (MEN 1)
type 2. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 2 (MEN 2)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1  
(MEN 1), 363
adrenal cortical tumors in, 366
age at onset of endocrine tumor 
expression in, 364, 364f
carcinoid tumors in, 347t, 366
clinical features of, 24t, 363t, 364–366, 
364f, 497, 516–517
diseases associated with, 363t
enteropancreatic tumors in, 364
epidemiology of, 364
gastrinomas in, 364, 364f
genetic factors in, 132, 347t, 364–365, 
366, 366f, 413, 413f
glucagonomas in, 365
hyperparathyroidism in, 364, 366–367, 
412
insulinomas in, 364f, 365
pancreatic tumors in, 347t, 365, 367
pathogenesis of, 10–11
pheochromocytoma in, 132f
pituitary tumors in, 24, 24t, 357–366, 
363t, 367
prevalence of, 364
treatment of, 366–367
unusual manifestations of, 366
Verner-Morrison (watery diarrhea) 
syndrome in, 365
ZES and, 355–356
Index
542
epidemiology of, 13t, 439, 500, 520
fractures associated with. See also specific 
fractures and sites
epidemiology of, 439–440, 439f, 500, 
520
prevention of
osteoporosis management/
prevention for, 447–448, 521
postmenopausal hormone therapy in, 
202, 203t, 450–451, 451f
risk factors for, 439f, 440, 440t, 500, 520
glucocorticoid-induced, 457–458
laboratory evaluation of, 446–447, 500, 
520
pathophysiology of, 441
bone remodeling in, 441–442, 441f
calcium nutrition in, 443
chronic disease in, 444, 444t
cigarette smoking in, 445
estrogen status in, 443–444, 443f
medications in, 444–445, 444t
physical activity in, 444
vitamin D deficiency in, 442–443
prevention of, 202, 203t
screening for, 13t, 500, 520–521
treatment of, 447, 501, 521
bisphosphonates, 452–454, 453f
calcitonin, 454–455
calcium supplementation, 448–450, 
449t
denosumab, 455, 455f
estrogens, 450–451, 451f
exercise, 450
fluoride, 452-453
fracture management, 447–448
GH, 457
magnesium, 450
monitoring of, 457
nonpharmacologic, 457
nutritional recommendations, 448–450, 
449t
progestins, 452
PTH, 455–456, 456f
risk factor reduction, 448, 449f
SERMs, 452, 454f
strontium ranelate, 457
vitamin D, 450
vitamin K, 450
Osteoprotegerin, 442, 443f
Osteosclerosis, 466
Ovarian cancer, 215
breast/ovarian cancer syndrome, 216
clinical features of, 216
epidemiology of, 215
epithelial, 215–216
etiology of, 15
genetic factors in, 216
germ cell tumors, 218–219
incidence of, 215
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
pathology of, 215
postmenopausal hormone therapy and, 
204t, 206
prognosis of, 217t, 218
protective factors for, 215
recurrent, 217–218
risk factors for, 215
Omega-3 fatty acids
adverse effects of, 337t
for lipoprotein disorders, 259, 337t, 338
Omentectomy, in ovarian cancer, 217
Oncogene(s), in thyroid cancer, 93–95, 94t
Oogonia, 178, 179f
Oophorectomy, for ovarian germ cell 
tumors, 219
Ophthalmopathy, Graves’, 79–80, 79f, 83, 
491, 508
Optic gliomas, 25
Oral contraceptives, 191
adverse effects of, 192, 192t
for amenorrhea, 197
characteristics of, 191–192
contraindications to, 192, 192t, 213
for dysmenorrhea, 199
for hirsutism, 213
in perimenopause, 201
for polycystic ovarian syndrome, 197
Orchiectomy, for testicular cancer, 173, 175
Orchitis, viral, 160
Orgasm
female orgasmic disorder, 231
Orlistat, 250, 258
Osmoreceptors, 50
Osmoregulation, 50–51, 57f
Ossification
ectopic, 469t, 470
extraskeletal, 71t, 469–470
Osteitis fibrosa cystica, 414–415, 437
Osteoarthritis, obesity and, 243
Osteoblast(s), 384, 385f, 387f, 460
Osteoblastoma, 377t
Osteochondrodysplasias, 468–469
Osteochondromatosis, 469
Osteoclast(s), 385f, 386, 387f, 460
Osteocyte(s), 384
Osteodystrophy, renal, 424
Osteomalacia
axial, 467
diagnosis of, 400
hypophosphatemia and, 400
oncogenic (tumor-induced), 377t, 381
secondary hyperparathyroidism and, 424
vitamin D deficiency and, 400
Osteomyelitis, treatment of, 287
Osteonecrosis of the jaw, 454
Osteopenia, 440f
Osteopetrosis
clinical features of, 464
etiology of, 464
genetic factors in, 464
laboratory findings in, 464
radiography of, 464
treatment of, 464–465
types of, 464
Osteopoikilosis, 466
Osteoporosis, 439
approach to the patient, 446–447, 447t
biochemical markers in, 447, 447t
bone biopsy in, 447
bone mass measurement in, 445–446, 
445f, 446t, 520
definition of, 439, 501, 521
diseases associated with, 444, 444t, 500, 
520
Obesity
bone and joint disorders and, 243, 246t
cancer and, 243
cardiovascular disease and, 242, 246t
central adiposity in, 254
comorbid conditions, 246–247, 246t
contraceptive methods and, 193
definition of, 234
diabetes mellitus and, 241–242, 246t
drug-induced, 244
erectile dysfunction in, 226
etiology of, 237–239
craniopharyngioma in, 239–240
Cushing’s syndrome in, 239
energy expenditure in, 241
food intake in, 241
genetic syndromes, 237–239, 238t, 
240t, 503, 524
genetic vs. environmental factors in, 237
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in, 
159
hypothalamic disorders in, 26, 239–240
hypothyroidism in, 239
insulinoma in, 239
leptin in, 239f, 241
evaluation of, 234, 244
gallstones and, 243
gastrointestinal disorders and, 246t
genitourinary disorders and, 246t
history focused on, 244
hypertension and, 242, 246t
lipoprotein disorders in, 330
liver disease and, 242–243
in metabolic syndrome, 253t, 254, 258
neurologic disorders and, 246t
physical fitness and, 246
prevalence of, 13t, 234–235
reproductive disorders and, 189, 242
respiratory disorders and, 242, 246t
screening and assessment of, 13t
skin manifestations of, 243, 246t
sleep apnea and, 242
treatment of, 247, 503, 524–525
bariatric surgery, 251–252, 251f, 525
behavioral therapy, 249
diet therapy, 247–249
exercise program, 249
goal of, 247
lifestyle management, 247
patient’s readiness to change and, 247
pharmacotherapy, 249–251
selection of, 248f, 248t
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome, 242
ob gene, 237, 536
Obstructive sleep apnea
in metabolic syndrome, 257
obesity and, 242
Octreotide
for acromegaly, 41–42
for carcinoid syndrome, 352–353
for diabetic diarrhea, 284
for glucagonoma, 357
for oncogenic osteomalacia, 381
for VIPoma, 358
Oligomenorrhea, 145, 194. See also 
Amenorrhea
Ollier’s disease, 218, 469
Index
543
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)/PTHrP 
receptor, 409, 409f
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide 
(PTHrP), 3
Parathyroid hormone–related protein 
(PTHrP), 408
actions of, 409–410, 410f
ectopic production of, 376, 377t
PTH and, 409–410, 409f
structure of, 408–409, 409f
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) resistance, 435, 
435f
Parental disomy, 222
Parenteral nutrition
diabetes mellitus management and, 306
hypercalcemia in, 403
Paroxetine, adverse effects of, 244
PAX-8, 63, 63t
PCOS. See Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
PCSK9 deficiency, 328
PCSK9 mutations, 322t, 324, 328
Pedometer, 249
Pegvisomant, for acromegaly, 42, 367
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 198, 198t
Pelvic pain
acute, 198, 198t
in cervical cancer, 220
chronic, 198
Pemberton’s sign, 89
Pendred syndrome, 65
Pendrin, 63t, 65
Penile tumescence, 224
Peptide(s), ovarian, 182–183
Peptide YY, 236
Perimenopause, 200
clinical features of, 200–201
definition of, 200
diagnosis of, 200
physiology of, 200, 201f
transition to menopause, 201
treatment of, 201
Periodic hypothermia syndrome, 26
Peritoneal dialysis
for hypercalcemia, 429
Peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor(s), 236
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome, 145
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 218
P450 oxidoreductase deficiency, 125t
PGA syndromes. See Polyglandular 
autoimmune (PGA) syndromes
Phendimetrazine, for weight loss, 250
Phenothiazines, adverse effects of, 227t
Phenotypic sex
definition of, 138
disorders of, 141
Phenoxybenzamine, for 
pheochromocytoma, 129
Phentermine
for metabolic syndrome, 258
for weight loss, 250, 251
Phenytoin
adverse effects of, 210
therapeutic monitoring of, 483t
Pheochromocytoma, 127
biochemical testing in, 129t
clinical features of, 127–128, 128t
Pancreatic endocrine tumors, 354. See also 
Gastrinoma; VIPomas (vasoactive 
intestinal peptidomas)
classification of, 343, 344–345t, 346
clinical features of, 344–345t, 354
Cushing’s syndrome and, 359–360
general characteristics of, 343t
genetic syndromes associated with,  
347–348, 347t
glucagonoma. See Glucagonoma
GRFomas, 359
insulinoma. See Insulinoma
localization of, 360–361
in MEN 1, 365, 367
misnomer of, 346
nonfunctional, 359
clinical features of, 359
definition of, 359
diagnosis of, 359
treatment of, 359
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
prevalence of, 344–345t, 346–347
prognostic factors in, 346t
rare syndromes, 359–360
somatostatinoma. See Somatostatinoma
treatment of, 354, 362
Pancreatitis, hypocalcemia in, 405, 429
Pap smear, for cervical cancer screening,  
220
Parachlorophenylanine, for carcinoid 
syndrome, 353–354
Paracrine regulation, 9
Paraganglial system, 127, 128f
Paraganglioma
definition of, 127
genetic screening for, 132, 134, 134f
imaging in, 133f
pheochromocytoma and, 131, 133f
topographic sites, 127, 128f
Paraneoplastic syndromes
definition of, 375
endocrinologic, 375, 377t
Parathyroid disease, 406
hypercalcemia in, 402–403
Parathyroidectomy, 366–367, 417–418, 437, 
499, 518
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 406
actions of, 400, 402, 402f, 406–407, 456, 
456f, 499, 519–520
assessment of, 10
in calcium metabolism, 8, 420f
deficiency of, 404–405
ectopic production of, 375, 377t, 404, 
524, 526
excess of, 402–403
in hypercalcemia, 425–426
immunoreactive, in primary 
hyperparathyroidism, 416, 416f
metabolism of, 408
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
455–456, 456f
physiology of, 400
PTHrP action and, 409–410, 410f
secretion of, 407–408
signal transduction pathway for, 2t, 3
structure of, 400, 407, 409f
synthesis of, 407
screening for, 216
sex cord tumors, 218
staging of, 216, 217t
treatment of, 217–218
tumor markers in, 216
Ovarian cyst, treatment of, 198
Ovarian failure, primary, 196–197
Ovarian follicles, 179–180, 180f
Ovarian function
clinical assessment of, 184
regulation of, 181
hypothalamic secretion in, 180–181,  
181f
ovarian peptides in, 182–183
ovarian steroids in, 181–182, 182f
pituitary secretion in, 180–181, 181f
Ovarian insufficiency, primary, 196–197
Ovarian peptides, 182–183
Ovarian reserve, 188
Ovarian steroids, 181–182, 182f. See also 
Estrogen(s)
Ovarian torsion, 198
Ovary. See also Ovarian cancer
development of, 178, 179f, 180f
estrogen production in, 181–182, 182f
metastatic disease to, 217
sex cord tumors of, 218
teratoma of, 218–219
Overfeeding, 235
Overweight, 234, 246t
Ovotesticular disorders of sexual 
development, 140t, 141
Ovulation, 496, 514
Ovulatory dysfunction, 189, 196–197
Oxidative stress hypothesis, 255–256
Oxytocin, 50f, 52
p16 gene, in thyroid cancer, 94t
p21/WAF gene, in thyroid cancer, 94t
p53 gene, in thyroid cancer, 94t
Pachydermoperiostosis, 468
Paclitaxel
for ovarian cancer, 217
for testicular cancer, 177
Paget’s disease of bone, 459
cardiovascular disease and, 461
clinical features of, 460–461, 521–522
complications of, 461
diagnosis of, 461–462, 461f, 462f, 501, 
521–522
diseases associated with, 461
epidemiology of, 459
etiology of, 459–460, 460f
fractures and, 461
genetic factors in, 459–460
juvenile, 459
pathophysiology of, 460f
treatment of, 462–464, 463t, 501–502, 
522
Painless thyroiditis, 85–86
Pallister-Hall syndrome, 25
Pamidronate
for hypercalcemia, 378, 404, 427t,  
428
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463, 463t
Pancreatic cancer, paraneoplastic syndromes 
in, 377t
Index
544
testicular dysfunction due to, 160
treatment of, 373
type I, 372, 372t, 431
type II, 372–373, 372t
Polyneuropathy, diabetic, 282–283
POMC. See Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
POMC gene, 120t
Postcoital contraception, 192–193
Postmenopausal hormone therapy, 201
approach to the patient, 206–208, 207f
benefits of, 202, 203t
candidates for, 206, 207f
discontinuation of, health status changes 
following, 206
endometrial cancer and, 21
for osteoporotic fracture prevention, 
451–452, 451f
probable or uncertain risks and benefits 
of, 203–204t, 205–206
risks associated with, 202–206, 203t, 496, 
515
Postpartum period, thyroiditis in, 86
PPHP (pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism), 
434, 434t
PPNAD (primary pigmented nodular 
adrenal disease), 107
PRAD 1, 413f, 414
Prader-Willi syndrome
clinical features of, 20, 158, 239, 240t, 
524
genetic factors in, 19–20, 158, 239
hypopituitarism due to, 19–20
obesity in, 239, 240t
Pramlintide, for diabetes mellitus, 297, 299t
Pravastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 337t
Precocious puberty
female, 185–186, 186t
male
approach to the patient, 156
central, 154
etiology of, 154t, 155t
familial male-limited, 154
gonadotropin-dependent, 154
gonadotropin-independent, 154–155
treatment of, 156
ovarian germ cell tumors and, 218–219
Precocity
heterosexual, 154, 155–156, 186
isosexual, 154
Prednisone
for ACTH deficiency, 43
for CAH, 213
for Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 83
for hypercalcemia, 404
for hypercalcemia of malignancy, 378
for subacute thyroiditis, 85
Preeclampsia, in gestational trophoblastic 
disease, 223
Pregabalin, for diabetic neuropathy, 293
Pregnancy
eclampsia in, 498, 517
Graves’ disease in, 83
hypothyroidism in, 76
pheochromocytoma in, 130
prolactinoma in, 34
thyroid function during, 88
Pregnenolone, 101f, 104
Pituitary hormones
expression and regulation of, 6t
in ovarian function regulation, 180–181, 
181f
secretion of, 17f
Pituitary tumors (adenomas), 21
ACTH-secreting, 44, 45t. See also 
Cushing’s syndrome
in Carney syndrome, 24, 24t
classification of, 21, 23t
diagnosis of, 26
histologic evaluation in, 28
laboratory studies in, 27–28, 28t, 488, 505
local mass effects, 26–27, 26t
MRI in, 27, 27f
ophthalmologic evaluation in, 27
in familial acromegaly, 24, 24t
gonadotropin-producing, 47–48
hormone-excess syndromes due to, 17
local mass effects of, 26–27, 26t
in McCune-Albright syndrome, 24
in MEN 1, 24, 24t, 363t, 365–366, 367
metabolic effects of, 26
metastatic, 25
nonfunctioning, 47–48, 48f
pathogenesis of, 23–24
prevalence of, 21
secondary adrenal insufficiency and, 
120–121, 120t
sellar mass lesions, 25–26, 26t, 159
treatment of
medical, 30, 488, 505
radiation therapy, 29–30
surgical, 28–29, 29f
TSH–secreting, 49
thyrotoxicosis due to, 84
Platelet(s), reference values for, 473t
Platybasia, 461
Plicamycin, for hypercalcemia, 428
PLTP (phospholipid transfer protein), 321
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PcP), ectopic 
ACTH production and, 380
POEMS syndrome (Crow-Fukase 
syndrome), 374
Poisoning/drug overdose, 482–484t
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
in CAH, 146–147
hirsutism in, 209, 212
infertility in, 188
insulin resistance in, 271
menstrual disorders in, 197
in metabolic syndrome, 257
obesity and, 242
prevalence of, 13t
screening and assessment of, 13t
treatment of, 197
Polydipsia
iatrogenic, 54, 56
primary, 53, 56
psychogenic, 53–54, 56
Polygenic hypercholesterolemia, 325
Polyglandular autoimmune (PGA) 
syndromes
clinical features of, 372–373, 372t
diagnosis of, 373
multiple endocrine organ effects of, 372, 
372t
Pheochromocytoma (Cont.):
definition of, 127
diagnosis of, 128, 129t
biochemical testing in, 128–129
imaging in, 129
differential diagnosis of, 129, 492, 510
epidemiology of, 127
etiology of, 127
genetic screening for, 132, 134, 134f
imaging in, 129t
malignant, 130
in MEN syndromes, 130, 132f, 368, 371
in neurofibromatosis, 130, 131f
in paraganglioma syndrome, 131, 133f
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 379
pathogenesis of, 127, 128f
during pregnancy, 130
topographic sites, 127, 128f
treatment of, 129–130, 492, 510
in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, 131, 
132–134, 133f. See also von 
Hippel-Lindau disease
PHEX gene, 381
Phosphate/phosphorus
definition of, 389
for hypercalcemia, 378, 427t, 429
metabolism of, 389
Phosphatonin, ectopic production of, 377t, 
381
Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors
action of, 224, 225f
adverse effects of, 228–229
for erectile dysfunction, 228–229
for female sexual dysfunction, 232
interaction with nitrates, 229
Phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP), 321
PHP. See Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP)
Physical activity, energy required for, 236
PID (pelvic inflammatory disease), 198, 198t
Pigmented pretibial papules, in diabetes 
mellitus, 288
Pilosebaceous unit, 209
Pioglitazone, for diabetes mellitus, 299t,  
301
PIT-1, 19, 63t
Pituitary apoplexy, 20–21, 120t
Pituitary axes, 17f
Pituitary disorders
anterior
insufficiency. See Hypopituitarism
tumors. See Pituitary tumors 
(adenomas)
posterior
adipsic hypernatremia. See Adipsic 
hypernatremia
diabetes insipidus. See Diabetes 
insipidus (DI)
Pituitary gland
anatomy of, 17–18, 17f
anterior. See Anterior pituitary
basic fibroblast growth factor in, 24
development of, 16t, 18
hormones produced by, 16–17, 16f, 487, 
504–505
insufficiency of. See Hypopituitarism
laboratory evaluation of, 22t
posterior. See Neurohypophysis
Index
545
Raloxifene
for gynecomastia, 162
for osteoporosis prevention and 
treatment, 452, 454f, 521
Ranitidine, adverse effects of, 227t
RANK (receptor activator of NFκB), 442, 
443f, 459, 460f
RANKL, 442, 443f
RAS gene, in thyroid cancer, 94t, 95
Rathke’s cyst, 25
Raynaud’s phenomenon, chemotherapy-
related, 176
Rb gene, in parathyroid carcinoma, 414
Receptor tyrosine kinase, 2t
Rectal carcinoids, 345t, 349, 354
Reifenstein syndrome, 144–145
Remodeling, bone, 441–442, 441f
Renal disease/failure. See Chronic kidney 
disease (CKD)
Renal osteodystrophy, 424
Renin, ectopic production of, 377t
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) 
system, regulation of, 102–103,  
103f
Repaglinide, for diabetes mellitus, 298,  
300t
Reserpine, adverse effects of, 227t
Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), 
67t, 69
Respiratory disorders, obesity and, 242
Resting (basal) metabolic rate, 236
RET gene
analysis of, 368–369
in MEN 2, 98, 130, 368–369, 369f, 414
in pheochromocytoma, 134, 134f
in thyroid cancer, 94–95, 94t
Retrograde ejaculation, 225, 284
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, for 
testicular cancer, 173, 175
Reverse T3 (rT3), 62f
Rhabdomyolysis, hypocalcemia in, 405
Rho kinase, 224
Riboflavin (vitamin B2), reference range for, 
484t
Rickets
diagnosis of, 400
vitamin D deficiency and, 400
vitamin D–dependent
type I, 434
type II, 434
Riedel’s thyroiditis, 86
Rimonabant, 250
Risedronate
adverse effects of, 454
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
453f, 454, 458, 521
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463t
Roferon-A, 227t
Rosiglitazone, for diabetes mellitus, 299t, 
301
Rosuvastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 337t
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 251, 251f, 525
RSPO1 gene, 146t
rT3 (reverse T3), 62f
RTH (resistance to thyroid hormone),  
67t, 69
Runx2, 386
Pseudohermaphroditism
female. See 46,XX disorders
male. See 44,XY disorders
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP)
classification of, 434–435, 434t
genetic factors in, 420f, 435–436, 435f
hypocalcemia and, 434
treatment of, 436
types of, 435
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP), 
434, 434t
Pseudotumor cerebri, 76
Psychogenic polydipsia, 53, 56
Psychosocial issues, in diabetes mellitus, 
304–305
Psychosocial short stature, 37
Psyllium mucilloid, with orlistat, 250
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
PTH-related peptide, 402
Puberty
definition of, 148
delayed
female, 186–187, 186t, 187t
male, 154t, 156–157
normal development during
female, 185, 185t
male, 148–149, 149f
precocious
female, 185–186, 186t
male. See Precocious puberty, male
stages of, 149, 149f
Pyknodysostosis, 465
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), reference range 
for, 484t
QT interval, prolonged, 405, 518
Rachitic rosary, 400
Radiation therapy
for acromegaly, 42
adverse effects of
pituitary, 20, 29–30, 120t
testicular dysfunction, 160
thyroid cancer, 92, 93
for pituitary tumors, 29
for testicular cancer, 175
Radiofrequency ablation, for 
neuroendocrine tumor liver 
metastases, 362
Radiography
in fibrous dysplasia, 467–468, 468f
in McCune-Albright syndrome, 467–468
in osteopetrosis, 464
in Paget’s disease of bone, 461–462, 461f, 
462f
Radioiodine therapy
for Graves’ disease, 82
for hyperfunctioning solitary thyroid 
nodule, 91
for malignant pheochromocytoma, 130
for thyroid cancer, 96–97
for toxic multinodular goiter, 91
Radioiodine uptake, in thyroid dysfunction 
evaluation, 70–71
Radionuclide scans/scintigraphy
in carcinoid tumor, 360f
in pancreatic endocrine tumors, 360–361
Prehypertension, 259
Premature ejaculation, 225
Premature menopause. See Primary ovarian 
insufficiency
Premature ovarian failure. See Primary 
ovarian insufficiency
Priapism, 225
Primary ovarian insufficiency, 197
Primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease 
(PPNAD), 107
Primary polydipsia, 53, 56
Progesterone
actions of, 182
adverse effects of, 227t
Progestins
in oral contraceptives, 192
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
452
in perimenopause, 201
for polycystic ovarian syndrome, 197
Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia, 465
Prohormone convertase 1, 238t
Prolactin, 30
action of, 30
laboratory evaluation of, 22t
secretion of, 30
synthesis of, 30
Prolactinoma, 32
clinical features of, 32
diagnosis of, 32–33
etiology of, 32
during pregnancy, 34
prevalence of, 32
screening tests for, 28t
treatment of, 33–34, 33f
Prometrium, for polycystic ovarian 
syndrome, 197
Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
deficiency, 120t
ectopic ATCH production and, 379
in obesity, 238, 238t, 239f
PROP-1, 19, 63t, 120t
Propranolol
for Graves’ disease, 82
for pheochromocytoma, 129
Propylthiouracil, for Graves’ disease, 81
Prostaglandin(s), in dysmenorrhea, 199
Prostaglandin E2, ectopic production of, 
377t
Prostate cancer
erectile dysfunction after treatment of, 
226
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
testosterone therapy and, 170
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
reference values, 480t
testosterone therapy and, 170
Protein(s)
lipoprotein-associated, 318–319
PTH-related, 408
serum binding, 66–67
thyroid hormone binding, 67
Protein C, reference values, 473t
Protein G, 5f, 6
Protein kinase A, 103
Protein kinase C, 278
Protein S, reference values, 473t
Index
546
Spironolactone
adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 226, 227t
female sexual dysfunction, 230t
hyperkalemia, 214
hypotension, 214
for hirsutism, 214
for mineralocorticoid excess, 114
for polycystic ovarian syndrome, 197
Sporadic goiter, 88
Squamous cell carcinoma, endometrium,  
222
SRY gene, 142, 143t, 146t
Staphylococcus aureus infections, in diabetes 
mellitus, 288
StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory 
protein), 142, 143t
Statins
adverse effects of, 336, 337t
for lipoprotein disorders, 259, 336, 337t
Sterilization (birth control), 190t, 191
Steroid(s), ovarian, 181–182, 182f
Steroid hormones. See also specific hormones
actions of, 182
adverse effects of, 244
synthesis, metabolism, and action of, 
103–105, 104f, 105f
Steroidogenesis
regulatory control of, 100–103, 102f
two-cell model for, 181, 182f
Steroidogenic enzyme pathways, disorders 
of, 142, 143t, 145
Stress, gonadotropin deficiency due to, 158
Stroke, prevention of, 204t, 206
Stromal tumors, ovarian, 218
Strontium ranelate, for osteoporosis, 457
Struma ovarii, 84, 377t
Substernal goiter, 89
Sugar Busters diet, 247
Sulfonylureas
adverse effects of, 244, 298
drug interactions of, 298
properties of, 300t
Sunlight, vitamin D deficiency due to lack 
of, 433–434
Swyer syndrome, 142, 143t
Sympathomimetics, ARR effects of, 115t
Syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess (SAME), 112
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis 
(SIAD)
differential diagnosis of, 59t, 60
etiology of, 58–59, 58t
osmoregulatory dysfunction in, 57f
pathophysiology of, 59–60
treatment of, 60–61
tumor-associated, 378
clinical features of, 378
diagnosis of, 378
etiology of, 378
treatment of, 378–388
Syndrome X. See Metabolic syndrome
T3. See Triiodothyronine (T3)
T3-resin uptake test, 70
T4. See Thyroxine (T4)
Tacrolimus, therapeutic monitoring of, 483t
Sexual pain disorder, 231
Sexual response, physiology of
female, 230–231
male, 224–225, 225f
SF1 gene, 100, 142, 143t
Sheehan’s syndrome, 20, 196, 487, 505
Short stature
clinical features of, 37
diagnosis of, 37
etiology of, 36
nutritional, 37
psychosocial, 37
treatment of, 37
in Turner’s syndrome, 141
SIAD. See Syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuresis (SIAD)
Sibutramine, 250, 258
Sick euthyroid syndrome, 67t, 86, 491, 
508
Signal transduction pathways, membrane 
receptor families and, 2t
Sildenafil
action of, 224, 225f
adverse effects of, 229
for erectile dysfunction, 228–229
Simvastatin
adverse effects of, 337t
for hyperlipidemia, 337t
Sirolimus, therapeutic monitoring of, 483t
Sitagliptin, for diabetes mellitus, 299t, 300t
Sitosterolemia, 322t, 324–325, 523
Skeletal maturation, somatic growth and, 36
Skin cancer, paraneoplastic syndromes in,  
377t
Skinfold thickness, 234
Sleep deprivation, 237
Small intestine, carcinoid tumors of, 345t, 
348–349, 349t
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, 119t
Smoking
cervical cancer and, 220
erectile dysfunction and, 225
osteoporosis and, 445
Sodium loading test, 113
Somatostatin
structure of, 352, 353f
synthesis of, 35
Somatostatin analogues
for acromegaly, 41–42, 41f
adverse effects of, 42
for TSH-secreting adenomas, 49
Somatostatinoma, 357
clinical features of, 344t, 357
diagnosis of, 358
etiology of, 357–358
treatment of, 358
tumor location in, 344t
Somatotrope, 16t, 23t
Sorafenib, for thyroid cancer, 97
South Beach diet, 247
SOX3 gene, 120t
SOX9 gene, 142, 143t, 146t
Spermatogenesis, 149f, 151–152
Sperm banking, 177
Spinal cord disease/injury, erectile 
dysfunction in, 226
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 161
Saline infusion test, 113
Salpingo-oophorectomy, bilateral
in endometrial cancer, 222
for ovarian cancer, 217
for ovarian germ cell tumors, 219
Salt-wasting 21-hydroxylase deficiency,  
145
SAME (syndrome of apparent 
mineralocorticoid excess), 112
Sandostatin-LAR, for acromegaly, 41
Sanjad-Sakati syndrome, 431
Sarcoidosis
hypercalcemia in, 403, 422
hypocalcemia in, 404
hypopituitarism in, 20
Sarcoma
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
uterine, 221, 222
Saxagliptin, for diabetes mellitus, 299t,  
300t
Scleredema, diabetic, 288
Sclerosteosis, 465
SDHB gene, 131, 134, 134f
SDHD gene, 131, 134, 134f
Sedative-hypnotics, adverse effects of, 230t
Selective estrogen response modulators 
(SERMs)
action of, 452
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
452, 521
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), adverse effects of, 226,  
227t
Selenium, reference range for, 484t
Sella chordomas, 25
Sellar mass lesions, 25–26, 26t, 159. See also 
Pituitary tumors (adenomas)
Semen analysis, 153, 188
Seminiferous tubules, 149f, 151–152
Sepsis, hypoglycemia in, 313
Septo-optic dysplasia, 19
Serine kinase receptors, 2t, 6
Serotonin (5-HT)
in carcinoid syndrome, 351
synthesis, secretion, and metabolism of, 
342–343, 345f
Sertoli-Leydig tumor, 218
Seven transmembrane GPCR family. See 
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs)
Sex
chromosomal, 136, 136f
gonadal, 136–137, 136f, 138f
phenotypic, 138, 139f
Sex cord tumors, ovarian, 218
Sex development
components of, 136–138, 136f
disorders of, 137t, 138
genetic regulation of, 138f
normal, 136, 139f
Sex hormone-binding globulin, 213
Sex therapy, 229
Sexual abuse, sexual dysfunction in 
adulthood following, 226, 230t
Sexual arousal disorder, female, 231
Sexual dysfunction, 224
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), 
cervical cancer and, 220
Index
547
genetic factors in, 93–95, 94t
incidence of, 92, 93f
laboratory evaluation of, 92
medullary
familial, 98
in MEN 2, 98, 368, 369f, 370–371
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
prevalence of, 92t
staging of, 93t
papillary, 92t, 93t, 95, 96f
pathogenesis of, 93–95
in patients with thyroid nodule, 92, 93t
risk factors for, 92, 93t
screening and assessment of, 13t
survival rates, 95, 96f
treatment of
kinase inhibitors, 97
radioiodine therapy, 96–97
surgery, 95–96
TSH suppression therapy, 96
well-differentiated, 92t, 93t, 95–98
Thyroid cysts, 92
Thyroid dermopathy, 79f, 80, 83–84
Thyroid disorders, 69
cancer. See Thyroid cancer
hyperthyroidism. See Hyperthyroidism
hypothyroidism. See Hypothyroidism
laboratory studies of
radioiodine uptake and thyroid 
scanning, 70–71
Tg levels, 70
thyroid hormone measurement,  
69–70
TPO antibodies, 70
ultrasonography, 71
lipoprotein disorders in, 331
nodular. See Thyroid nodule
Thyroidectomy
for diffuse nontoxic goiter, 89
for Graves’ disease, 82–83
hypocalcemia following, 499, 518
Thyroid gland, 62
anatomy of, 62–63
development of, 62–63
function of, 87–88
hormones of. See Thyroid hormone(s)
pain in, differential diagnosis of, 84
physical examination of, 69
regulation of, 63
Thyroid hormone(s)
action of, 68–69, 68f
laboratory evaluation of, 69–70
resistance to, 67t, 69
structure of, 62f
synthesis of, 64
factors influencing, 66
iodine metabolism and transport in, 
64–65
organification, coupling, storage, 
release, 65–66
regulation of, 63–64, 64f
TSH action in, 66
transport and metabolism of
binding proteins in, 67
deiodinases in, 68
serum binding proteins in, 66–67, 66t
unbound, 70
Testosterone
assays of, 153
bioavailable, 153
in hirsutism, 210–213
total, tests of, 153
transport and metabolism of, 150–151, 
151f
unbound, measurement of, 153
Testosterone gel, 165t, 166–167
Testosterone therapy
abuse of, 170–171
adverse effects of, 168–170, 169t
for age-related reproductive dysfunction, 
162–163, 164–166
buccal adhesive testosterone, 165t, 167
contraindications to, 168, 169t
for erectile dysfunction, 229
formulations not available in U.S., 167
for hypogonadism, 47
injectable forms of, 166, 166t
male hormonal contraception and, 168
monitoring of, 168–170, 169t
novel androgen formulations, 167
oral derivatives, 165t, 166
pharmacologic uses of, 167
pharmacology of, 165t
regimens for, 168
testosterone gel, 165t, 166–167
transdermal patch, 165t, 166, 166t, 229
Testotoxicosis, 154
Tg. See Thyroglobulin (Tg)
THBR (thyroid hormone binding ratio), 70
Thecoma, of ovary, 218–219
Thelarche, 185
Theophylline, therapeutic monitoring of, 
484t
Thermogenesis, 236, 241
Thiamine (vitamin B1)
for dysmenorrhea, 199
reference range for, 484t
Thiazide diuretics
adverse effects of, 226
erectile dysfunction, 227t
hypercalcemia, 423
for nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 56
Thiazolidinediones
action of, 299t, 301
adverse effects of, 244, 299t
for insulin resistance in metabolic 
syndrome, 260
for type 2 diabetes mellitus, 299t, 301
Thionamides, for Graves’ disease, 81
Thirst
defects in, 56–57
mechanism of, 52
Thymic cancer, paraneoplastic syndromes 
in, 377t
Thyroglobulin (Tg)
in congenital hypothyroidism, 63, 63t
in thyroid cancer follow-up, 70, 97
in thyrotoxicosis, 70
Thyroid acropachy, 79f, 80
Thyroid cancer, 92
anaplastic, 93t, 98
classification of, 92–93, 92t, 93t
follicular, 92t, 93t, 95, 96f
follow-up care, 97, 97f
Tadalafil
action of, 224, 225f
adverse effects of, 229
for erectile dysfunction, 228–229
Tamoxifen
adverse effects of, 221
for gynecomastia, 162
for osteoporosis prevention and 
treatment, 452
Tangier disease (ABCA1 deficiency), 329
Taxanes, for ovarian cancer, 217
TBG (thyroxine-binding globulin),  
67t, 70
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
Telogen, 209
Teratoma
ovarian, 218–219
parasellar, 26
testicular, 173, 177
Teriparatide, for osteoporosis prevention 
and treatment of, 456, 456f
Testes/testicles, 148
acquired defects of, 160–161
atrophy of, in systemic disease, 160
biopsy of, 153
development of, 48
disorders of, 152
dysgenesis of, 142, 143t
dysgenetic, 142, 143t
regulation of function of
androgen synthesis in, 149–150, 150f
hypothalamic-pituitary-testis axis in, 
149–150, 149f
spermatogenesis and, 149f, 151–152
structure of, 48
Testicular adrenal rest tumors, 125, 126f
Testicular cancer, 172
clinical features of, 172–173
epidemiology of, 172
etiology of, 172
genetic factors in, 172
incidence of, 172
nonseminoma, 173, 176t
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 377t
pathology of, 173, 174f
risk classification in, 176, 176t
seminoma, 173, 176t
staging of, 173, 174f
treatment of
chemotherapy for advanced disease, 
175–176
infertility after, 177
postchemotherapy surgery, 176
risk-directed chemotherapy, 176,  
176t
salvage chemotherapy, 177
stage I nonseminoma, 173, 174f, 175, 
502–503, 523
stage II nonseminoma, 174f, 175
stages I and II seminoma, 174f, 175
tumor markers in, 173, 502, 523
Testicular feminization syndrome. See 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(AIS)
Testicular mass, 172
Testicular torsion, testicular dysfunction due 
to, 160
Index
548
TTF-1, 63, 63t
TTF-2, 63, 63t
Tubal disease, 189
Tubal ligation, 190t, 191
Tuberous sclerosis, 347t, 348
Tub gene, 238t, 239
Tubular infundibular peptide of 39 residues 
(TIP39), 409
Tumoral calcinosis, 469–470
Tumor lysis syndrome, hypocalcemia in, 405
Tumor markers
in ovarian cancer, 216
in testicular cancer, 173
Tumor-suppressor genes, in thyroid cancer, 
93–95, 94t
Turner’s syndrome, 140
clinical features of, 140, 140t, 496, 515
pathophysiology of, 140
prevalence of, 13t
primary ovarian insufficiency in, 197
screening and assessment of, 13t, 496, 515
treatment of, 141
Two-cell model for steroidogenesis, 181, 
182f
Type 1 diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes 
mellitus (DM), type 1
Type 2 diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes 
mellitus (DM), type 2
Tyrosine kinase receptors, 2t, 5f, 6
UDCA (ursodeoxycholic acid), 249
Ulcer(s), foot, in diabetes mellitus, 287–288
Ultrasonography
in bone mass measurement, 445
in thyroid dysfunction evaluation, 71
Uncoupling protein, mitochondrial, 236
Underandrogenization of 46,XY fetus, 
142–146
Underwater weighing, 234
Underweight, 246t
Urinary tract infections (UTIs), in diabetes 
mellitus, 288
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), 249
Uterus, disorders of
amenorrhea in, 195–196, 196f
cancer. See Endometrial cancer
pelvic pain in, 198
treatment of, 196
Vacuum constriction device, for erectile 
dysfunction, 229
Vagina
blind, 195
congenital absence of, 147
Vaginal dilatation, 196
Vaginal ring, monthly, 190t, 192
Vaginal septum, 195
Valproate/valproic acid
adverse effects of, 244
therapeutic monitoring of, 484t
van Buchem’s disease, 465
Vancomycin, therapeutic monitoring of, 
484t
Vardenafil, 224, 225f, 228–229
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
in diabetic retinopathy, 278
Vasectomy, 190t, 191
Thyrotrope, 6t
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 
30, 40
Thyroxine (T4)
characteristics of, 66t, 489, 507
free, 70
laboratory evaluation of, 69–70, 489, 507
structure of, 62f
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), 67t, 70
Tiludronate, for Paget’s disease of bone, 463t
TIP39 (tubular infundibular peptide of 39 
residues), 409
TNFRSF11A gene, 459
TNFRSF11B gene, 459
Tobacco use. See Smoking
Topiramate, 251
Topotecan, for ovarian cancer, 217
Total parenteral nutrition. See Parenteral 
nutrition
Toxic adenoma, 91–92, 91f
Toxic multinodular goiter, 90–91
TP53 gene, 117
TPO. See Thyroid peroxidase (TPO)
Tranquilizers, adverse effects of, 227t
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), in 
thyroid hormone synthesis, 66
Transsphenoidal surgery
for acromegaly, 41
for Cushing’s syndrome, 45, 111
for pituitary tumors, 28–29, 29f, 48
Transthyretin (TTR), euthyroid 
hyperthyroxinemia and, 67t
Transvaginal ultrasound, in ovarian cancer, 
216
Trastuzumab, for ovarian cancer, 218
TREs (thyroid response elements), 68, 68f
TRH (thyrotropin-releasing hormone), 30, 49
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
adverse effects of
erectile dysfunction, 226, 227t
obesity, 244
for diabetic neuropathy, 283
Triglycerides
elevated, lipid disorders associated with, 
325–328, 327t
lowering level of, 259
normal, elevated LDL–C and, 321t, 
322–325
of VLDLs, 321
Triiodothyronine (T3)
characteristics of, 66t
free, 70
laboratory evaluation of, 69–70
structure of, 62f
Trilostane for Cushing’s syndrome, 46
TrkB gene, 238t
Troglitazone, 301
Trousseau’s sign, 405, 518
True hermaphroditism. See Ovotesticular 
disorders of sexual development
T-scores, 439, 445, 445f
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH)
TSH-R (thyroid-stimulating hormone 
receptor), 91, 91f, 94t
TSI. See Thyroid-stimulating 
immunoglobulins (TSI)
Thyroid hormone binding proteins, 
abnormalities of, 67–68
Thyroid hormone binding ratio (THBR),  
70
Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs), 68–69, 
68f
Thyroiditis, 84
acute, 84, 84t
atrophic, 72
chronic, 84t, 86
de Quervain’s, 84–85, 491, 508–509
destructive, 84
drug-induced, 86
etiology of, 84t
goitrous, 72
granulomatous, 84–85
Hashimoto’s, 72
postpartum, 86
Riedel’s, 86
silent (painless), 85–86, 491, 508–509
subacute, 84–85, 84t, 85f
viral, 84–85
Thyroid lymphoma, 98
Thyroid nodule
approach to the patient, 98–99, 99f
benign, 92, 92t
prevalence of, 13t, 88
screening and assessment of, 13t, 491, 509
solitary, hyperfunctioning, 91–92, 91f
thyroid cancer in patients with, 92, 93t
Thyroid peroxidase (TPO)
in autoimmune hypothyroidism, 70
in thyroid development, 63, 63t
Thyroid response elements (TREs), 68, 68f
Thyroid scanning, 71
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 49
action of, 49
assessment of, 10
deficiency of, 23t, 49
ectopic production of, 377t
elevated, 490, 507–508
laboratory evaluation of, 22t, 69
secretion of, 49
suppression therapy, 96
synthesis of, 49
thyroid cancer due to, 93
in thyroid gland function, 66
Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor 
(TSH-R), 63, 63t, 91, 91f, 94t
Thyroid-stimulating hormone  
(TSH)–secreting adenomas, 49
Thyroid-stimulating hormone  
(TSH)–secreting pituitary adenoma, 84
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins (TSI)
in Graves’ disease, 70
in pregnancy, 70
Thyroid storm (thyrotoxic crisis), 83
Thyrotoxicosis, 62, 77. See also Graves’ disease
amiodarone-induced, 87–88
apathetic, 78
clinical features of, 78–80, 78t, 79f
definition of, 77
etiology of, 77t, 84
primary hyperthyroidism and, 77t
subclinical, 89
without hyperthyroidism, 77t
Thyrotoxicosis factitia, 70, 84
Index
549
pheochromocytoma in, 131, 132–134, 
133f, 371
vs. MEN 1 or MEN 2, 371
von Recklinghausen’s disease. See 
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
VTE (venous thromboembolism), 
postmenopausal hormone therapy 
and, 202, 203t
Waist circumference, 244, 246t
in metabolic syndrome, 253t, 256
Waist-to-hip ratio, 242, 244
Water diuresis, 51, 51f
Watery diarrhea syndrome, 365
Weight
disease risk and, 246t
regulation of, 235–236
set point of, 240
Weight gain, physiology of, 235–236
Weight loss
for lipoprotein disorders, 335
for metabolic syndrome, 258
Whipple’s triad, 308, 495, 513
Whole-body thyroid scanning, for thyroid 
cancer follow-up, 97
Williams’ syndrome, 422–423
WNT1 gene, 146t
Wolff-Chaikoff effect, 66, 83, 87
Woven bone, 386
Wrist fracture, 440
WT1 gene, 143t
Xtreme computed tomography, in bone 
mass measurement, 445
46,XX disorders, 145, 146t, 147
46,XY disorders, 142–146, 143t, 144f
Yoga, 199
Yolk sac tumor, of ovary, 218–219
Zoledronate (zoledronic acid)
for hypercalcemia, 378, 404, 427t,  
428
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
453f, 454
for Paget’s disease of bone, 463, 463t
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES), 354
clinical features of, 344t, 354–355, 496, 
515–516
diagnosis of, 355, 496, 515–516
epidemiology of, 344t
MEN 1 and, 355
pathophysiology of, 344t
treatment of, 355–356, 367
tumor distribution in, 344t
Zone diet, 247
Zonisamide, 251
Z-scores, 445, 445f
Vitamin(s), reference ranges for, 484t
Vitamin A
reference range for, 484t
toxicity of, 423
Vitamin B1. See Thiamine (vitamin B1)
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin), reference range for, 
484t
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), reference range 
for, 484t
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin ), reference range 
for, 484t
Vitamin C, reference range for, 484t
Vitamin D, 396
activation of, 396–397, 397f
defective metabolism of, 434, 498, 518
deficiency of
anticonvulsants and, 434
clinical features of, 400
diagnosis of, 400, 405
in elderly, 399, 498, 517
etiology of, 399, 399t
hypocalcemia and, 404
hypomagnesemia and, 396
inadequate diet and/or sunlight and, 
433–434
osteomalacia due to, 400
osteoporosis associated with, 442–443
prevalence of, 13t, 399
rickets due to, 400
screening and assessment of, 13t, 518
terminal ileal disease and, 399
treatment of, 396, 401, 405
for hypocalcemia, 437–438
for hypoparathyroidism, 432
metabolism of, 396–397, 397f, 398f
in osteoporosis management/prevention, 
450
reference range for, 484t
resistance to, 404, 434
supplements, for hypocalcemia, 405
synthesis of, 396–397, 397f, 398f
toxicity of, 422
Vitamin E
reference range for, 484t
supplements
for dysmenorrhea, 199
for menopausal symptoms, 202
Vitamin K
for osteoporosis management/prevention, 
450
reference range for, 484t
VLDLs. See Very low–density lipoproteins 
(VLDLs)
von Hippel-Lindau disease
clinical features of, 131, 132, 133f, 363t
genetic factors in, 132–134, 347t, 348,  
371
pancreatic endocrine tumors in, 347t, 348
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), 30, 358, 
377t
Vasoactive intestinal peptidomas (VIPomas). 
See VIPomas (vasoactive intestinal 
peptidomas)
Vasointestinal polypeptide, in female sexual 
response, 231
Vasopressin. See also Arginine vasopressin 
(AVP)
ectopic production of. See Syndrome of 
inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD)
VeIP regimen, for testicular cancer, 177
Velocardiofacial syndrome, hypocalcemia 
and, 430
Venlafaxine, for menopausal symptoms, 202
Venous stasis, obesity and, 243
Venous thromboembolism (VTE), 
postmenopausal hormone therapy 
and, 202, 203t
Verner-Morrison syndrome, 365, 516
Vertebrae, “ivory,” 462, 522
Vertebral fractures
bisphosphonates for prevention of,  
452–454, 453f
crush fracture, 440, 440f
denosumab for prevention of, 455,  
455f
epidemiology of, 439f, 440
raloxifene for prevention of, 452, 454f
teriparatide for prevention of, 455–456, 
456f
Vertebroplasty, 457
Very-low-calorie diet, 249
Very low–density lipoproteins (VLDLs)
characteristics of, 317, 317f, 318t
elevated levels of, 322t, 326, 327t
metabolic pathways of, 319f, 320
VHL gene, 132–134, 134f, 371
Vildagliptin, for diabetes mellitus, 299t,  
300t
Vinblastine
for gestational trophoblastic disease, 223
for testicular cancer, 177
Vincristine
for gestational trophoblastic disease, 223
for malignant pheochromocytoma, 130
VIP (vasoactive intestinal peptide), 30, 358, 
377t
VIPomas (vasoactive intestinal peptidomas), 
358
clinical features of, 344t, 358, 497, 516
diagnosis of, 358, 516
treatment of, 358–359
tumor locations in, 344t
Viral orchitis, 160
Viral thyroiditis, 84–85
Virilization, 209
Visual loss, in pituitary tumors, 26
