Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Section I
Introduction to  
the Renal System
  1	 Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney. . . . 2
Alfred L. George, Jr., Eric G. Neilson
  2	 Adaption of the Kidney to Renal Injury. . . . . . . 14
Raymond C. Harris, Eric G. Neilson
Section II
Alterations of Renal Function  
and Electrolytes
  3	 Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities. . . . . . . . . 22
Julie Lin, Bradley M. Denker
  4	 Atlas of Urinary Sediments and 
Renal Biopsies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Agnes B. Fogo, Eric G. Neilson
  5	 Acidosis and Alkalosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Thomas D. DuBose, Jr.
  6	 Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances. . . . . . . . . . . 56
David B. Mount
  7	 Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia. . . . . . . . . . . 81
Sundeep Khosla
  8	 Hyperuricemia and Gout. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Christopher M. Burns, Robert L. Wortmann,  
H. Ralph Schumacher, Lan X. Chen
  9	 Nephrolithiasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
John R. Asplin, Fredric L. Coe, Murray J. Favus
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and  
Chronic Renal Failure
10	 Acute Kidney Injury. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Sushrut S. Waikar, Joseph V. Bonventre
11	 Chronic Kidney Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Joanne M. Bargman, Karl Skorecki
12	 Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure. . . . 141
Kathleen D. Liu, Glenn M. Chertow
13	 Transplantation in the Treatment 
of Renal Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Anil Chandraker, Edgar L. Milford,  
Mohamed H. Sayegh
14	 Infections in Kidney Transplant Recipients. . . . 158
Robert Finberg, Joyce Fingeroth
Section IV
Glomerular and  
Tubular Disorders
15	 Glomerular Diseases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
Julia B. Lewis, Eric G. Neilson
16	 Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other 
Inherited Tubular Disorders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
David J. Salant, Craig E. Gordon
17	 Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney. . . . . . 205
Laurence H. Beck, David J. Salant
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
18	 Vascular Injury to the Kidney. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
Stephen C. Textor, Nelson Leung
19	 Hypertensive Vascular Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Theodore A. Kotchen
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections  
and Obstruction
20	 Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, 
and Prostatitis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254
Kalpana Gupta, Barbara W. Trautner
Contents
Contents
21	 Urinary Tract Obstruction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265
Julian L. Seifter
Section VII
Cancer of the Kidney  
and Urinary Tract
22	 Bladder and Renal Cell Carcinomas. . . . . . . . . 272
Howard I. Scher, Robert J. Motzer
Appendix
	
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance. . . . . 281
Alexander Kratz, Michael A. Pesce,  
Robert C. Basner, Andrew J. Einstein
Review and Self-Assessment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
Charles Wiener, Cynthia D. Brown, Anna R. Hemnes
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
vi
vii
John R. Asplin, MD
Medical Director, Litholink Corporation, Chicago, Illinois [9]
Joanne M. Bargman, MD, FRCPC
Professor of Medicine, University of Toronto; Staff Nephrologist, 
University Health Network; Director, Home Peritoneal Dialysis 
Unit, and Co-Director, Renal Rheumatology Lupus Clinic,  
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [11]
Robert C. Basner, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of Pulmonary,  
Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University  
College of Physicians and Surgeons,  
New York, New York [Appendix]
Laurence H. Beck, Jr., MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Boston University  
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts [17]
Joseph V. Bonventre, MD, PhD
Samuel A. Levine Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; 
Chief, Renal Division; Chief, BWH HST Division of Bioengineering, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [10]
Cynthia D. Brown, Md
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
[Review and Self-Assessment]
Christopher M. Burns, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine,
Section of Rheumatology, Dartmouth Medical School;
Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire [8]
Anil Chandraker, MD, FASN, FRCP
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;
Medical Director of Kidney and Pancreas Transplantation;
Assistant Director, Schuster Family Transplantation Research Center, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Children’s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts [13]
Lan X. Chen, MD, PhD
Penn Presbyterian Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [8]
Glenn M. Chertow, MD, MPH
Norman S. Coplon/Satellite Healthcare Professor of Medicine; 
Chief, Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Palo Alto, California [12]
Fredric L. Coe, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois [9]
Bradley M. Denker, MD
Associate Professor, Harvard Medical School; Physician,  
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital;  
Chief of Nephrology, Harvard Vanguard Medical Associates,  
Boston, Massachusetts [3]
Thomas D. DuBose, Jr., MD, MACP
Tinsley R. Harrison Professor and Chair, Internal Medicine;  
Professor of Physiology and Pharmacology,  
Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University  
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem,  
North Carolina [5]
Andrew J. Einstein, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine,  
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons;  
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Radiology, Columbia University Medical Center and New York-
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York [Appendix]
Murray J. Favus, MD
Professor, Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes, and Metabolism; Director, Bone Program, University of 
Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [9]
Robert Finberg, MD
Chair, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts  
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts [14]
Joyce Fingeroth, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,  
Boston, Massachusetts [14]
Agnes B. Fogo, MD
John L. Shapiro Professor of Pathology; Professor of Medicine  
and Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,  
Nashville, Tennessee [4]
Alfred L. George, Jr., MD
Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology;
Chief, Division of Genetic Medicine,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee [1]
Craig E. Gordon, MD, MS
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Boston University 
School of Medicine; Attending, Section of Nephrology,  
Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts [16]
Kalpana Gupta, MD, MPH
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Boston University 
School of Medicine; Chief, Section of Infectious Diseases,  
VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts [20]
Raymond C. Harris, MD
Ann and Roscoe R. Robinson Professor of Medicine;  
Chief, Division of Nephrology, Vanderbilt University  
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee [2]
Anna R. Hemnes, Md
Assistant Professor, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical 
Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,  
Nashville, Tennessee [Review and Self-Assessment]
Sundeep Khosla, MD
Professor of Medicine and Physiology, College of Medicine,  
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [7]
Theodore A. Kotchen, MD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Medicine;  
Associate Dean for Clinical Research,  
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin [19]
Alexander Kratz, MD, PhD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pathology and Cell Biology,  
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons;  
Director, Core Laboratory, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, New York [Appendix]
CONTRIBUTORS
Numbers in brackets refer to the chapter(s) written or co-written by the contributor.
Contributors
viii
Nelson Leung, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine,  
Department of Nephrology and Hypertension,  
Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [18]
Julia B. Lewis, MD
Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology,  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee [15]
Julie Lin, MD, MPH
Assistant Professor of Medicine,  
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts [3]
Kathleen D. Liu, MD, PhD, MAS
Assistant Professor, Divisions of Nephrology and Critical Care 
Medicine, Departments of Medicine and Anesthesia,  
University of California–San Francisco, San Francisco, California [12]
Edgar L. Milford, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Director, Tissue Typing Laboratory,  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [13]
Robert J. Motzer, MD
Professor of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College; 
Attending Physician, Genitourinary Oncology Service, 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York [22]
David B. Mount, MD, FRCPC
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,  
Renal Division, VA Boston Healthcare System;  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [6]
Eric G. Neilson, MD
Thomas Fearn Frist Senior Professor of Medicine and Cell and 
Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee [1, 2, 4, 15]
Michael A. Pesce, PhD
Professor Emeritus of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia Uni-
versity College of Physicians and Surgeons; Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, New York [Appendix]
David J. Salant, MD
Professor of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine; 
Chief, Section of Nephrology, Boston Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts [16, 17]
Mohamed H. Sayegh, MD
Raja N. Khuri Dean, Faculty of Medicine; Professor of Medicine 
and Immunology; Vice President of Medical Affairs, American 
University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon; Visiting Professor of Medicine 
and Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School; Director, Schuster Family 
Transplantation Research Center, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; 
Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [13]
Howard I. Scher, MD
Professor of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College;  
D. Wayne Calloway Chair in Urologic Oncology;  
Chief, Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine,  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York [22]
H. Ralph Schumacher, MD
Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of 
Pennsylvania, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [8]
Julian L. Seifter, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [21]
Karl Skorecki, MD, FRCP(C), FASN
Annie Chutick Professor in Medicine (Nephrology);  
Director, Rappaport Research Institute,  
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology;  
Director, Medical and Research Development,  
Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel [11]
Stephen C. Textor, MD
Professor of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [18]
Barbara W. Trautner, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, Section of Infectious Diseases,  
Baylor College of Medicine; The Michael E. DeBakey  
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston VA  
Health Services Research and Development  
Center of Excellence, Houston, Texas [20]
Sushrut S. Waikar, MD, MPH
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [10]
Charles M. Wiener, Md
Dean/CEO Perdana University Graduate School of Medicine,  
Selangor, Malaysia; Professor of Medicine and Physiology, 
 Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,  
Baltimore, Maryland [Review and Self-Assessment]
Robert L. Wortmann, MD, FACP, MACR
Professor, Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School and 
Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire [8]
ix
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine has been a respected 
information source for more than 60 years. Over time, 
the traditional textbook has evolved to meet the needs of 
internists, family physicians, nurses, and other health care 
providers. The growing list of Harrison’s products now 
includes Harrison’s for the iPad, Harrison’s Manual of Medi-
cine, and Harrison’s Online. This book, Harrison’s Nephrol-
ogy and Acid-Base Disorders, now in its second edition, is a 
compilation of chapters related to kidney function.
Our readers consistently note the sophistication of the 
material in the specialty sections of Harrison’s. Our goal 
was to bring this information to our audience in a more 
compact and usable form. Because the topic is more fo-
cused, it is possible to enhance the presentation of the 
material by enlarging the text and the tables. We have 
also included a review and self-assessment section that 
includes questions and answers to provoke reflection and 
to provide additional teaching points.
Renal dysfunction, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders 
are among the most common problems faced by the cli-
nician. The evaluation of renal function relies heavily on 
laboratory tests, urinalyses, and characteristics of urinary 
sediments. Evaluation and management of renal disease 
also requires a broad knowledge of physiology and pathol-
ogy since the kidney is involved in many systemic disor-
ders. Thus, this book considers a broad spectrum of topics 
including acid-base and electrolyte disorders, vascular in-
jury to the kidney, as well as specific diseases of the kidney.
Kidney disorders, such as glomerulonephritis, can be a 
primary basis for clinical presentation. More commonly, 
however, the kidney is affected secondary to other medi-
cal problems such as diabetes, shock, or complications 
from dye administration or medications. As such, renal 
dysfunction may be manifest by azotemia, hypertension, 
proteinuria, or an abnormal urinary sediment, and it may 
herald the presence of an underlying medical disorder. 
Renal insufficiency may also appear late in the course 
of chronic conditions such as diabetes, lupus, or sclero-
derma and significantly alter a patient’s quality of life. 
Fortunately, intervention can often reverse or delay renal 
insufficiency. And, when this is not possible, dialysis and 
renal transplant provide lifesaving therapies. 
Understanding normal and abnormal renal function pro-
vides a strong foundation for diagnosis and clinical manage-
ment. Therefore, topics such as acidosis and alkalosis, fluid 
and electrolyte disorders, and hypercalcemia are covered 
here. These basic topics are useful in all fields of medicine 
and represent a frequent source of renal consultation.
The first section of the book, “Introduction to the 
Renal System,” provides a systems overview, beginning 
with renal development, function, and physiology, as 
well as providing an overview of how the kidney re-
sponds to injury. The integration of pathophysiology 
with clinical management is a hallmark of Harrison’s, and 
can be found throughout each of the subsequent disease-
oriented chapters. The book is divided into seven main 
sections that reflect the scope of nephrology: (I) Intro-
duction to the Renal System; (II) Alterations of Renal 
Function and Electrolytes; (III) Acute Kidney Injury 
and Chronic Renal Failure; (IV) Glomerular and Tubu-
lar Disorders; (V) Renal Vascular Disease; (VI) Urinary 
Tract Infections and Obstruction; and (VII) Cancer of 
the Kidney and Urinary Tract.
While Harrison’s Nephrology and Acid-Base Disorders is 
classic in its organization, readers will sense the impact 
of the scientific advances as they explore the individual 
chapters in each section. Genetics and molecular biol-
ogy are transforming the field of nephrology, whether 
illuminating the genetic basis of a tubular disorder or ex-
plaining the regenerative capacity of the kidney. Recent 
clinical studies involving common diseases like chronic 
kidney disease, hypertensive vascular disease, and urinary 
tract infections provide powerful evidence for medical 
decision making and treatment. These rapid changes in 
nephrology are exciting for new students of medicine 
and underscore the need for practicing physicians to con-
tinuously update their knowledge base and clinical skills.
Our access to information through web-based jour-
nals and databases is remarkably efficient. Although these 
sources of information are invaluable, the daunting body 
of data creates an even greater need for synthesis by ex-
perts in the field. Thus, the preparation of these chapters 
is a special craft that requires the ability to distill core in-
formation from the ever-expanding knowledge base. The 
editors are therefore indebted to our authors, a group of 
internationally recognized authorities who are masters at 
providing a comprehensive overview while being able 
to distill a topic into a concise and interesting chapter. 
We are indebted to our colleagues at McGraw-Hill. Jim 
Shanahan is a champion for Harrison’s and these books 
were impeccably produced by Kim Davis.
We hope you find this book useful in your effort to 
achieve continuous learning on behalf of your patients.
J. Larry Jameson, MD, PhD
Joseph Loscalzo, MD, PhD
PREFACE
NOTICE

Introduction to  
the Renal System
 alfred l. George, Jr.  I   eric G. neilson 
2
 The kidney is one of the most highly differentiated 
organs in the body. At the conclusion of embryologic 
development, nearly 30 different cell types form a mul-
titude of fi ltering capillaries and segmented nephrons 
enveloped by a dynamic interstitium. This cellular 
diversity modulates a variety of complex physiologic 
processes. Endocrine functions, the regulation of blood 
pressure and intraglomerular hemodynamics, solute and 
water transport, acid-base balance, and removal of drug 
metabolites are all accomplished by intricate mechanisms 
of renal response. This breadth of physiology hinges 
on the clever ingenuity of nephron architecture that 
evolved as complex organisms came out of water to live 
on land. 
 embrYologic DeVelopment 
 Kidneys develop from intermediate mesoderm under 
the timed or sequential control of a growing number of 
genes, described in  Fig. 1-1 . The transcription of these 
genes is guided by morphogenic cues that invite two 
ureteric buds to each penetrate bilateral metanephric 
blastema, where they induce primary mesenchymal cells 
to form early nephrons. This induction involves a num-
ber of complex signaling pathways mediated by Pax2, 
Six2, WT-1, Wnt9b, c-Met, fi broblast growth factor, 
transforming growth factor β, glial cell-derived neuro-
trophic factor, hepatocyte growth factor, and epidermal 
growth factor. The two ureteric buds emerge from pos-
terior nephric ducts and mature into separate collecting 
systems that eventually form a renal pelvis and ureter. 
Induced mesenchyme undergoes mesenchymal epithelial 
transitions to form comma-shaped bodies at the proxi-
mal end of each ureteric bud, leading to the formation of 
S-shaped nephrons that cleft and enjoin with penetrat-
ing endothelial cells derived from sprouting angioblasts. 
Under the infl uence of vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor A (VEGF-A), these penetrating cells form capillar-
ies with surrounding mesangial cells that differentiate 
into a glomerular fi lter for plasma water and solute. The 
ureteric buds branch, and each branch produces a new 
set of nephrons. The number of branching events ulti-
mately determines the total number of nephrons in each 
kidney. There are approximately 900,000 glomeruli in 
each kidney in normal birth weight adults and as few 
as 225,000 in low birth weight adults—producing the 
latter in numerous comorbid risks. 
 Glomeruli evolve as complex capillary fi lters with 
fenestrated endothelia under the guiding infl uence of 
VEGF-A and angiopoietin-1 secreted by adjacently 
developing podocytes. Epithelial podocytes facing the 
urinary space envelop the exterior basement membrane 
supporting these emerging endothelial capillaries. Podo-
cytes are partially polarized and periodically fall off into 
the urinary space by epithelial-mesenchymal transition, 
and to a lesser extent apoptosis, only to be replenished 
by migrating parietal epithelia from Bowman’s cap-
sule. Failing replenishment results in heavy proteinuria. 
Podocytes attach to the basement membrane by special 
foot processes and share a slit-pore membrane with their 
neighbor. The slit-pore membrane forms a fi lter for 
plasma water and solute by the synthetic interaction of 
nephrin, annexin-4, CD2AP, FAT, ZO-1, P-cadherin, 
podocin, TRPC6, PLCE1, and neph 1–3 proteins. 
Mutations in many of these proteins also result in heavy 
proteinuria. The glomerular capillaries are embedded in 
a mesangial matrix shrouded by parietal and proximal 
tubular epithelia forming Bowman’s capsule. Mesangial 
cells have an embryonic lineage consistent with arte-
riolar or juxtaglomerular cells and contain contractile 
actin-myosin fi bers. These mesangial cells make contact 
with glomerular capillary loops, and their local matrix 
holds them in condensed arrangement. 
 CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR 
BIOLOGY OF THE KIDNEY 
 chapter 1 
 
CHAPTER 1
Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney 
3
Between nephrons lies the renal interstitium. This 
region forms a functional space surrounding glomeruli 
and their downstream tubules, which are home to res-
ident and trafficking cells such as fibroblasts, dendritic 
cells, occasional lymphocytes, and lipid-laden macro-
phages. The cortical and medullary capillaries, which 
siphon off solute and water following tubular reclama-
tion of glomerular filtrate, are also part of the interstitial 
fabric as well as a web of connective tissue that supports 
the kidney’s emblematic architecture of folding tubules. 
The relational precision of these structures determines the 
unique physiology of the kidney.
Each nephron is partitioned during embryologic 
development into a proximal tubule, descending and 
ascending limbs of the loop of Henle, distal tubule, and 
the collecting duct. These classic tubular segments build 
from subsegments lined by highly unique epithelia serv-
ing regional physiology. All nephrons have the same 
structural components, but there are two types whose 
structure depend on their location within the kidney. 
The majority of nephrons are cortical, with glomeruli 
located in the mid-to-outer cortex. Fewer nephrons 
are juxtamedullary, with glomeruli at the boundary of 
the cortex and outer medulla. Cortical nephrons have 
short loops of Henle, whereas juxtamedullary nephrons 
have long loops of Henle. There are critical differences 
in blood supply as well. The peritubular capillaries sur-
rounding cortical nephrons are shared among adjacent 
nephrons. By contrast, juxtamedullary nephrons depend 
on individual capillaries called vasa recta. Cortical neph-
rons perform most of the glomerular filtration because 
there are more of them and because their afferent arte-
rioles are larger than their respective efferent arterioles. 
The juxtamedullary nephrons, with longer loops of 
Henle, create a hyperosmolar gradient for concentrating 
urine. How developmental instructions specify the dif-
ferentiation of all these unique epithelia among various 
tubular segments is still unknown.
Determinants and Regulation of 
Glomerular Filtration
Renal blood flow normally drains approximately 20% 
of the cardiac output, or 1000 mL/min. Blood reaches 
each nephron through the afferent arteriole leading 
into a glomerular capillary where large amounts of 
fluid and solutes are filtered to form the tubular fluid. 
The distal ends of the glomerular capillaries coalesce to 
form an efferent arteriole leading to the first segment of 
a second capillary network (cortical peritubular capil-
laries or medullary vasa recta) surrounding the tubules 
(Fig. 1-2A). Thus, nephrons have two capillary beds 
arranged in a series separated by the efferent arteriole 
that regulates the hydrostatic pressure in both capil-
lary beds. The distal capillaries empty into small venous 
branches that coalesce into larger veins to eventually 
form the renal vein.
The hydrostatic pressure gradient across the glomer-
ular capillary wall is the primary driving force for glo-
merular filtration. Oncotic pressure within the capillary 
lumen, determined by the concentration of unfilter­ed 
plasma proteins, partially offsets the hydrostatic pressure 
gradient and opposes filtration. As the oncotic pres-
sure rises along the length of the glomerular capillary, 
the driving force for filtration falls to zero on reaching 
-Pax2
-GDNF/cRet
-Lim1
-Eya1
-Six1
-α8β1 integrin
-FGFR2
-Hoxa11/Hoxd11
-Foxc1
-Slit2/Robo2
-WT-1
-Wnt4
-Emx2
-FGF-8
Nephrogenesis
-VEGF-A/Flk-1
-BF-2
-Pod1/Tcf21
-Foxc2
-Lmx1b
-α3β1 integrin
-PDGFB/PDGFβR
-CXCR4-SDF1
-Notch2
-NPHS1
NCK1/2
-FAT
-CD2AP
-Neph1
-NPHS2
-LAMB2
Mature
glomerulus
Capillary
loop
S-shape
Comma-shape
Pretubular
aggregation
Ureteric bud induction
and condensation
Figure 1-1
Genes controlling renal nephrogenesis. A growing number 
of genes have been identified at various stages of glomeru-
lotubular development in the mammalian kidney. The genes 
listed have been tested in various genetically modified mice, 
and their location corresponds to the classical stages of 
kidney development postulated by Saxen in 1987. GDNF, 
giant cell line–derived neutrophilic factor; FGFR2, fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 2; WT-1, Wilms’ tumor gene 1; FGF-8, 
fibroblast growth factor 8; VEGF–A/Flk-1, vascular endo-
thelial growth factor–A/fetal liver kinase-1; PDGFβ, platelet-
derived growth factor β; PDGFβR, PDGFβ receptor; SDF-1, 
stromal-derived factor 1; NPHS1, nephrin; NCK1/2, NCK-
adaptor protein; CD2AP, CD2-associated protein; NPHS2, 
podocin; LAMB2, laminin beta-2.
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
4
the efferent arteriole. Approximately 20% of the renal 
plasma flow is filtered into Bowman’s space, and the 
ratio of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) to renal plasma 
flow determines the filtration fraction. Several factors, 
mostly hemodynamic, contribute to the regulation of 
filtration under physiologic conditions.
Although glomerular filtration is affected by renal 
artery pressure, this relationship is not linear across the 
range of physiologic blood pressures due to autoregu-
lation of GFR. Autoregulation of glomerular filtration 
is the result of three major factors that modulate either 
afferent or efferent arteriolar tone: these include an auton-
omous vasoreactive (myogenic) reflex in the afferent arte-
riole, tubuloglomerular feedback, and angiotensin II–mediated 
vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole. The myogenic 
reflex is a first line of defense against fluctuations in 
renal blood flow. Acute changes in renal perfusion pres-
sure evoke reflex constriction or dilatation of the afferent 
arteriole in response to increased or decreased pressure, 
respectively. This phenomenon helps protect the glomer-
ular capillary from sudden changes in systolic pressure.
Tubuloglomerular feedback changes the rate of filtra-
tion and tubular flow by reflex vasoconstriction or dilata-
tion of the afferent arteriole. Tubuloglomerular feedback 
is mediated by specialized cells in the thick ascending 
limb of the loop of Henle, called the macula densa, that act 
as sensors of solute concentration and tubular flow rate. 
With high tubular flow rates, a proxy for an inappropri-
ately high filtration rate, there is increased solute delivery 
to the macula densa (Fig. 1-2B) that evokes vasocon-
striction of the afferent arteriole causing GFR to return 
toward normal. One component of the soluble signal 
from the macula densa is adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
released by the cells during increased NaCl reabsorption. 
ATP is metabolized in the extracellular space to generate 
adenosine, a potent vasoconstrictor of the afferent arteri-
ole. During conditions associated with a fall in filtration 
rate, reduced solute delivery to the macula densa attenu-
ates the tubuloglomerular response, allowing afferent 
arteriolar dilatation and restoring glomerular filtration to 
normal levels. Angiotensin II and reactive oxygen species 
enhance, while nitric oxide (NO) blunts, tubuloglomer-
ular feedback.
The third component underlying autoregulation of 
GFR involves angiotensin II. During states of reduced 
renal blood flow, renin is released from granular cells 
within the wall of the afferent arteriole near the macula 
densa in a region called the juxtaglomerular apparatus 
(Fig. 1-2B). Renin, a proteolytic enzyme, catalyzes the 
conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin I, which is 
subsequently converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) (Fig. 1-2C). Angiotensin II 
evokes vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole, and the 
resulting increased glomerular hydrostatic pressure ele-
vates filtration to normal levels.
Collecting
duct
Renin
ACE
ACE2
C
B
A
Angiotensinogen
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-IIe-His-Pro-Phe-His-Leu - Val-IIe-His--
Angiotensin I
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-IIe-His-Pro-Phe - His-Leu
Angiotensin II
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-IIe-His-Pro-Phe
Peritubular
capillaries
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Macula
densa
Renin-secreting
granular cells
Peritubular
venules
Proximal
convoluted tubule
Proximal
tubule
Bowman's
capsule
Efferent
arteriole
Efferent
arteriole
Afferent
arteriole
Afferent
arteriole
Glomerulus
Glomerulus
Proximal
tubule
Thick
ascending
limb
Thick
ascending
limb
Angiotensin (I–VII)
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-IIe-His-Pro
Figure 1-2
Renal microcirculation and the renin-angiotensin system.
A. Diagram illustrating relationships of the nephron with glome­
rular and peritubular capillaries. B. Expanded view of the 
glomerulus with its juxtaglomerular apparatus including 
the macula densa and adjacent afferent arteriole. C. Proteo-
lytic processing steps in the generation of angiotensins.
 
CHAPTER 1
Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney 
5
Mechanisms of Renal  
Tubular Transport
The renal tubules are composed of highly differenti-
ated epithelia that vary dramatically in morphology 
and function along the nephron (Fig. 1-3). The cells 
lining the various tubular segments form monolay-
ers connected to one another by a specialized region of 
the adjacent lateral membranes called the tight junction. 
Tight junctions form an occlusive barrier that separates 
the lumen of the tubule from the interstitial spaces sur-
rounding the tubule and also apportions the cell mem-
brane into discrete domains: the apical membrane facing 
the tubular lumen and the basolateral membrane fac-
ing the interstitium. This regionalization allows cells to 
allocate membrane proteins and lipids asymmetrically. 
Owing to this feature, renal epithelial cells are said to 
Cortex
Medulla
Distal convoluted
tubule
Proximal tubule
Loop of Henle:
Thick ascending
limb
Thin descending
limb
Thin ascending
limb
Macula
densa
Cortical
collecting
duct
Inner medullary
collecting duct
Bowman's
capsule
D
Proximal tubule
Lumen
Interstitium
Formic acid
H2O + CO2
H2CO3
H2CO3
HCO3 + H
Basolateral
Apical
CO2
Carbonic
anhydrase
Carbonic
anhydrase
H
A
Na
Na
Phosphate
Na
Glucose
Na
Amino acids
H
Cl
Formate
Na
H
3Na
Cl
K
Na
HCO3
2K
3Na
2K
H2O
Glucose
Amino
acids
H2O, solutes
Lumen
Interstitium
Thick ascending
limb cell
Ca, Mg
H2O
Cl
K
Ca
Loop
diuretics
Na
2Cl
K
B
3Na
2K
Cortical collecting
duct
Lumen
Interstitium
Interstitium
E
Lumen
Inner medullary
collecting duct
F
Lumen
Blood
interstitium
Distal convoluted
tubule
H2O
Cl
Thiazides
Amiloride
C
3Na
2K
3Na
2K
Ca
3Na
Na
Cl
Ca
Principal cell
Type A
Intercalated cell
+
+
+
+
+
Aldosterone
Carbonic
anhydrase
H
H
K
H2O
Na
H2O
Vasopressin
+
+
H2O
H2O
Vasopressin
ANP
K
Na
K
3Na
2K
3Na
2K
HCO3
Cl
Urea
Figure 1-3
Transport activities of the major nephron segments. Rep-
resentative cells from five major tubular segments are illus-
trated with the lumen side (apical membrane) facing left and 
interstitial side (basolateral membrane) facing right. A. Proxi-
mal tubular cells. B. Typical cell in the thick ascending limb of 
the loop of Henle. C. Distal convoluted tubular cell. D. Over-
view of entire nephron. E. Cortical collecting duct cells. F. 
Typical cell in the inner medullary collecting duct. The major 
membrane transporters, channels, and pumps are drawn with 
arrows indicating the direction of solute or water movement. 
For some events, the stoichiometry of transport is indicated 
by numerals preceding the solute. Targets for major diuretic 
agents are labeled. The actions of hormones are illustrated by 
arrows with plus signs for stimulatory effects and lines with 
perpendicular ends for inhibitory events. Dotted lines indicate 
free diffusion across cell membranes. The dashed line indi-
cates water impermeability of cell membranes in the thick 
ascending limb and distal convoluted tubule.
be polarized. The asymmetric assignment of membrane 
proteins, especially proteins mediating transport pro-
cesses, provides the machinery for directional move-
ment of fluid and solutes by the nephron.
Epithelial solute transport
There are two types of epithelial transport. Move-
ment of fluid and solutes sequentially across the api-
cal and basolateral cell membranes (or vice versa) 
mediated by transporters, channels, or pumps is called 
cellular transport. By contrast, movement of fluid and sol-
utes through the narrow passageway between adjacent 
cells is called paracellular transport. Paracellular transport 
occurs through tight junctions, indicating that they are 
not completely “tight.” Indeed, some epithelial cell lay-
ers allow rather robust paracellular transport to occur 
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
6
(leaky epithelia), whereas other epithelia have more effec-
tive tight junctions (tight epithelia). In addition, because 
the ability of ions to flow through the paracellular path-
way determines the electrical resistance across the epithe-
lial monolayer, leaky and tight epithelia are also referred 
to as low- or high-resistance epithelia, respectively. The 
proximal tubule contains leaky epithelia, whereas distal 
nephron segments such as the collecting duct, contain 
tight epithelia. Leaky epithelia are most well suited for bulk 
fluid reabsorption, whereas tight epithelia allow for more 
refined control and regulation of transport.
Membrane Transport
Cell membranes are composed of hydrophobic lipids 
that repel water and aqueous solutes. The movement 
of solutes and water across cell membranes is made pos-
sible by discrete classes of integral membrane proteins, 
including channels, pumps, and transporters. These dif-
ferent mechanisms mediate specific types of transport 
activities, including active transport (pumps), passive trans-
port (channels), facilitated diffusion (transporters), and sec-
ondary active transport (cotransporters). Active transport 
requires metabolic energy generated by the hydrolysis 
of ATP. Active transport pumps are ion-translocating 
ATPases, including the ubiquitous Na+/K+-ATPase, the 
H+-ATPases, and Ca2+-ATPases. Active transport cre-
ates asymmetric ion concentrations across a cell mem-
brane and can move ions against a chemical gradient. 
The potential energy stored in a concentration gradient 
of an ion such as Na+ can be utilized to drive transport 
through other mechanisms (secondary active transport). 
Pumps are often electrogenic, meaning they can cre-
ate an asymmetric distribution of electrostatic charges 
across the membrane and establish a voltage or mem-
brane potential. The movement of solutes through a 
membrane protein by simple diffusion is called passive 
transport. This activity is mediated by channels cre-
ated by selectively permeable membrane proteins, and 
it allows solute or water to move across a membrane 
driven by favorable concentration gradients or electrochemical 
potential. Examples in the kidney include water channels 
(aquaporins), K+ channels, epithelial Na+ channels, and 
Cl− channels. Facilitated diffusion is a specialized type of 
passive transport mediated by simple transporters called 
carriers or uniporters. For example, hexose transporters 
such as GLUT2 mediate glucose transport by tubular 
cells. These transporters are driven by the concentration 
gradient for glucose that is highest in extracellular fluids 
and lowest in the cytoplasm due to rapid metabolism. 
Many other transporters operate by translocating two or 
more ions/solutes in concert either in the same direc-
tion (symporters or cotransporters) or in opposite directions 
(antiporters or exchangers) across the cell membrane. The 
movement of two or more ions/solutes may produce 
no net change in the balance of electrostatic charges 
across the membrane (electroneutral), or a transport event 
may alter the balance of charges (electrogenic). Several 
inherited disorders of renal tubular solute and water 
transport occur as a consequence of mutations in genes 
encoding a variety of channels, transporter proteins, and 
their regulators (Table 1-1).
Segmental Nephron Functions
Each anatomic segment of the nephron has unique 
characteristics and specialized functions enabling selec-
tive transport of solutes and water (Fig. 1-3). Through 
sequential events of reabsorption and secretion along 
the nephron, tubular fluid is progressively conditioned 
into urine. Knowledge of the major tubular mechanisms 
responsible for solute and water transport is critical for 
understanding hormonal regulation of kidney function 
and the pharmacologic manipulation of renal excretion.
Proximal Tubule
The proximal tubule is responsible for reabsorbing 
∼60% of filtered NaCl and water, as well as ∼90% of 
filtered bicarbonate and most critical nutrients such as 
glucose and amino acids. The proximal tubule utilizes 
both cellular and paracellular transport mechanisms. 
The apical membrane of proximal tubular cells has an 
expanded surface area available for reabsorptive work 
created by a dense array of microvilli called the brush 
border, and leaky tight junctions enable high-capacity 
fluid reabsorption.
Solute and water pass through these tight junctions to 
enter the lateral intercellular space where absorption by 
the peritubular capillaries occurs. Bulk fluid reabsorp-
tion by the proximal tubule is driven by high oncotic 
pressure and low hydrostatic pressure within the peritu-
bular capillaries. Physiologic adjustments in GFR made 
by changing efferent arteriolar tone cause proportional 
changes in reabsorption, a phenomenon known as 
glomerulotubular balance. For example, vasoconstriction 
of the efferent arteriole by angiotensin II will increase 
glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure but lower pres-
sure in the peritubular capillaries. At the same time, 
increased GFR and filtration fraction raise oncotic pres-
sure near the end of the glomerular capillary. These 
changes, a lowered hydrostatic and increased oncotic 
pressure, increase the driving force for fluid absorption 
by the peritubular capillaries.
Cellular transport of most solutes by the proximal 
tubule is coupled to the Na+ concentration gradient 
established by the activity of a basolateral Na+/K+-ATPase 
(Fig. 1-3A). This active transport mechanism maintains 
a steep Na+ gradient by keeping intracellular Na+ con-
centrations low. Solute reabsorption is coupled to the 
Na+ gradient by Na+-dependent transporters such as 
 
CHAPTER 1
Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney 
7
Table 1-1
Inherited Disorders Affecting Renal Tubular Ion and Solute Transport
Disease or Syndrome
Gene
OMIMa
Disorders Involving the Proximal Tubule
Proximal renal tubular acidosis
Sodium bicarbonate cotransporter
(SLC4A4, 4q21)
604278
Fanconi-Bickel syndrome
Glucose transporter, GLUT2
(SLC2A2, 3q26.2)
227810
Isolated renal glycosuria
Sodium glucose cotransporter
(SLC5A2, 16p11.2)
233100
Cystinuria
  Type I
Cystine, dibasic and neutral amino acid transporter
(SLC3A1, 2p16.3)
220100
  Nontype I
Amino acid transporter, light subunit
(SLC7A9, 19q13.1)
600918
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Amino acid transporter (SLC7A7, 4q11.2)
222700
Hartnup disorder
Neutral amino acid transporter
(SLC6A19, 5p15.33)
34500
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with  
hypercalcemia
Sodium phosphate cotransporter
(SLC34A3, 9q34)
241530
Renal hypouricemia
  Type 1
Urate-anion exchanger
(SLC22A12, 11q13)
220150
  Type 2
Urate transporter, GLUT9
(SLC2A9, 4p16.1)
612076
Dent’s disease
Chloride channel, ClC-5
(CLCN5, Xp11.22)
300009
X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis with renal failure
Chloride channel, ClC-5
(CLCN5, Xp11.22)
310468
X-linked recessive hypophosphatemic rickets
Chloride channel, ClC-5
(CLCN5, Xp11.22)
307800
Disorders Involving the Loop of Henle
Bartter’s syndrome
  Type 1
Sodium, potassium chloride cotransporter
(SLC12A1, 15q21.1)
241200
  Type 2
Potassium channel, ROMK
(KCNJ1, 11q24)
601678
  Type 3
Chloride channel, ClC-Kb
(CLCNKB, 1p36)
602023
  with sensorineural deafness
Chloride channel accessory subunit, Barttin
(BSND, 1p31)
602522
Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with  
Bartter-like syndrome
Calcium-sensing receptor
(CASR, 3q13.33)
601199
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
Calcium-sensing receptor
(CASR, 3q13.33)
145980
Primary hypomagnesemia
Claudin-16 or paracellin-1
(CLDN16 or PCLN1, 3q27)
248250
Isolated renal magnesium loss
Sodium potassium ATPase, γ1-subunit
(ATP1G1, 11q23)
154020
Disorders Involving the Distal Tubule and Collecting Duct
Gitelman’s syndrome
Sodium chloride cotransporter
(SLC12A3, 16q13)
263800
Primary hypomagnesemia with secondary  
hypocalcemia
Melastatin-related transient receptor potential  
cation channel 6
(TRPM6, 9q22)
602014
Pseudoaldosteronism (Liddle’s syndrome)
Epithelial sodium channel β and γ subunits
(SCNN1B, SCNN1G, 16p12.1)
177200
(continued)
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
8
Na+-glucose and Na+-phosphate cotransporters. In addi-
tion to the paracellular route, water reabsorption also 
occurs through the cellular pathway enabled by consti-
tutively active water channels (aquaporin-1) present on 
both apical and basolateral membranes. Small, local osmotic 
gradients close to plasma membranes generated by cellular 
Na+ reabsorption are likely responsible for driving direc-
tional water movement across proximal tubule cells, but 
reabsorption along the proximal tubule does not produce 
a net change in tubular fluid osmolality.
Proximal tubular cells reclaim bicarbonate by a 
mechanism dependent on carbonic anhydrases. Filtered 
bicarbonate is first titrated by protons delivered to the 
lumen by Na+/H+ exchange. The resulting carbonic acid 
(H2CO3) is metabolized by brush border carbonic 
anhydrase to water and carbon dioxide. Dissolved 
carbon dioxide then diffuses into the cell, where it is 
enzymatically hydrated by cytoplasmic carbonic anhy-
drase to re-form carbonic acid. Finally, intracellular car-
bonic acid dissociates into free protons and bicarbonate 
anions, and bicarbonate exits the cell through a baso-
lateral Na+/HCO3
− cotransporter. This process is satu-
rable, resulting in urinary bicarbonate excretion when 
plasma levels exceed the physiologically normal range 
(24–26 meq/L). Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such 
as acetazolamide, a class of weak diuretic agents, block 
proximal tubule reabsorption of bicarbonate and are 
useful for alkalinizing the urine.
Chloride is poorly reabsorbed throughout the first seg-
ment of the proximal tubule, and a rise in Cl− concen-
tration counterbalances the removal of bicarbonate anion 
from tubular fluid. In later proximal tubular segments, 
cellular Cl− reabsorption is initiated by apical exchange 
of cellular formate for higher luminal concentrations of 
Cl−. Once in the lumen, formate anions are titrated by 
H+ (provided by Na+/H+ exchange) to generate neutral 
formic acid, which can diffuse passively across the apical 
membrane back into the cell where it dissociates a pro-
ton and is recycled. Basolateral Cl− exit is mediated by a 
K+/Cl− cotransporter.
Reabsorption of glucose is nearly complete by the 
end of the proximal tubule. Cellular transport of glu-
cose is mediated by apical Na+-glucose cotransport cou-
pled with basolateral, facilitated diffusion by a glucose 
transporter. This process is also saturable, leading to 
glycosuria when plasma levels exceed 180–200 mg/dL, 
as seen in untreated diabetes mellitus.
The proximal tubule possesses specific transporters 
capable of secreting a variety of organic acids (carbox-
ylate anions) and bases (mostly primary amine cations). 
Organic anions transported by these systems include 
urate, ketoacid anions, and several protein-bound drugs 
not filtered at the glomerulus (penicillins, cephalosporins, 
and salicylates). Probenecid inhibits renal organic anion 
secretion and can be clinically useful for raising plasma 
concentrations of certain drugs like penicillin and osel-
tamivir. Organic cations secreted by the proximal tubule 
include various biogenic amine neurotransmitters (dopa-
mine, acetylcholine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and 
histamine) and creatinine. The ATP-dependent trans-
porter P-glycoprotein is highly expressed in brush bor-
der membranes and secretes several medically important 
drugs, including cyclosporine, digoxin, tacrolimus, and 
various cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Certain drugs 
like cimetidine and trimethoprim compete with endog-
enous compounds for transport by the organic cation 
pathways. While these drugs elevate serum creatinine 
levels, there is no change in the actual GFR.
Table 1-1
Inherited Disorders Affecting Renal Tubular Ion and Solute Transport (Continued )
Disease or Syndrome
Gene
OMIma
Recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism Type 1
Epithelial sodium channel, α, β, and γ subunits
(SCNN1A, 12p13; SCNN1B, SCNN1G, 16pp12.1)
264350
Pseudohypoaldosteronism Type 2 (Gordon’s hyperkale-
mia-hypertension syndrome)
Kinases WNK-1, WNK-4
(WNK1, 12p13; WNK4, 17q21.31)
145260
X-linked nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Vasopressin V2 receptor (AVPR2, Xq28)
304800
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (autosomal)
Water channel, aquaporin-2
(AQP2, 12q13)
125800
Distal renal tubular acidosis
 
  autosomal dominant
Anion exchanger-1
(SLC4A1, 17q21.31)
179800
  autosomal recessive
Anion exchanger-1
(SLC4A1, 17q21.31)
602722
  with neural deafness
Proton ATPase, β1 subunit
(ATP6V1B1, 2p13.3)
192132
  with normal hearing
Proton ATPase, 116-kD subunit
(ATP6V0A4, 7q34)
602722
aOnline Mendelian Inheritance in Man database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim).
 
CHAPTER 1
Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney 
9
The proximal tubule, through distinct classes of 
Na+-dependent and Na+-independent transport sys-
tems, reabsorbs amino acids efficiently. These trans-
porters are specific for different groups of amino acids. 
For example, cystine, lysine, arginine, and ornithine 
are transported by a system comprising two proteins 
encoded by the SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 genes. Muta-
tions in either SLC3A1 or SLC7A9 impair reabsorption 
of these amino acids and cause the disease cystinuria. 
Peptide hormones such as insulin and growth hormone, 
β2-microglobulin, albumin, and other small proteins, 
are taken up by the proximal tubule through a process 
of absorptive endocytosis and are degraded in acidi-
fied endocytic lysosomes. Acidification of these vesicles 
depends on a vacuolar H+-ATPase and Cl− channel. 
Impaired acidification of endocytic vesicles because of 
mutations in a Cl− channel gene (CLCN5) causes low 
molecular weight proteinuria in Dent’s disease. Renal 
ammoniagenesis from glutamine in the proximal tubule 
provides a major tubular fluid buffer to ensure excretion 
of secreted H+ ion as NH4
+ by the collecting duct. Cel-
lular K+ levels inversely modulate ammoniagenesis, and 
in the setting of high serum K+ from hypoaldosteron-
ism, reduced ammoniagenesis facilitates the appearance 
of Type IV renal tubular acidosis.
Loop of Henle
The loop of Henle consists of three major segments: 
descending thin limb, ascending thin limb, and ascend-
ing thick limb. These divisions are based on cellular mor-
phology and anatomic location, but also correlate with 
specialization of function. Approximately 15–25% of fil-
tered NaCl is reabsorbed in the loop of Henle, mainly 
by the thick ascending limb. The loop of Henle has an 
important role in urinary concentration by contributing 
to the generation of a hypertonic medullary interstitium 
in a process called countercurrent multiplication. The loop 
of Henle is the site of action for the most potent class 
of diuretic agents (loop diuretics) and also contributes to 
reabsorption of calcium and magnesium ions.
The descending thin limb is highly water permeable 
owing to dense expression of constitutively active aqua-
porin-1 water channels. By contrast, water permeability 
is negligible in the ascending limb. In the thick ascending 
limb, there is a high level of secondary active salt trans-
port enabled by the Na+/K+/2Cl− cotransporter on the 
apical membrane in series with basolateral Cl− channels 
and Na+/K+-ATPase (Fig. 1-3B). The Na+/K+/2Cl− 
cotransporter is the primary target for loop diuretics. 
Tubular fluid K+ is the limiting substrate for this cotrans-
porter (tubular concentration of K+ is similar to plasma, 
about 4 meq/L), but transporter activity is maintained 
by K+ recycling through an apical potassium channel. 
An inherited disorder of the thick ascending limb, Bart-
ter’s syndrome, also results in a salt-wasting renal disease 
associated with hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis; 
loss-of-function mutations in one of five distinct genes 
encoding components of the Na+/K+/2Cl− cotransporter 
(NKCC2), apical K+ channel (KCNJ1), or basolateral Cl− 
channel (CLCNKB, BSND), or calcium-sensing receptor 
(CASR) can cause Bartter’s syndrome.
Potassium recycling also contributes to a positive 
electrostatic charge in the lumen relative to the inter-
stitium that promotes divalent cation (Mg2+ and Ca2+) 
reabsorption through a paracellular pathway. A Ca2+-
sensing, G-protein–coupled receptor (CaSR) on baso-
lateral membranes regulates NaCl reabsorption in the 
thick ascending limb through dual signaling mechanisms 
utilizing either cyclic AMP or eicosanoids. This recep-
tor enables a steep relationship between plasma Ca2+ 
levels and renal Ca2+ excretion. Loss-of-function muta-
tions in CaSR cause familial hypercalcemic hypocalciuria 
because of a blunted response of the thick ascending limb 
to extracellular Ca2+. Mutations in CLDN16 encoding 
paracellin-1, a transmembrane protein located within the 
tight junction complex, leads to familial hypomagnese-
mia with hypercalcuria and nephrocalcinosis, suggesting 
that the ion conductance of the paracellular pathway in 
the thick limb is regulated.
The loop of Henle contributes to urine-concentrating 
ability by establishing a hypertonic medullary interstitium 
that promotes water reabsorption by the downstream 
inner medullary collecting duct. Countercurrent multiplica-
tion produces a hypertonic medullary interstitium using 
two countercurrent systems: the loop of Henle (oppos-
ing descending and ascending limbs) and the vasa recta 
(medullary peritubular capillaries enveloping the loop). 
The countercurrent flow in these two systems helps 
maintain the hypertonic environment of the inner 
medulla, but NaCl reabsorption by the thick ascend-
ing limb is the primary initiating event. Reabsorption of 
NaCl without water dilutes the tubular fluid and adds 
new osmoles to medullary interstitial fluid. Because the 
descending thin limb is highly water permeable, osmotic 
equilibrium occurs between the descending limb tubu-
lar fluid and the interstitial space, leading to progressive 
solute trapping in the inner medulla. Maximum medul-
lary interstitial osmolality also requires partial recycling 
of urea from the collecting duct.
Distal Convoluted Tubule
The distal convoluted tubule reabsorbs ∼5% of the fil-
tered NaCl. This segment is composed of a tight epi-
thelium with little water permeability. The major 
NaCl-transporting pathway utilizes an apical mem-
brane, electroneutral thiazide-sensitive Na+/Cl− cotrans-
porter in tandem with basolateral Na+/K+-ATPase and 
Cl− channels (Fig. 1-3C). Apical Ca2+-selective chan-
nels (TRPV5) and basolateral Na+/Ca2+ exchange medi-
ate calcium reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubule. 
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
10
Ca2+ reabsorption is inversely related to Na+ reabsorp-
tion and is stimulated by parathyroid hormone. Block-
ing apical Na+/Cl− cotransport will reduce intracellular 
Na+, favoring increased basolateral Na+/Ca2+ exchange 
and passive apical Ca2+ entry. Loss-of-function mutations 
of SLC12A3 encoding the apical Na+/Cl− cotransporter 
cause Gitelman’s syndrome, a salt-wasting disorder asso-
ciated with hypokalemic alkalosis and hypocalciuria. 
Mutations in genes encoding WNK kinases, WNK-1 
and WNK-4, cause pseudohypoaldosteronism type II 
or Gordon’s syndrome characterized by familial hyper-
tension with hyperkalemia. WNK kinases influence 
the activity of several tubular ion transporters. Muta-
tions in this disorder lead to overactivity of the apical 
Na+/Cl− cotransporter in the distal convoluted tubule 
as the primary stimulus for increased salt reabsorp-
tion, extracellular volume expansion, and hypertension. 
Hyperkalemia may be caused by diminished activity of 
apical K+ channels in the collecting duct, a primary route 
for K+ secretion. Mutations in TRPM6 encoding Mg2+ 
permeable ion channels also cause familial hypomag-
nesemia with hypocalcemia. A molecular complex of 
TRPM6 and TRPM7 proteins is critical for Mg2+ reab-
sorption in the distal convoluted tubule.
Collecting Duct
The collecting duct modulates the final composition of 
urine. The two major divisions, the cortical collecting 
duct and inner medullary collecting duct, contribute 
to reabsorbing ∼4–5% of filtered Na+ and are impor-
tant for hormonal regulation of salt and water balance. 
The cortical collecting duct contains high-resistance 
epithelia with two cell types. Principal cells are the main 
water, Na+-reabsorbing, and K+-secreting cells, and the 
site of action of aldosterone, K+-sparing diuretics, and 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists such as spirono-
lactone. The other cells are type A and B intercalated 
cells. Type A intercalated cells mediate acid secretion 
and bicarbonate reabsorption also under the influence 
of aldosterone. Type B intercalated cells mediate bicar-
bonate secretion and acid reabsorption.
Virtually all transport is mediated through the cel-
lular pathway for both principal cells and intercalated 
cells. In principal cells, passive apical Na+ entry occurs 
through the amiloride-sensitive, epithelial Na+ channel 
(ENaC) with basolateral exit via the Na+/K+-ATPase 
(Fig. 1-3E). This Na+ reabsorptive process is tightly 
regulated by aldosterone and is physiologically activated 
by a variety of proteolytic enzymes that cleave extracel-
lular domains of ENaC; plasmin in the tubular fluid of 
nephrotic patients, for example, activates ENaC, leading 
to sodium retention. Aldosterone enters the cell across 
the basolateral membrane, binds to a cytoplasmic min-
eralocorticoid receptor, and then translocates into the 
nucleus, where it modulates gene transcription, result-
ing in increased Na+ reabsorption and K+ secretion. 
Activating mutations in ENaC increase Na+ reclamation 
and produce hypokalemia, hypertension, and metabolic 
alkalosis (Liddle’s syndrome). The potassium-sparing 
diuretics amiloride and triamterene block ENaC, caus-
ing reduced Na+ reabsorption.
Principal cells secrete K+ through an apical mem-
brane potassium channel. Several forces govern the 
secretion of K+. Most importantly, the high intracel-
lular K+ concentration generated by Na+/K+-ATPase 
creates a favorable concentration gradient for K+ 
secretion into tubular fluid. With reabsorption of Na+ 
without an accompanying anion, the tubular lumen 
becomes negative relative to the cell interior, creating 
a favorable electrical gradient for secretion of potas-
sium. When Na+ reabsorption is blocked, the electrical 
component of the driving force for K+ secretion is 
blunted, and this explains the lack of excess urinary K+ loss 
during treatment with potassium-sparing diuretics. K+ 
secretion is also promoted by aldosterone actions that 
increase regional Na+ transport favoring more elec-
tronegativity and by increasing the number and activ-
ity of potassium channels. Fast tubular fluid flow rates 
that occur during volume expansion or diuretics acting 
“upstream” of the cortical collecting duct also increase 
K+ secretion, as does the presence of relatively nonre-
absorbable anions (including bicarbonate and semisyn-
thetic penicillins) that contribute to the lumen-negative 
potential. Off-target effects of certain antibiotics such 
as trimethoprim and pentamidine, block ENaCs and 
predispose to hyperkalemia, especially when renal K+ 
handling is impaired for other reasons. Principal cells, 
as described below, also participate in water reabsorp-
tion by increased water permeability in response to 
vasopressin.
Intercalated cells do not participate in Na+ reabsorp-
tion but instead mediate acid-base secretion. These 
cells perform two types of transport: active H+ trans-
port mediated by H+-ATPase (proton pump), and 
Cl−/HCO3
− exchange. Intercalated cells arrange the two 
transport mechanisms on opposite membranes to enable 
either acid or base secretion. Type A intercalated cells 
have an apical proton pump that mediates acid secre-
tion and a basolateral Cl−/HCO3
− anion exchanger 
for bicarbonate reabsorption (Fig. 1-3E); aldosterone 
increases the number of H+-ATPase pumps, sometimes 
contributing to the development of metabolic alkalo-
sis. By contrast, type B intercalated cells have the anion 
exchanger on the apical membrane to mediate bicar-
bonate secretion while the proton pump resides on the 
basolateral membrane to enable acid reabsorption. Under 
conditions of acidemia, the kidney preferentially uses 
type A intercalated cells to secrete the excess H+ and 
generate more HCO3
−. The opposite is true in states 
 
CHAPTER 1
Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney 
11
of bicarbonate excess with alkalemia where the type B 
intercalated cells predominate. An extracellular protein 
called hensin mediates this adaptation.
Inner medullary collecting duct cells share many 
similarities with principal cells of the cortical collect-
ing duct. They have apical Na+ and K+ channels that 
mediate Na+ reabsorption and K+ secretion, respectively 
(Fig. 1-3F). Inner medullary collecting duct cells also 
have vasopressin-regulated water channels (aquaporin-2 
on the apical membrane, aquaporin-3 and -4 on the 
basolateral membrane). The antidiuretic hormone 
vasopressin binds to the V2 receptor on the basolat-
eral membrane and triggers an intracellular signaling 
cascade through G-protein–mediated activation of ade-
nylyl cyclase, resulting in an increase in the cellular lev-
els of cyclic AMP. This signaling cascade stimulates the 
insertion of water channels into the apical membrane 
of the inner medullary collecting duct cells to promote 
increased water permeability. This increase in perme-
ability enables water reabsorption and production of 
concentrated urine. In the absence of vasopressin, inner 
medullary collecting duct cells are water impermeable, 
and urine remains dilute.
Sodium reabsorption by inner medullary collect-
ing duct cells is also inhibited by the natriuretic pep-
tides called atrial natriuretic peptide or renal natriuretic peptide 
(urodilatin); the same gene encodes both peptides but 
uses different posttranslational processing of a common 
preprohormone to generate different proteins. Atrial 
natriuretic peptides are secreted by atrial myocytes in 
response to volume expansion, whereas urodilatin is 
secreted by renal tubular epithelia. Natriuretic peptides 
interact with either apical (urodilatin) or basolateral (atrial 
natriuretic peptides) receptors on inner medullary collect-
ing duct cells to stimulate guanylyl cyclase and increase 
levels of cytoplasmic cGMP. This effect in turn reduces 
the activity of the apical Na+ channel in these cells and 
attenuates net Na+ reabsorption, producing natriuresis.
The inner medullary collecting duct transports urea 
out of the lumen, returning urea to the interstitium, 
where it contributes to the hypertonicity of the medul-
lary interstitium. Urea is recycled by diffusing from the 
interstitium into the descending and ascending limbs of 
the loop of Henle.
Hormonal Regulation of Sodium 
and Water Balance
The balance of solute and water in the body is deter-
mined by the amounts ingested, distributed to various 
fluid compartments, and excreted by skin, bowel, and 
kidneys. Tonicity, the osmolar state determining the 
volume behavior of cells in a solution, is regulated by 
water balance (Fig. 1-4A), and extracellular blood volume 
is regulated by Na+ balance (Fig. 1-4B). The kidney is 
a critical modulator of both physiologic processes.
Water Balance
Tonicity depends on the variable concentration of effec-
tive osmoles inside and outside the cell causing water to 
move in either direction across its membrane. Clas-
sic effective osmoles, like Na+, K+, and their anions, 
are solutes trapped on either side of a cell membrane, 
where they collectively partition and obligate water to 
move and find equilibrium in proportion to retained 
solute; Na+/K+-ATPase keeps most K+ inside cells and 
most Na+ outside. Normal tonicity (∼280 mosmol/L) is 
rigorously defended by osmoregulatory mechanisms that 
control water balance to protect tissues from inadver-
tent dehydration (cell shrinkage) or water intoxication (cell 
swelling), both of which are deleterious to cell function 
(Fig. 1-4A).
The mechanisms that control osmoregulation are 
distinct from those governing extracellular volume, 
although there is some shared physiology in both pro-
cesses. While cellular concentrations of K+ have a 
determinant role in any level of tonicity, the routine 
surrogate marker for assessing clinical tonicity is the 
concentration of serum Na+. Any reduction in total 
body water, which raises the Na+ concentration, trig-
gers a brisk sense of thirst and conservation of water by 
decreasing renal water excretion mediated by release 
of vasopressin from the posterior pituitary. Con-
versely, a decrease in plasma Na+ concentration trig-
gers an increase in renal water excretion by suppressing 
the secretion of vasopressin. While all cells expressing 
mechanosensitive TRPV1, 2, or 4 channels, among 
potentially other sensors, respond to changes in tonic-
ity by altering their volume and Ca2+ concentration, 
only TRPV+ neuronal cells connected to the organum 
vasculosum of the lamina terminalis are osmoreceptive. 
Only these cells, because of their neural connectivity 
and adjacency to a minimal blood-brain barrier, modu-
late the downstream release of vasopressin by the poste-
rior lobe of the pituitary gland. Secretion is stimulated 
primarily by changing tonicity and secondarily by other 
nonosmotic signals such as variable blood volume, 
stress, pain, nausea, and some drugs. The release of 
vasopressin by the posterior pituitary increases linearly as 
plasma tonicity rises above normal, although this varies, 
depending on the perception of extracellular volume 
(one form of cross-talk between mechanisms that adju-
dicate blood volume and osmoregulation). Changing 
the intake or excretion of water provides a means for 
adjusting plasma tonicity; thus, osmoregulation governs 
water balance.
The kidneys play a vital role in maintaining water 
balance through the regulation of renal water excretion. 
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
12
The ability to concentrate urine to an osmolality 
exceeding that of plasma enables water conservation, 
while the ability to produce urine more dilute than 
plasma promotes excretion of excess water. For water 
to enter or exit a cell, the cell membrane must express 
aquaporins. In the kidney, aquaporin 1 is constitutively 
active in all water-permeable segments of the proximal 
and distal tubules, while vasopressin-regulated aquapo-
rins 2, 3, and 4 in the inner medullary collecting duct 
promote rapid water permeability. Net water reab-
sorption is ultimately driven by the osmotic gradient 
between dilute tubular fluid and a hypertonic medullary 
interstitium.
Sodium Balance
The perception of extracellular blood volume is determined, 
in part, by the integration of arterial tone, cardiac stroke 
volume, heart rate, and the water and solute content of 
extracellular fluid. Na+ and accompanying anions are 
the most abundant extracellular effective osmols and 
together support a blood volume around which pres-
sure is generated. Under normal conditions, this volume 
is regulated by sodium balance (Fig. 1-4B), and the bal-
ance between daily Na+ intake and excretion is under 
the influence of baroreceptors in regional blood vessels and 
vascular hormone sensors modulated by atrial natriuretic 
Cell volume
pNa+ = Tonicity = 
=
Effective Osmols
TB H2O
TB Na+ + TB K+
TB H2O
Net water balance
+ TB H2O
– TB H2O
Thirst
Osmoreception
Custom/habit
ADH levels
V2-receptor/AP2 water flow
Medullary gradient
Determinants
Water intake
Renal regulation
Free water clearance
Hyponatremia
Hypotonicity
Water intoxication
Hypernatremia
Hypertonicity
Dehydration
Cell
membrane
Clinical result
A
 Extracellular blood volume and pressure
(TB Na+ + TB H2O + vascular tone + heart rate + stroke volume)
Net Na+ balance
+ TB Na+
– TB Na+
Taste
Baroreception
Custom/habit
Na+ reabsorption
Tubuloglomerular feedback
Macula densa
Atrial natriuretic peptides
Determinants
Na+ intake
Renal regulation
Fractional Na+ excretion
Edema
Volume depletion
Clinical result
B
Figure 1-4
Determinants of sodium and water balance. A. Plasma 
Na+ concentration is a surrogate marker for plasma tonicity, 
the volume behavior of cells in a solution. Tonicity is deter-
mined by the number of effective osmols in the body divided 
by the total body H2O (TB H2O), which translates simply into 
the total body Na (TB Na+) and anions outside the cell sep-
arated from the total body K (TB K+) inside the cell by the 
cell membrane. Net water balance is determined by the inte-
grated functions of thirst, osmoreception, Na reabsorption, 
vasopressin release, and the strength of the medullary gradi-
ent in the kidney, keeping tonicity within a narrow range of 
osmolality around 280 mosmol/L. When water metabolism 
is disturbed and total body water increases, hyponatremia, 
hypotonicity, and water intoxication occur; when total body 
water decreases, hypernatremia, hypertonicity, and dehydra-
tion occur. B. Extracellular blood volume and pressure are 
an integrated function of total body Na+ (TB Na+), total body 
H2O (TB H2O), vascular tone, heart rate, and stroke volume 
that modulates volume and pressure in the vascular tree of 
the body. This extracellular blood volume is determined by 
net Na balance under the control of taste, baroreception, 
habit, Na+ reabsorption, macula densa/tubuloglomerular 
feedback, and natriuretic peptides. When Na+ metabolism is 
disturbed and total body Na+ increases, edema occurs; when 
total body Na+ is decreased, volume depletion occurs. ADH, 
antidiuretic hormone; AQP2, aquaporin-2.
 
CHAPTER 1
Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney 
13
peptides, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, Ca2+ 
signaling, adenosine, vasopressin, and the neural adren-
ergic axis. If Na+ intake exceeds Na+ excretion (posi-
tive Na+ balance), then an increase in blood volume will 
trigger a proportional increase in urinary Na+ excretion. 
Conversely, when Na+ intake is less than urinary excre-
tion (negative Na+ balance), blood volume will decrease 
and trigger enhanced renal Na+ reabsorption, leading to 
decreased urinary Na+ excretion.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is the best-
understood hormonal system modulating renal Na+ 
excretion. Renin is synthesized and secreted by granu-
lar cells in the wall of the afferent arteriole. Its secretion 
is controlled by several factors, including β1-adrenergic 
stimulation to the afferent arteriole, input from the mac-
ula densa, and prostaglandins. Renin and ACE activ-
ity eventually produce angiotensin II that directly or 
indirectly promotes renal Na+ and water reabsorption. 
Stimulation of proximal tubular Na+/H+ exchange 
by angiotensin II directly increases Na+ reabsorption. 
Angiotensin II also promotes Na+ reabsorption along the 
collecting duct by stimulating aldosterone secretion by 
the adrenal cortex. Constriction of the efferent glomeru-
lar arteriole by angiotensin II indirectly increases the fil-
tration fraction and raises peritubular capillary oncotic 
pressure to promote tubular Na+ reabsorption. Finally, 
angiotensin II inhibits renin secretion through a negative 
feedback loop. Alternative metabolism of angiotensin by 
ACE2 generates the vasodilatory peptide angiotensin 1-7 
that acts through Mas receptors to counterbalance sev-
eral actions of angiotensin II on blood pressure and renal 
function (Fig. 1-2C).
Aldosterone is synthesized and secreted by granulosa 
cells in the adrenal cortex. It binds to cytoplasmic min-
eralocorticoid receptors in the collecting duct principal 
cells that increase activity of ENaC, apical membrane K+ 
channel, and basolateral Na+/K+-ATPase. These effects 
are mediated in part by aldosterone-stimulated transcrip-
tion of the gene encoding serum/glucocorticoid-induced 
kinase 1 (SGK1). The activity of ENaC is increased by 
SGK1-mediated phosphorylation of Nedd4-2, a protein 
that promotes recycling of the Na+ channel from the 
plasma membrane. Phosphorylated Nedd4-2 has impaired 
interactions with ENaC, leading to increased channel den-
sity at the plasma membrane and increased capacity for Na+ 
reabsorption by the collecting duct.
Chronic exposure to aldosterone causes a decrease 
in urinary Na+ excretion lasting only a few days, after 
which Na+ excretion returns to previous levels. This 
phenomenon, called aldosterone escape, is explained by 
decreased proximal tubular Na+ reabsorption following
blood volume expansion. Excess Na+ that is not re-
absorbed by the proximal tubule overwhelms the reab-
sorptive capacity of more distal nephron segments. This 
escape may be facilitated by atrial natriuretic peptides 
that lose their effectiveness in the clinical settings of 
heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, and cirrhosis, leading 
to severe Na+ retention and volume overload.
 Raymond C. Harris  I   Eric G. Neilson 
14
 The size of a kidney and the total number of neph-
rons formed late in embryologic development depend 
on the degree to which the ureteric bud undergoes 
branching morphogenesis. Humans have between 
225,000 and 900,000 nephrons in each kidney, a num-
ber that mathematically hinges on whether ureteric 
branching goes to completion or is terminated prema-
turely by one or two cycles. Although the signaling 
mechanisms regulating cycle number are incompletely 
understood, these fi nal rounds of branching likely 
determine how well the kidney will adapt to the physi-
ologic demands of blood pressure and body size, vari-
ous environmental stresses, or unwanted infl ammation 
leading to chronic renal failure. 
 One of the intriguing generalities regarding chronic 
renal failure is that residual nephrons hyperfunction to 
compensate for the loss of those nephrons succumb-
ing to primary disease. This compensation depends on 
adaptive changes produced by renal hypertrophy and 
adjustments in  tubuloglomerular feedback and  glomerulotu-
bular balance , as advanced in the  intact nephron hypothesis
by Neal Bricker in 1969. Some physiologic adaptations 
to nephron loss also produce unintended clinical con-
sequences explained by Bricker’s  trade-off hypothesis in 
1972, and eventually some adaptations accelerate the 
deterioration of residual nephrons, as described by Barry 
Brenner in his  hyperfi ltration hypothesis in 1982. These 
three important notions regarding chronic renal fail-
ure form a conceptual basis for understanding common 
pathophysiology leading to uremia. 
 common mechanisms of 
pRogRessiVe Renal disease 
 When the initial complement of nephrons is reduced 
by a sentinel event, such as unilateral nephrectomy, the 
remaining kidney adapts by enlarging and increasing its 
glomerular fi ltration rate. If the kidneys were initially 
normal, the fi ltration rate usually returns to 80% of 
normal for two kidneys. The remaining kidney grows 
by  compensatory renal hypertrophy with very little cel-
lular proliferation. This unique event is accomplished 
by increasing the size of each cell along the nephron, 
which is accommodated by the elasticity or growth of 
interstitial spaces under the renal capsule. The mecha-
nism of this  compensatory renal hypertrophy is only par-
tially understood; studies suggest roles for angiotensin II 
transactivation of heparin-binding epithelial growth fac-
tor, PI3K, and p27 kip1 , a cell cycle protein that prevents 
tubular cells exposed to angiotensin II from proliferat-
ing, and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), 
which mediates new protein synthesis. 
Hyperfi ltration during pregnancy or in humans born 
with one kidney or who lose one to trauma or trans-
plantation generally produces no ill consequences. By 
contrast, experimental animals that undergo resection of 
80% of their renal mass, or humans who have persis-
tent injury that destroys a comparable amount of renal 
tissue, progress to end-stage disease  ( Fig. 2-1 ) . Clearly, 
there is a critical amount of primary nephron loss that 
produces maladaptive deterioration in remaining neph-
rons. This maladaptive response is referred to clinically 
as  renal progression, and the pathologic correlate of renal 
progression is the relentless advance of tubular atrophy 
and tissue fi brosis. The mechanism for this maladaptive 
response is the focus of intense investigation. A unifi ed 
theory of  renal progression is just starting to emerge, and 
most importantly, this progression follows a fi nal com-
mon pathway regardless of whether renal injury begins 
in glomeruli or within the tubulointerstitium. 
 There are six mechanisms that hypothetically unify 
this fi nal common pathway. If injury begins in glom-
eruli, these sequential steps build on each other: (1) per-
sistent glomerular injury produces local hypertension in 
capillary tufts, increases their single-nephron glomerular 
 ADAPTION OF THE KIDNEY TO RENAL INJURY 
 chapteR 2 
 
CHAPTER 2
Adaption of the Kidney to Renal Injury
15
filtration rate and engenders protein leak into the tubular 
fluid; (2) significant glomerular proteinuria, accom-
panied by increases in the local production of angio-
tensin II, facilitates a downstream cytokine bath that 
induces the accumulation of interstitial mononuclear 
cells; (3) the initial appearance of interstitial neutrophils 
is quickly replaced by a gathering of macrophages and 
T lymphocytes, which form a nephritogenic immune 
response producing interstitial nephritis; (4) some tubu-
lar epithelia respond to this inflammation by disaggre-
gating from their basement membrane and adjacent 
sister cells to undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transitions 
forming new interstitial fibroblasts; and finally (5) sur-
viving fibroblasts lay down a collagenous matrix that 
disrupts adjacent capillaries and tubular nephrons, even-
tually leaving an acellular scar. The details of these com-
plex events are outlined in Fig. 2-2.
Significant ablation of renal mass results in hyperfil-
tration characterized by an increase in the rate of single-
nephron glomerular filtration. The remaining nephrons lose 
their ability to autoregulate, and systemic hypertension 
is transmitted to the glomerulus. Both the hyperfiltra-
tion and intraglomerular hypertension stimulate the even-
tual appearance of glomerulosclerosis. Angiotensin II 
acts as an essential mediator of increased intraglomerular 
capillary pressure by selectively increasing efferent arte-
riolar vasoconstriction relative to afferent arteriolar 
tone. Angiotensin II impairs glomerular size selectivity, 
induces protein ultrafiltration, and increases intracellu-
lar Ca2+ in podocytes, which alters podocyte function. 
Diverse vasoconstrictor mechanisms, including blockade 
of nitric oxide synthase and activation of angiotensin II 
and thromboxane receptors, can also induce oxidative 
stress in surrounding renal tissue. Finally, the effects of 
aldosterone on increasing renal vascular resistance and 
glomerular capillary pressure, or stimulating plasmino-
gen activator inhibitor-1, facilitate fibrogenesis and may 
complement the detrimental activity of angiotensin II.
On occasion, inflammation that begins in the renal 
interstitium disables tubular reclamation of filtered 
0
0
5
10
15
20
50
1
2
3
4
5
6
100
150
Years of Diabetes
Onset
diabetes
GFR
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
ESRD
Hyperfiltration
Overt
proteinuria
Onset
nephropathy
Microalbuminuria
GFR, mL/min
Urinary Protein
Excretion, g/24 h
Figure 2-1
Progression of chronic renal injury. Although 
various types of renal injury have their own 
unique rates of progression, one of the best 
understood is that associated with type I dia-
betic nephropathy. Notice the early increase 
in glomerular filtration rate, followed by inexo-
rable decline associated with increasing pro-
teinuria. Also indicated is the National Kidney 
Foundation K/DOQI classification of the stages 
of chronic kidney disease.
protein, producing mild nonselective proteinuria. Renal 
inflammation that initially damages glomerular capillar-
ies often spreads to the tubulointerstitium in association 
with heavier proteinuria. Many clinical observations 
support the association of worsening glomerular proteinuria 
with renal progression. The simplest explanation for this 
expansion of mononuclear cells is that increasingly 
severe proteinuria triggers a downstream inflammatory 
cascade in tubular epithelial cells, producing interstitial 
nephritis, fibrosis, and tubular atrophy. As albumin is an 
abundant polyanion in plasma and can bind a variety of 
cytokines, chemokines, and lipid mediators, it is likely 
these small albumin-carried molecules initiate the tubu-
lar inflammation brought on by proteinuria. Further-
more, glomerular injury either adds activated mediators 
to the proteinuric filtrate or alters the balance of cyto-
kine inhibitors and activators such that attainment of a 
critical level of activated cytokines eventually damages 
downstream tubular nephrons.
Tubular epithelia bathed in these complex mixtures 
of proteinuric cytokines respond by increasing their 
secretion of chemokines and relocating NF-kB to the 
nucleus to induce the proinflammatory release of trans-
forming growth factor β (TGF-β), platelet-derived growth 
factor–BB (PDGF-BB), and fibroblast growth factor 2 
(FGF-2). Inflammatory cells are drawn into the renal 
interstitium by this cytokine milieu. This interstitial 
spreading reduces the likelihood that the kidney will 
survive. The immunologic mechanisms for spreading 
include loss of tolerance to parenchymal self, immune 
deposits that share cross-reactive epitopes in either com-
partment, or glomerular injury that reveals a new inter-
stitial epitope. Drugs, infection, and metabolic defects 
also induce autoimmunity through toll-like receptors 
(TLRs) that bind to ligands with an immunologically 
distinct molecular pattern. Bacterial and viral ligands 
activate TLRs, but interestingly so do Tamm-Horsfall 
protein, bacterial CpG repeats, and RNA that is released 
nonspecifically from injured tubular cells. Dendritic 
cells and macrophages are subsequently activated, and 
16
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
circulating T cells engage in the formal cellular immu-
nologic response.
Nephritogenic interstitial T cells are a mix of CD4+ 
helper, CD17+ effector, and CD8+ cytotoxic lympho-
cytes. Presumptive evidence of antigen-driven T cells 
found by examining the DNA sequence of T-cell recep-
tors suggests a polyclonal expansion responding to mul-
tiple epitopes. Some experimental interstitial lesions are 
histologically analogous to a cutaneous delayed-type 
hypersensitivity reaction, and more intense reactions 
sometimes induce granuloma formation. The cytotoxic 
activity of antigen-reactive T cells probably accounts for 
tubular cell destruction and atrophy. Cytotoxic T cells 
synthesize proteins with serine esterase activity as well 
as pore-forming proteins, which can effect membrane 
damage much like the activated membrane attack com-
plex of the complement cascade. Such enzymatic activity 
provides a structural explanation for target cell lysis.
One long-term consequence of tubular epithelia and 
adjacent endothelia exposed to cytokines is the profi-
brotic activation of epithelial/endothelial-mesenchymal tran-
sition (EMT). Persistent cytokine activity during renal 
inflammation and disruption of underlying basement 
membranes by local proteases initiates the process of 
transition. Rather than collapsing into the tubular lumens 
and dying, some epithelia become fibroblasts while 
translocating back into the interstitial space behind dete-
riorating tubules through holes in the ruptured base-
ment membrane; the contribution of endothelial cells 
from interstitial vessels may be equally important. Wnt 
proteins, integrin-linked kinases, insulin-like growth 
factors, EGF, FGF-2, and TGF-β are among the clas-
sic modulators of EMT. Fibroblasts that deposit collagen 
during fibrogenesis also replicate locally at sites of per-
sistent inflammation. Estimates indicate that more than 
half of the total fibroblasts found in fibrotic renal tissues 
are products of the proliferation of newly transitioned or 
preexisting fibroblasts. Fibroblasts are stimulated to mul-
tiply by activation of cognate cell-surface receptors for 
PDGF and TGF-β.
Tubulointerstitial scars are composed principally of 
fibronectin, collagen types I and III, and tenascin, but 
other glycoproteins such as thrombospondin, SPARC, 
osteopontin, and proteoglycan also may be important. 
1. Glomerular hypertension
and proteinuria
Albumin
Transferrin
AngII
ROS oxidants
C5-9 complex
NF-κB
IL-8
RANTES
MCP-1
ET-1
MIF
B
TR1/2
TR
TE
TGFβ
Proteases
TNFα
IL-1
MCP-1
RANTES
γIFN
Collagens (I and III)
Fibronectin
Apoptosis
FSP1/p53
PAI-1
Vimentin
αSMA
Thrombospondin 1
MMP-2/9
PDGF
EMT
TGF-EGF-FGF2-FSP1
Fibroblast
HGF-BMP7
CArG-Box
Transcriptome
Sequential pathophysiology
of renal progression
Toll-like receptors
Co-recognition
MHC restricted
Antigen specific
2. Proteinuria-linked
interstitial mononuclear
cell accumulation
6. Fibrosis
4. Nephritogenic
T-lymphocyte
activation
3. Cytokines and
chemokines
+
–
5. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
Figure 2-2
Mechanisms of renal progression. The general mecha-
nisms of renal progression advance sequentially through six 
stages that include hyperfiltration, proteinuria, cytokine bath, 
mononuclear cell infiltration, epithelial-mesenchymal tran-
sition, and fibrosis. (Modified from RC Harris, EG Neilson: 
Annu Rev Med 57:365, 2006.)
 
CHAPTER 2
Adaption of the Kidney to Renal Injury
17
Although tubular epithelia can synthesize collagens I 
and III and are modulated by a variety of growth fac-
tors, these epithelia disappear through transition and 
tubular atrophy, leaving fibroblasts as the major con-
tributor to matrix production. After fibroblasts acquire 
a synthetic phenotype, expand their population, and 
locally migrate around areas of inflammation, they 
begin to deposit fibronectin, which provides a scaffold 
for interstitial collagens. When fibroblasts outdistance 
their survival factors, they die from apoptosis, leaving 
an acellular scar.
Response to Reduction in 
Numbers of Functioning Nephrons
As mentioned above, the response to the loss of many 
functioning nephrons produces an increase in renal blood 
flow with glomerular hyperfiltration, which is the result 
of increased vasoconstriction in postglomerular effer-
ent arterioles relative to preglomerular afferent arteri-
oles, increasing the intraglomerular capillary pressure and 
filtration fraction. Persistent intraglomerular hyperten-
sion is associated with progressive nephron destruction. 
Although the hormonal and metabolic factors mediat-
ing hyperfiltration are not fully understood, a number of 
vasoconstrictive and vasodilatory substances have been 
implicated, chief among them being angiotensin II. 
Angiotensin II incrementally vasoconstricts the efferent 
arteriole, and studies in animals and humans demonstrate 
that interruption of the renin-angiotensin system with 
either angiotensin-converting inhibitors or angiotensin II 
receptor blockers will decrease intraglomerular capillary 
pressure, decrease proteinuria, and slow the rate of neph-
ron destruction. The vasoconstrictive agent endothelin 
has also been implicated in hyperfiltration, and increases 
in afferent vasodilatation have been attributed, at least in 
part, to local prostaglandins and release of endothelium- 
derived nitric oxide. Finally, hyperfiltration may be 
mediated in part by a resetting of the kidney’s intrinsic 
autoregulatory mechanism of glomerular filtration by a 
tubuloglomerular feedback system. This feedback originates 
from the macula densa and modulates renal blood flow 
and glomerular filtration (see Chap. 1).
Even with the loss of functioning nephrons, there is 
some continued maintenance of glomerulotubular balance, 
by which the residual tubules adapt to increases in single 
nephron glomerular filtration with appropriate alterations in 
reabsorption or excretion of filtered water and solutes 
in order to maintain homeostasis. Glomerulotubular balance 
results both from tubular hypertrophy and from regula-
tory adjustments in tubular oncotic pressure or solute 
transport along the proximal tubule. Some studies indi-
cate these alterations in tubule size and function may 
themselves be maladaptive, and as a trade-off, predispose 
to further tubule injury.
Tubular Function in Chronic 
Renal Failure
Sodium
Na+ ions are reclaimed along many parts of the neph-
ron by various transport mechanisms (see Chap. 2). 
This transport function and its contribution to main-
taining extracellular blood volume usually remains near 
normal until limitations from advanced renal disease 
inadequately excrete dietary Na+ intake. Prior to this 
point and throughout renal progression, increasing the 
fractional excretion of Na+ in final urine at progressively 
reduced rates of glomerular filtration provides a mech-
anism of early adaptation. Na+ excretion increases pre-
dominantly by decreasing Na+ reabsorption in the loop 
of Henle and distal nephron. An increase in the osmotic 
obligation of residual nephrons increases tubular water 
and lowers the concentration of Na+ in tubular fluid, 
reducing efficient Na+ reclamation; increased excre-
tion of inorganic and organic anions also obligates more 
Na+ excretion. In addition, hormonal influences, nota-
bly increased expression of atrial natriuretic peptides that 
increase distal Na+ excretion, play an important role in 
maintaining net Na+ excretion. Although many details 
of these adjustments are only understood conceptually, it 
is an example of a trade-off by which initial adjustments 
following the loss of functioning nephrons leads to com-
pensatory responses that maintain homeostasis. Eventu-
ally, with advancing nephron loss, the atrial natriuretic 
peptides lose their effectiveness, and Na+ retention results 
in intravascular volume expansion, edema, and worsening 
hypertension.
Urinary Dilution and Concentration
Patients with progressive renal injury gradually lose 
the capacity either to dilute or concentrate their urine, 
and urine osmolality becomes relatively fixed about 
350 mosmol/L (specific gravity ∼1.010). Although the 
absolute ability of a single nephron to excrete water free 
of solute may not be impaired, the reduced number of 
functioning nephrons obligates increased fractional solute 
excretion by residual nephrons, and this greater obliga-
tion impairs the ability to dilute tubular fluid maximally. 
Similarly, urinary concentrating ability falls as more 
water is needed to hydrate an increasing solute load. 
Tubulointerstitial damage also creates insensitivity to 
the antidiuretic effects of vasopressin along the collect-
ing duct or loss of the medullary gradient that eventually 
disturbs control of variation in urine osmolality. Patients 
with moderate degrees of chronic renal failure often 
complain of nocturia as a manifestation of this fixed urine 
osmolality, and they are prone to extracellular volume 
depletion if they do not keep up with the persistent loss 
of Na+ or to hypotonicity if they drink too much water.
18
Section I
Introduction to the Renal System 
Potassium
Renal excretion is the major pathway for reducing excess 
total body K+. Normally, the kidney excretes 90% of 
dietary K+, while 10% is excreted in the stool with a 
trivial amount lost to sweat. Although the colon possesses 
some capacity to increase K+ excretion—up to 30% of 
ingested K+ may be excreted in the stool of patients with
worsening renal failure—the majority of the K+ load con-
tinues to be excreted by the kidneys due to elevation in 
levels of serum K+ that increase filtered load. Aldosterone 
also regulates collecting duct Na+ reabsorption and K+ 
secretion. Aldosterone is released from the adrenal cor-
tex not only in response to the renin-angiotensin system, 
but also in direct response to elevated levels of serum K+ 
and, for a while, a compensatory increase in the capacity 
of the collecting duct to secrete K+ keeps up with renal 
progression. As serum K+ levels rise with renal failure, cir-
culating levels of aldosterone also increase over what is 
required to maintain normal levels of blood volume.
Acid-Base Regulation
The kidneys excrete 1 meq/kg/day of noncarbonic 
H+ ion on a normal diet. To do this, all of the filtered 
HCO3
2− needs to be reabsorbed proximally so that H+ 
pumps in the intercalated cells of the collecting duct 
can secrete H+ ions that are subsequently trapped by 
urinary buffers, particularly phosphates and ammo-
nia (see Chap. 1). While remaining nephrons increase 
their solute load with loss of renal mass, the ability to 
maintain total body H+ excretion is often impaired by 
the gradual loss of H+ pumps or with reductions in 
ammoniagenesis, leading to development of a non-
delta acidosis. Although hypertrophy of the proximal 
tubules initially increases their ability to reabsorb filtered 
HCO3
2− and increases ammoniagenesis, with progressive 
loss of nephrons this compensation is eventually over-
whelmed. In addition, with advancing renal failure, 
ammoniagenesis is further inhibited by elevation in lev-
els of serum K+, producing type IV renal tubular aci-
dosis. Once the glomerular filtration rate falls below 
25 mL/min, noncarbonic organic acids accumulate, 
producing a delta metabolic acidosis. Hyperkalemia 
can also inhibit tubular HCO3
2− reabsorption, as can 
extracellular volume expansion and elevated levels of 
parathyroid hormone. Eventually, as the kidneys fail, 
the level of serum HCO3
2− falls severely, reflecting the 
exhaustion of all body buffer systems, including bone.
Calcium and Phosphate
The kidney and gut play an important role in the 
regulation of serum levels of Ca2+ and PO4
2−. With 
decreasing renal function and the appearance of tubu-
lointerstitial nephritis, the expression of 1α-hydroxylase 
by the proximal tubule is reduced, lowering levels of 
calcitriol and Ca2+ absorption by the gut. Loss of neph-
ron mass with progressive renal failure also gradually 
reduces the excretion of PO4
2− and Ca2+, and elevations 
in serum PO4
2− further lower serum levels of Ca2+, caus-
ing sustained secretion of parathyroid hormone. Unreg-
ulated increases in levels of parathyroid hormone cause 
Ca2+ mobilization from bone, Ca2+/PO4
2− precipitation 
in vascular tissues, abnormal bone remodeling, decreases 
in tubular bicarbonate reabsorption, and increases in 
renal PO4
2− excretion. While elevated serum levels of 
parathyroid hormone initially maintain serum PO4
2− 
near normal, with progressive nephron destruction, the 
capacity for renal PO4
2− excretion is overwhelmed,
the serum PO4
2− elevates, and bone is progressively demin­
eralized from secondary hyperparathyroidism. These 
adaptations evoke another classic functional trade-off 
(Fig. 2-3).
GFR
PO42–
Ca2+
PTH
Time (years)
A
Decreases in GFR
Increase in
phosphate load
Decreased renal
calcitriol production
Reduced ionized
Ca2+ in blood
Return serum 
phosphate 
toward normal 
at expense of 
higher PTH
Stimulated PTH secretion
Reduced tubular phosphate reabsorption
Phosphaturia
B
Figure 2-3
The “Trade-off Hypothesis” for Ca2+/PO4
2− homeostasis with 
progressively declining renal function. A. How adaptation to 
maintain Ca2+/PO4
2− homeostasis leads to increasing levels of 
parathyroid hormone (“classic” presentation from E Slatopolsky 
et al: Kidney Int 4:141, 1973). B. current understanding of the 
underlying mechanisms for this Ca2+/PO4
2− trade-off.
 
CHAPTER 2
Adaption of the Kidney to Renal Injury
19
Modifiers Influencing the 
Progression of Renal Disease
Well-described risk factors for the progressive loss of 
renal function include systemic hypertension, diabetes, 
and activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone sys-
tem (Table 2-1). Poor glucose control will aggravate 
renal progression in both diabetic and nondiabetic renal 
disease. Angiotensin II produces intraglomerular hyper-
tension and stimulates fibrogenesis. Aldosterone also 
serves as an independent fibrogenic mediator of pro-
gressive nephron loss apart from its role in modulating 
Na+ and K+ homeostasis. Genetic factors also play a role. 
There is recent, exciting evidence that risk alleles for 
APOL1 underlie the increased susceptibility of African 
Americans to development of progressive kidney injury.
Lifestyle choices also affect the progression of renal 
disease. Cigarette smoking either predisposes or accel-
erates the progression of nephron loss. Whether the 
effect of cigarettes is related to systemic hemodynamic 
alterations or specific damage to the renal microvascu-
lature and/or tubules is unclear. Increases in fetuin-A, 
decreases in adiponectin, and increases in lipid oxidation 
associated with obesity also accelerate cardiovascular 
disease and progressive renal damage. Recent epidemio-
logic studies also confirm an association between high 
protein diets and progression of renal disease. Progres-
sive nephron loss in experimental animals, and possi-
bly in humans, is slowed by adherence to a low protein 
diet. Although a large multicenter trial, the Modifica-
tion of Diet in Renal Disease, did not provide con-
clusive evidence that dietary protein restriction could 
retard progression to renal failure in humans, second-
ary analyses and a number of meta-analyses suggest a 
renoprotective effect from supervised low-protein diets 
Table 2-1 
Potential Modifiers of Renal Disease 
Progression
Hypertension
Renin-angiotensin  
system activation
  Angiotensin II
  Aldosterone
Diabetes
Obesity
Excessive dietary protein
Hyperlipidemia
Abnormal calcium/phosphorus 
homeostasis
Cigarette smoking
Intrinsic paucity in nephron 
number
  Prematurity/low birth weight
  Genetic predisposition
Genetic factors
in the range of 0.6–0.75 g/kg/day. Repair of chronic 
low serum bicarbonate levels during renal progression 
increases kidney survival. Abnormal Ca2+ and PO4
2− 
metabolism in chronic kidney disease also plays a role in 
renal progression, and administration of calcitriol or its 
analogues can attenuate progression in a variety of mod-
els of chronic kidney disease.
An intrinsic paucity in the number of functioning 
nephrons predisposes to the development of renal dis-
ease. A reduced number of nephrons leads to perma-
nent hypertension, either through direct renal damage 
or hyperfiltration producing glomerulosclerosis, or by 
primary induction of systemic hypertension that further 
exacerbates glomerular barotrauma. Younger individu-
als with hypertension who die suddenly as a result of 
trauma have 47% fewer glomeruli per kidney than age-
matched controls.
A consequence of low birth weight is a relative 
deficit in the number of total nephrons, and low birth 
weight associates in adulthood with more hyperten-
sion and renal failure, among other abnormalities. In 
this regard, in addition or instead of a genetic predis-
position to development of a specific disease or con-
dition such as low birth weight, different epigenetic 
phenomena may produce varying clinical phenotypes 
from a single genotype depending on maternal expo-
sure to different environmental stimuli during gesta-
tion, a phenomenon known as developmental plasticity. 
A specific clinical phenotype can also be selected in 
response to an adverse environmental exposure dur-
ing critical periods of intrauterine development, also 
known as fetal programming. In the United States, there 
is at least a twofold increased incidence of low birth 
weight among blacks compared with whites, much 
but not all of which can be attributed to maternal age, 
health, or socioeconomic status.
As in other conditions producing nephron loss, the 
glomeruli of low-birth-weight individuals enlarge and 
associate with early hyperfiltration to maintain normal 
levels of renal function. With time, the resulting intra-
glomerular hypertension initiates a progressive decline in 
residual hyperfunctioning nephrons, ultimately acceler-
ating renal failure. In African Americans as well as other 
populations at increased risk for kidney failure, such as 
Pima Indians and Australian aborigines, large glomeruli 
are seen at early stages of kidney disease. An associa-
tion between low birth weight and the development of 
albuminuria and nephropathy is reported for both dia-
betic and nondiabetic renal disease.
This page intentionally left blank 
Section II
Alterations of 
Renal Function and 
Electrolytes
 Julie lin  I   Bradley M. denker 
22
 Normal kidney functions occur through numerous 
cellular processes to maintain body homeostasis. Dis-
turbances in any of those functions can lead to a con-
stellation of abnormalities that may be detrimental to 
survival. The clinical manifestations of those disorders 
depend on the pathophysiology of the renal injury and 
often are identifi ed initially as a complex of symptoms, 
abnormal physical fi ndings, and laboratory changes that 
together make possible the identifi cation of specifi c 
syndromes. These renal syndromes  ( Table 3-1 ) may 
arise as a consequence of a systemic illness or can occur 
as a primary renal disease. Nephrologic syndromes usu-
ally consist of several elements that refl ect the underly-
ing pathologic processes. The duration and severity of 
the disease affect those fi ndings and typically include 
one or more of the following: (1) reduction in glo-
merular fi ltration rate (GFR) (azotemia), (2) abnormali-
ties of urine sediment [red blood cells (RBCs), white
blood cells, casts, and crystals], (3) abnormal excre-
tion of serum proteins (proteinuria), (4) disturbances in 
urine volume (oliguria, anuria, polyuria), (5) presence 
of hypertension and/or expanded total body fl uid vol-
ume (edema), (6) electrolyte abnormalities, (7) in some 
syndromes, fever/pain. The combination of these fi nd-
ings should permit identifi cation of one of the major 
nephrologic syndromes ( Table 3-1 ) and will allow dif-
ferential diagnoses to be narrowed and the appropri-
ate diagnostic evaluation and therapeutic course to 
be determined. All these syndromes and their associ-
ated diseases are discussed in more detail in subsequent 
chapters. This chapter focuses on several aspects of renal 
abnormalities that are critically important for distin-
guishing among those processes: (1) reduction in GFR 
leading to azotemia, (2) alterations of the urinary sedi-
ment and/or protein excretion, and (3) abnormalities of 
urinary volume. 
 
 AZOTEMIA AND URINARY ABNORMALITIES 
 ChAPter 3
 AZotemiA 
 aSSeSSMent of gloMerular 
filtration rate 
 Monitoring the GFR is important in both the hospi-
tal and outpatient settings, and several different meth-
odologies are available. GFR is the primary metric for 
kidney “function,” and its direct measurement involves 
administration of a radioactive isotope (such as inulin 
or iothalamate) that is fi ltered at the glomerulus but 
neither reabsorbed nor secreted throughout the tubule. 
Clearance of inulin or iothalamate in milliliters per 
minute equals the GFR and is calculated from the rate 
of removal from the blood and appearance in the urine 
over several hours. Direct GFR measurements are 
frequently available through nuclear radiology depart-
ments. In most clinical circumstances direct measure-
ment of GFR is not available, and the serum creatinine 
level is used as a surrogate to estimate GFR. Serum 
creatinine is the most widely used marker for GFR, 
and the GFR is related directly to the urine creatinine 
excretion and inversely to the serum creatinine (U Cr /
P Cr ). Based on this relationship and some important 
caveats (discussed below), the GFR will fall in roughly 
inverse proportion to the rise in P Cr . Failure to account 
for GFR reductions in drug dosing can lead to sig-
nifi cant morbidity and mortality from drug toxicities 
(e.g., digoxin, aminoglycosides). In the outpatient set-
ting, the serum creatinine serves as an estimate for GFR 
(although much less accurate; see below). In patients 
with chronic progressive renal disease, there is an 
approximately linear relationship between 1/P Cr ( y axis) 
and time ( x axis). The slope of that line will remain 
constant for an individual patient, and when values are 
obtained that do not fall on the line, an investigation 
 
CHAPTER 3
Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities
23
Table 3-1 
Initial Clinical and Laboratory DataBase for Defining Major Syndromes in Nephrology
Syndromes
Important Clues to Diagnosis
COMMON Findings
Location of Discussion 
of Disease-Causing 
Syndrome
Acute or rapidly  
progressive renal 
failure
Anuria
Oliguria
Documented recent decline in GFR
Hypertension, hematuria
Proteinuria, pyuria
Casts, edema
Chaps. 10, 15, 17, 21
Acute nephritis
Hematuria, RBC casts
Azotemia, oliguria
Edema, hypertension
Proteinuria
Pyuria
Circulatory congestion
Chap. 15
Chronic renal failure
Azotemia for >3 months
Prolonged symptoms or signs of uremia
Symptoms or signs of renal osteodystrophy
Kidneys reduced in size bilaterally
Broad casts in urinary sediment
Proteinuria
Casts
Polyuria, nocturia
Edema, hypertension
Electrolyte disorders
Chaps. 2, 11
Nephrotic syndrome
Proteinuria >3.5 g per 1.73 m2 per 24 h
Hypoalbuminemia
Edema
Hyperlipidemia
Casts
Lipiduria
Chap. 15
Asymptomatic urinary 
abnormalities
Hematuria
Proteinuria (below nephrotic range)
Sterile pyuria, casts
Chap. 15
Urinary tract  
infection/ 
pyelonephritis
Bacteriuria >105 colonies per milliliter
Other infectious agent documented in urine
Pyuria, leukocyte casts
Frequency, urgency
Bladder tenderness, flank tenderness
Hematuria
Mild azotemia
Mild proteinuria
Fever
Chap. 20
Renal tubule defects
Electrolyte disorders
Polyuria, nocturia
Renal calcification
Large kidneys
Renal transport defects
Hematuria
“Tubular” proteinuria  
(<1 g/24 h)
Enuresis
Chaps. 16, 17
Hypertension
Systolic/diastolic hypertension
Proteinuria
Casts
Azotemia
Chaps. 18, 19
Nephrolithiasis
Previous history of stone passage or removal
Previous history of stone seen by x-ray
Renal colic
Hematuria
Pyuria
Frequency, urgency
Chap. 9
Urinary tract  
obstruction
Azotemia, oliguria, anuria
Polyuria, nocturia, urinary retention
Slowing of urinary stream
Large prostate, large kidneys
Flank tenderness, full bladder after voiding
Hematuria
Pyuria
Enuresis, dysuria
Chap. 21
Abbreviations: GFR; glomerular filtration rate; RBC, red blood cell.
Section II
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
24
for a superimposed acute process (e.g., volume deple-
tion, drug reaction) should be initiated. Signs and symp-
toms of uremia develop at significantly different levels 
of serum creatinine, depending on the patient (size, age, 
and sex), the underlying renal disease, the existence of 
concurrent diseases, and true GFR. In general, patients 
do not develop symptomatic uremia until renal insuffi-
ciency is quite severe (GFR <15 mL/min).
A significantly reduced GFR (either acute or chronic) 
usually is reflected in a rise in serum creatinine and leads 
to retention of nitrogenous waste products (azotemia) 
such as urea. Azotemia may result from reduced renal 
perfusion, intrinsic renal disease, or postrenal processes 
(ureteral obstruction; see below and Fig. 3-1). Precise 
determination of GFR is problematic as both commonly 
measured indices (urea and creatinine) have character-
istics that affect their accuracy as markers of clearance. 
Urea clearance may underestimate GFR significantly 
because of urea reabsorption by the tubule. In contrast, 
creatinine is derived from muscle metabolism of creatine, 
and its generation varies little from day to day.
Creatinine clearance, an approximation of GFR, 
is measured from plasma and urinary creatinine excre-
tion rates for a defined time period (usually 24 h) and is 
expressed in milliliters per minute: CrCl = (Uvol × UCr)/
(PCr × Tmin). Creatinine is useful for estimating GFR 
because it is a small, freely filtered solute that is not 
reabsorbed by the tubules. Serum creatinine levels can 
increase acutely from dietary ingestion of cooked meat, 
however, and creatinine can be secreted into the prox-
imal tubule through an organic cation pathway (espe-
cially in advanced progressive chronic kidney disease), 
leading to overestimation of GFR. When a timed col-
lection for creatinine clearance is not available, decisions 
AZOTEMIA
Urinalysis and
Renal ultrasound
Hydronephrosis
Renal size parenchyma
Urinalysis
Urologic evaluation
Relieve obstruction
Small kidneys, thin cortex,
  bland sediment,
  isosthenuria
  <3.5 g protein/24 h
Normal-sized kidneys
Intact parenchyma
Bacteria
Pyelonephritis
Chronic Renal Failure
Symptomatic treatment
  delay progression
If end-stage, prepare
  for dialysis
Normal
  urinalysis
 with oliguria
Abnormal
  urinalysis
WBC, casts
  eosinophils
Interstitial
  nephritis
Red blood
  cells
Renal artery
  or vein
  occlusion
Urine
  electrolytes
Muddy brown
  casts,
  amorphous
  sediment
  + protein
RBC casts
Proteinuria
Angiogram
FeNa <1%
U osmolality >500 mosmol
FeNa >1%
U osmolality <350 mosmol
Renal biopsy
Prerenal Azotemia
Volume contraction,
  cardiac failure,
  vasodilatation, drugs,
  sepsis, renal
  vasoconstriction,
  impaired autoregulation
Acute Tubular Necrosis
Glomerulonephritis
  or vasculitis
Immune complex,
  anti-GBM disease
EVALUATION OF AZOTEMIA
Acute Renal Failure
Figure 3-1
Approach to the patient with azotemia. FeNa, fractional excretion of sodium; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; RBC, 
red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
 
CHAPTER 3
Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities
25
about drug dosing must be based on serum creatinine 
alone. Two formulas are used widely to estimate kidney 
function from serum creatinine: (1) Cockcroft-Gault 
and (2) four-variable MDRD (Modification of Diet in 
Renal Disease).
Cockcroft-Gault: CrCl (mL/min) = 
(140 − age [years] × weight [kg] 
× [0.85 if female])/(72 × sCr [mg/dL])
MDRD: eGFR (mL/min per 1.73 m2) = 
186.3 × PCr (e−1.154) × age (e−0.203) 
× (0.742 if female) × (1.21 if black).
Numerous websites are available for making these cal-
culations (www.kidney.org/professionals/kdoqi/gfr_calculator
.cfm). A newer CKD-EPI eGFR was developed by 
pooling several cohorts with and without kidney disease 
who had data on directly measured GFR and appears to 
be more accurate:
CKD-EPI: eGFR = 
141 × min (Scr/k, 1)a × max (Scr/k, 1)−1.209 
× 0.993Age × 1.018 (if female) × 1.159 (if black)
where Scr is serum creatinine, k is 0.7 for females and 
0.9 for males, a is −0.329 for females and −0.411 for 
males, min indicates the minimum of Scr/k or 1, and 
max indicates the maximum of Scr/k or 1 (http://www.
qxmd.com/renal/Calculate-CKD-EPI-GFR.php).
Several limitations of using serum creatinine–based 
estimating equations must be acknowledged. Each 
equation, along with the 24-h urine collection for 
measurement of creatinine clearance, is based on the 
assumption that the patient is in steady state, without 
daily increases or decreases in serum creatinine levels as 
a result of rapidly changing GFR. The MDRD equa-
tion has poorer accuracy when GFR >60 mL/min per 
1.73 m2. The gradual loss of muscle from chronic ill-
ness, chronic use of glucocorticoids, or malnutrition can 
mask significant changes in GFR with small or imper-
ceptible changes in serum creatinine concentration. 
Cystatin C is a member of the cystatin superfamily of 
cysteine protease inhibitors and is produced at a rela-
tively constant rate from all nucleated cells. Serum cys-
tatin C has been proposed to be a more sensitive marker 
of early GFR decline than is plasma creatinine; how-
ever, like serum creatinine, cystatin C is influenced by 
age, race, and sex and additionally is associated with dia-
betes, smoking, and markers of inflammation.
approach to the 
patient	
Azotemia
Once it has been established that GFR is reduced, the 
physician must decide if this represents acute or chronic
renal injury. The clinical situation, history, and laboratory 
data often make this an easy distinction. However, the 
laboratory abnormalities characteristic of chronic renal 
failure, including anemia, hypocalcemia, and hyper-
phosphatemia, often are also present in patients pre-
senting with acute renal failure. Radiographic evidence 
of renal osteodystrophy (Chap. 11) can be seen only 
in chronic renal failure but is a very late finding, and 
these patients are usually on dialysis. The urinalysis and 
renal ultrasound occasionally can facilitate distinguish-
ing acute from chronic renal failure. An approach to 
the evaluation of azotemic patients is shown in Fig. 3-1. 
Patients with advanced chronic renal insufficiency often 
have some proteinuria, nonconcentrated urine (isos-
thenuria; isoosmotic with plasma), and small kidneys 
on ultrasound, characterized by increased echogenicity 
and cortical thinning. Treatment should be directed 
toward slowing the progression of renal disease and  
providing symptomatic relief for edema, acidosis, ane-
mia, and hyperphosphatemia, as discussed in Chap. 11. 
Acute renal failure (Chap. 10) can result from processes 
that affect renal blood flow (prerenal azotemia), intrin-
sic renal diseases (affecting small vessels, glomeruli, or 
tubules), or postrenal processes (obstruction to urine 
flow in ureters, bladder, or urethra) (Chap. 21).
Prerenal 
Failure  Decreased 
renal 
perfusion 
accounts for 40–80% of acute renal failure and, if appro-
priately treated, is readily reversible. The etiologies of 
prerenal azotemia include any cause of decreased cir-
culating blood volume (gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 
burns, diarrhea, diuretics), volume sequestration (pan-
creatitis, peritonitis, rhabdomyolysis), or decreased 
effective arterial volume (cardiogenic shock, sepsis). 
Renal perfusion also can be affected by reductions in 
cardiac output from peripheral vasodilation (sepsis, 
drugs) or profound renal vasoconstriction [severe heart 
failure, hepatorenal syndrome, drugs such as nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)]. True or “effec-
tive” arterial hypovolemia leads to a fall in mean arterial 
pressure, which in turn triggers a series of neural and 
humoral responses that include activation of the sym-
pathetic nervous and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
systems and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release. GFR 
is maintained by prostaglandin-mediated relaxation of 
afferent arterioles and angiotensin II–mediated con-
striction of efferent arterioles. Once the mean arterial 
pressure falls below 80 mmHg, there is a steep decline 
in GFR.
Blockade of prostaglandin production by NSAIDs 
can result in severe vasoconstriction and acute renal 
failure. Blocking angiotensin action with angiotensin- 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin recep-
tor blockers (ARBs) decreases efferent arteriolar tone and 
in turn decreases glomerular capillary perfusion pressure. 
Section II
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
26
Patients on NSAIDs and/or ACE inhibitors/ARBs are most 
susceptible to hemodynamically mediated acute renal 
failure when blood volume is reduced for any reason. 
Patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis (or stenosis 
in a solitary kidney) are dependent on efferent arteriolar 
vasoconstriction for maintenance of glomerular filtration 
pressure and are particularly susceptible to a precipitous 
decline in GFR when given ACE inhibitors or ARBs.
Prolonged renal hypoperfusion may lead to acute 
tubular necrosis (ATN), an intrinsic renal disease that is 
discussed below. The urinalysis and urinary electrolytes 
can be useful in distinguishing prerenal azotemia from 
ATN (Table 3-2). The urine of patients with prerenal azo-
temia can be predicted from the stimulatory actions of 
norepinephrine, angiotensin II, ADH, and low tubule 
fluid flow rate on salt and water reabsorption. In prer-
enal conditions, the tubules are intact, leading to a con-
centrated urine (>500 mosmol), avid Na retention (urine 
Na concentration <20 mM/L, fractional excretion of 
Na <1%), and UCr/PCr >40 (Table 3-2). The prerenal urine 
sediment is usually normal or has occasional hyaline 
and granular casts, whereas the sediment of ATN usu-
ally is filled with cellular debris and dark (muddy brown) 
granular casts.
Postrenal 
Azotemia  Urinary tract obstruction 
accounts for <5% of cases of acute renal failure, but it 
is usually reversible and must be ruled out early in the 
evaluation (Fig. 3-1). Since a single kidney is capable 
of adequate clearance, obstructive acute renal failure 
requires obstruction at the urethra or bladder outlet, 
bilateral ureteral obstruction, or unilateral obstruc-
tion in a patient with a single functioning kidney. 
Obstruction usually is diagnosed by the presence of 
ureteral and renal pelvic dilation on renal ultrasound. 
Table 3-2
Laboratory Findings in Acute Renal Failure
Index
Prerenal 
Azotemia
Oliguric 
Acute Renal 
Failure
BUN/PCr ratio
>20:1
10–15:1
Urine sodium (UNa), meq/L
<20
>40
Urine osmolality,  
mosmol/L H2O
>500
<350
Fractional excretion of sodium
 
FE
U
P
P
U
Na
Na
Cr
Na
Cr
=
×
×
×
100
<1%
>2%
Urine/plasma creatinine  
(UCr/PCr)
>40
<20
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; PCr, plasma creatinine; PNa, 
plasma sodium concentration; UCr, urine creatinine concentration; 
UNa, urine sodium concentration.
However, early in the course of obstruction or if the 
ureters are unable to dilate (e.g., encasement by pelvic 
tumors or periureteral), the ultrasound examination may 
be negative. The specific urologic conditions that cause 
obstruction are discussed in Chap. 21.
Intrinsic Renal Disease  When prerenal and 
postrenal azotemia have been excluded as etiologies 
of renal failure, an intrinsic parenchymal renal disease is 
present. Intrinsic renal disease can arise from processes 
involving large renal vessels, intrarenal microvascu-
lature and glomeruli, or the tubulointerstitium. Isch-
emic and toxic ATN account for ∼90% of cases of acute 
intrinsic renal failure. As outlined in Fig. 3-1, the clini-
cal setting and urinalysis are helpful in separating the 
possible etiologies of acute intrinsic renal failure. Prer-
enal azotemia and ATN are part of a spectrum of renal 
hypoperfusion; evidence of structural tubule injury is 
present in ATN, whereas prompt reversibility occurs 
with prerenal azotemia upon restoration of adequate 
renal perfusion. Thus, ATN often can be distinguished 
from prerenal azotemia by urinalysis and urine elec-
trolyte composition (Table 3-2 and Fig. 3-1). Ischemic 
ATN is observed most frequently in patients who have 
undergone major surgery, trauma, severe hypovole-
mia, overwhelming sepsis, or extensive burns. Neph-
rotoxic ATN complicates the administration of many 
common medications, usually by inducing a combina-
tion of intrarenal vasoconstriction, direct tubule toxic-
ity, and/or tubule obstruction. The kidney is vulnerable 
to toxic injury by virtue of its rich blood supply (25% of  
cardiac output) and its ability to concentrate and 
metabolize toxins. A diligent search for hypotension 
and nephrotoxins usually will uncover the specific etiol-
ogy of ATN. Discontinuation of nephrotoxins and stabi-
lization of blood pressure often will suffice without the 
need for dialysis while the tubules recover. An extensive 
list of potential drugs and toxins implicated in ATN can 
be found in Chap. 10.
Processes that involve the tubules and interstitium 
can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI), a subtype of acute 
renal failure. These processes include drug-induced 
interstitial nephritis (especially antibiotics, NSAIDs, and 
diuretics), severe infections (both bacterial and viral), 
systemic diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), 
and infiltrative disorders (e.g., sarcoid, lymphoma, or 
leukemia). A list of drugs associated with allergic inter-
stitial nephritis can be found in Chap. 17. The urinalysis 
usually shows mild to moderate proteinuria, hematu-
ria, and pyuria (∼75% of cases) and occasionally shows 
white blood cell casts. The finding of RBC casts in inter-
stitial nephritis has been reported but should prompt a 
search for glomerular diseases (Fig. 3-1). Occasionally, 
renal biopsy will be needed to distinguish among these 
possibilities. The finding of eosinophils in the urine is 
 
CHAPTER 3
Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities
27
suggestive of allergic interstitial nephritis or atheroem-
bolic renal disease and is optimally observed by using 
a Hansel stain. The absence of eosinophiluria, however, 
does not exclude these etiologies.
Occlusion of large renal vessels including arteries 
and veins is an uncommon cause of acute renal failure. 
A significant reduction in GFR by this mechanism sug-
gests bilateral processes or a unilateral process in a 
patient with a single functioning kidney. Renal arteries 
can be occluded with atheroemboli, thromboemboli, in 
situ thrombosis, aortic dissection, or vasculitis. Athero-
embolic renal failure can occur spontaneously but most 
often is associated with recent aortic instrumentation. 
The emboli are cholesterol rich and lodge in medium 
and small renal arteries, leading to an eosinophil-rich 
inflammatory reaction. Patients with atheroembolic 
acute renal failure often have a normal urinalysis, but 
the urine may contain eosinophils and casts. The diag-
nosis can be confirmed by renal biopsy, but this is often 
unnecessary when other stigmata of atheroemboli are 
present (livedo reticularis, distal peripheral infarcts, 
eosinophilia). Renal artery thrombosis may lead to mild 
proteinuria and hematuria, whereas renal vein thrombo-
sis typically induces heavy proteinuria and hematuria. 
These vascular complications often require angiography 
for confirmation and are discussed in Chap. 18.
Diseases of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis and 
vasculitis) and the renal microvasculature (hemolytic-
uremic syndromes, thrombotic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura, and malignant hypertension) usually present with 
various combinations of glomerular injury: proteinuria, 
hematuria, reduced GFR, and alterations of sodium 
excretion that lead to hypertension, edema, and circu-
latory congestion (acute nephritic syndrome). These 
findings may occur as primary renal diseases or as renal 
manifestations of systemic diseases. The clinical set-
ting and other laboratory data help distinguish primary 
renal diseases from systemic diseases. The finding of RBC 
casts in the urine is an indication for early renal biopsy  
(Fig. 3-1) as the pathologic pattern has important impli-
cations for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Hema-
turia without RBC casts also can be an indication of glo-
merular disease; this evaluation is summarized in Fig. 3-2.
A detailed discussion of glomerulonephritis and dis-
eases of the microvasculature can be found in Chap. 17.
Oliguria and Anuria  Oliguria refers to a 24-h urine 
output <400 mL, and anuria is the complete absence 
of urine formation (<100 mL). Anuria can be caused 
by total urinary tract obstruction, total renal artery or 
vein occlusion, and shock (manifested by severe hypo-
tension and intense renal vasoconstriction). Cortical 
necrosis, ATN, and rapidly progressive glomerulone-
phritis occasionally cause anuria. Oliguria can accom-
pany any cause of acute renal failure and carries a
HEMATURIA
Proteinuria (>500 mg/24 h),
Dysmorphic RBCs or RBC casts
Pyuria, WBC casts
Urine culture
Urine eosinophils
Serologic and
  hematologic
  evaluation: blood
  cultures, anti-GBM
  antibody, ANCA,
  complement levels,
  cryoglobulins,
  hepatitis B and C
  serologies, VDRL,
  HIV, ASLO
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
Urine cytology
UA of family members
24-h urinary calcium/uric acid
IVP +/- Renal
ultrasound
As indicated: retrograde
  pyelography or
  arteriogram,
  or cyst aspiration
Cystoscopy
Urogenital biopsy
and evaluation
Renal CT scan
Renal biopsy of
mass/lesion
Follow periodic
  urinalysis
Renal biopsy
EVALUATION OF HEMATURIA
Figure 3-2 
Approach to the patient with hematuria. ANCA, antineu-
trophil cytoplasmic antibody; ASLO, antistreptolysin O; CT, 
computed tomography; GBM, glomerular basement mem-
brane; IVP, intravenous pyelography; RBC, red blood cell; 
UA, urinalysis; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; 
WBC, white blood cell.
more serious prognosis for renal recovery in all con-
ditions except prerenal azotemia. Nonoliguria refers 
to urine output >400 mL/d in patients with acute or 
chronic azotemia. With nonoliguric ATN, disturbances of 
potassium and hydrogen balance are less severe than in 
oliguric patients, and recovery to normal renal function 
is usually more rapid.
Abnormalities of the Urine
Proteinuria
The evaluation of proteinuria is shown schematically 
in Fig. 3-3 and typically is initiated after detection of 
proteinuria by dipstick examination. The dipstick mea-
surement detects only albumin and gives false-positive 
results when pH >7.0 and the urine is very concen-
trated or contaminated with blood. Because the dipstick 
relies on urinary albumin concentration, a very dilute 
urine may obscure significant proteinuria on dipstick 
Section II
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
28
examination. Quantification of urinary albumin on a 
spot urine sample (ideally from a first morning void) 
by measuring an albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR) is 
helpful in approximating a 24-h albumin excretion rate 
(AER) where ACR (mg/g) ≈AER (mg/24 h). Further-
more, proteinuria that is not predominantly albumin 
will be missed by dipstick screening. This is particularly 
important for the detection of Bence Jones proteins in 
the urine of patients with multiple myeloma. Tests to 
measure total urine protein concentration accurately 
rely on precipitation with sulfosalicylic or trichloracetic 
acid (Fig. 3-3).
The magnitude of proteinuria and the protein com-
position of the urine depend on the mechanism of 
renal injury that leads to protein losses. Both charge 
and size selectivity normally prevent virtually all plasma 
albumin, globulins, and other high-molecular-weight 
proteins from crossing the glomerular wall; how-
ever, if this barrier is disrupted, plasma proteins may 
leak into the urine (glomerular proteinuria; Fig. 3-3). 
Smaller proteins (<20 kDa) are freely filtered but are 
readily reabsorbed by the proximal tubule. Tradition-
ally, healthy individuals excrete <150 mg/d of total 
protein and <30 mg/d of albumin. However, even at 
albuminuria levels <30 mg/d, risk for progression to 
overt nephropathy or subsequent cardiovascular disease 
is increased. The remainder of the protein in the 
urine is secreted by the tubules (Tamm-Horsfall, IgA, 
and urokinase) or represents small amounts of filtered 
β2-microglobulin, apoproteins, enzymes, and peptide 
hormones. Another mechanism of proteinuria occurs 
when there is excessive production of an abnormal 
protein that exceeds the capacity of the tubule for reab-
sorption. This most commonly occurs with plasma cell 
dyscrasias, such as multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, and 
lymphomas that are associated with monoclonal pro-
duction of immunoglobulin light chains.
The normal glomerular endothelial cell forms a bar-
rier composed of pores of ∼100 nm that retain blood 
cells but offer little impediment to passage of most pro-
teins. The glomerular basement membrane traps most 
large proteins (>100 kDa), and the foot processes of 
epithelial cells (podocytes) cover the urinary side of the 
glomerular basement membrane and produce a series 
of narrow channels (slit diaphragms) to allow molecu-
lar passage of small solutes and water but not proteins. 
Some glomerular diseases, such as minimal-change dis-
ease, cause fusiown of glomerular epithelial cell foot 
processes, resulting in predominantly “selective” (Fig. 
3-3) loss of albumin. Other glomerular diseases can 
present with disruption of the basement membrane and 
slit diaphragms (e.g., by immune complex deposition), 
PROTEINURIA ON URINE DIPSTICK
Quantify by 24-h urinary excretion of protein and
albumin or first morning spot albumin-to-creatinine ratio
RBCs or RBC casts on urinalysis
In addition to disorders listed
under microalbuminuria consider
Myeloma-associated kidney
disease (check UPEP)  
  Intermittent proteinuria
  Postural proteinuria
  Congestive heart failure
  Fever
  Exercise
Go to
Fig. 3-2
Macroalbuminuria
300–3500 mg/d or
300–3500 mg/g
Microalbuminuria
30–300 mg/d or
30–300 mg/g
Nephrotic range
> 3500 mg/d or
> 3500 mg/g
+
Consider
  Early diabetes
  Essential hypertension
  Early stages of
    glomerulonephritis
    (especially with RBCs,
    RBC casts)
Nephrotic syndrome
  Diabetes
  Amyloidosis
  Minimal-change disease
  FSGS
  Membranous glomerulopathy
EVALUATION OF PROTEINURIA
Figure 3-3
Approach to the patient with proteinuria. Investigation of 
proteinuria is often initiated by a positive dipstick on routine 
urinalysis. Conventional dipsticks detect predominantly albu-
min and provide a semiquantitative assessment (trace, 1+, 
2+, or 3+), which is influenced by urinary concentration
as reflected by urine specific gravity (minimum <1.005, 
maximum 1.030). However, more exact determination of 
proteinuria should employ a spot morning protein/creatinine 
ratio (mg/g) or a 24-h urine collection (mg/24 h). FSGS, focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis; MPGN, membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis; RBC, red blood cell.
 
CHAPTER 3
Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities
29
resulting in losses of albumin and other plasma proteins. 
The fusion of foot processes causes increased pressure 
across the capillary basement membrane, resulting in areas 
with larger pore sizes. The combination of increased 
pressure and larger pores results in significant protein-
uria (“nonselective”; Fig. 3-3).
When the total daily excretion of protein is >3.5 g, 
hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and edema (nephrotic 
syndrome; Fig. 3-3) are often present as well. How-
ever, total daily urinary protein excretion >3.5 g can 
occur without the other features of the nephrotic syn-
drome in a variety of other renal diseases (Fig. 3-3). 
Plasma cell dyscrasias (multiple myeloma) can be associ-
ated with large amounts of excreted light chains in the 
urine, which may not be detected by dipstick. The light 
chains produced from these disorders are filtered by the 
glomerulus and overwhelm the reabsorptive capacity 
of the proximal tubule. Renal failure from these disor-
ders occurs through a variety of mechanisms, including 
tubule obstruction (cast nephropathy) and light chain 
deposition.
Hypoalbuminemia in nephrotic syndrome occurs 
through excessive urinary losses and increased proxi-
mal tubule catabolism of filtered albumin. Edema 
forms from renal sodium retention and reduced plasma 
oncotic pressure, which favors fluid movement from 
capillaries to interstitium. To compensate for the per-
ceived decrease in effective intravascular volume, acti-
vation of the renin-angiotensin system, stimulation of 
ADH, and activation of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem occur that promote continued renal salt and water 
reabsorption and progressive edema. The urinary loss 
of regulatory proteins and changes in hepatic synthesis 
contribute to the other manifestations of the nephrotic 
syndrome. A hypercoagulable state may arise from uri-
nary losses of antithrombin III, reduced serum levels of 
proteins S and C, hyperfibrinogenemia, and enhanced 
platelet aggregation. Hypercholesterolemia may be 
severe and results from increased hepatic lipoprotein 
synthesis. Loss of immunoglobulins contributes to an 
increased risk of infection. Many diseases (some listed in 
Fig. 3-3) and drugs can cause the nephrotic syndrome; a 
complete list can be found in Chap. 15.
Hematuria, Pyuria, and Casts
Isolated hematuria without proteinuria, other cells, or 
casts is often indicative of bleeding from the urinary 
tract. Hematuria is defined as two to five RBCs per 
high-power field (HPF) and can be detected by dip-
stick. A false-positive dipstick for hematuria (where no 
RBCs are seen on urine microscopy) may occur when 
myoglobinuria is present, often in the setting of rhabdo-
myolysis. Common causes of isolated hematuria include 
stones, neoplasms, tuberculosis, trauma, and prostatitis. 
Gross hematuria with blood clots is usually not an 
intrinsic renal process; rather, it suggests a postrenal 
source in the urinary collecting system. Evaluation of 
patients presenting with microscopic hematuria is out-
lined in Fig. 3-2. A single urinalysis with hematuria is 
common and can result from menstruation, viral illness, 
allergy, exercise, or mild trauma. Persistent or signifi-
cant hematuria (>3 RBCs/HPF on three urinalyses, a 
single urinalysis with >100 RBCs, or gross hematuria) 
is associated with significant renal or urologic lesions in 
9.1% of cases. Even patients who are chronically anti-
coagulated should be investigated as outlined in Fig. 3-2. 
The suspicion for urogenital neoplasms in patients with 
isolated painless hematuria and nondysmorphic RBCs 
increases with age. Neoplasms are rare in the pediat-
ric population, and isolated hematuria is more likely 
to be “idiopathic” or associated with a congenital 
anomaly. Hematuria with pyuria and bacteriuria is typi-
cal of infection and should be treated with antibiotics 
after appropriate cultures. Acute cystitis or urethritis in 
women can cause gross hematuria. Hypercalciuria and 
hyperuricosuria are also risk factors for unexplained iso-
lated hematuria in both children and adults. In some of 
these patients (50–60%), reducing calcium and uric acid 
excretion through dietary interventions can eliminate 
the microscopic hematuria.
Isolated microscopic hematuria can be a manifestation 
of glomerular diseases. The RBCs of glomerular ori-
gin are often dysmorphic when examined by phase-
contrast microscopy. Irregular shapes of RBCs may also 
result from pH and osmolarity changes produced along 
the distal nephron. Observer variability in detecting 
dysmorphic RBCs is common. The most common 
etiologies of isolated glomerular hematuria are IgA 
nephropathy, hereditary nephritis, and thin basement 
membrane disease. IgA nephropathy and hereditary 
nephritis can lead to episodic gross hematuria. A family 
history of renal failure is often present in patients with 
hereditary nephritis, and patients with thin basement 
membrane disease often have other family members 
with microscopic hematuria. A renal biopsy is needed 
for the definitive diagnosis of these disorders, which are 
discussed in more detail in Chap. 15. Hematuria with 
dysmorphic RBCs, RBC casts, and protein excretion 
>500 mg/d is virtually diagnostic of glomerulonephritis. 
RBC casts form as RBCs that enter the tubule fluid 
become trapped in a cylindrical mold of gelled Tamm-
Horsfall protein. Even in the absence of azotemia, these 
patients should undergo serologic evaluation and renal 
biopsy as outlined in Fig. 3-2.
Isolated pyuria is unusual since inflammatory reac-
tions in the kidney or collecting system also are associ-
ated with hematuria. The presence of bacteria suggests 
infection, and white blood cell casts with bacteria are 
indicative of pyelonephritis. White blood cells and/
or white blood cell casts also may be seen in acute glo-
merulonephritis as well as in tubulointerstitial processes 
Section II
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
30
such as interstitial nephritis and transplant rejection. 
In chronic renal diseases, degenerated cellular casts 
called waxy casts can be seen in the urine. Broad casts 
are thought to arise in the dilated tubules of enlarged 
nephrons that have undergone compensatory hyper-
trophy in response to reduced renal mass (i.e., chronic 
renal failure). A mixture of broad casts typically seen 
with chronic renal failure together with cellular casts 
and RBCs may be seen in smoldering processes such as 
chronic glomerulonephritis.
Abnormalities of Urine Volume
The volume of urine produced varies with the fluid 
intake, renal function, and physiologic demands of the 
individual. See “Azotemia,” above, for discussion of 
decreased (oliguria) or absent urine production (anuria). 
The physiology of water formation and renal water 
conservation are discussed in Chap. 2.
Polyuria
By history, it is often difficult for patients to distin-
guish urinary frequency (often of small volumes) from 
true polyuria (>3 L/d), and a quantification of volume 
by 24-h urine collection may be needed (Fig. 3-4). 
Polyuria results from two potential mechanisms: 
(1) excretion of nonabsorbable solutes (such as glu-
cose) or (2) excretion of water (usually from a defect 
in ADH production or renal responsiveness). To dis-
tinguish a solute diuresis from a water diuresis and to 
determine if the diuresis is appropriate for the clini-
cal circumstances, a urine osmolality is measured. The 
average person excretes between 600 and 800 mosmol 
of solutes per day, primarily as urea and electrolytes. 
If the urine output is >3 L/d and the urine is dilute 
(<250 mosmol/L), total mosmol excretion is nor-
mal and a water diuresis is present. This circumstance 
could arise from polydipsia, inadequate secretion of 
vasopressin (central diabetes insipidus), or failure of renal 
tubules to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus). If the urine volume is >3 L/d and 
urine osmolality is >300 mosmol/L, a solute diuresis is 
clearly present and a search for the responsible solute(s) 
is mandatory.
Excessive filtration of a poorly reabsorbed solute such 
as glucose, mannitol, or urea can depress reabsorption 
of NaCl and water in the proximal tubule and lead to 
enhanced excretion in the urine. Poorly controlled 
diabetes mellitus with glucosuria is the most common 
cause of a solute diuresis, leading to volume depletion 
and serum hypertonicity. Since the urine sodium con-
centration is less than that of blood, more water than 
sodium is lost, causing hypernatremia and hypertonicity. 
Common iatrogenic solute diuresis occurs from man-
nitol administration, radiocontrast media, and high-
protein feedings (enterally or parenterally), leading to 
increased urea production and excretion. Less com-
monly, excessive sodium loss may result from cystic 
renal diseases or Bartter’s syndrome or during the 
course of a tubulointerstitial process (such as resolv-
ing ATN). In these so-called salt-wasting disorders, the 
tubule damage results in direct impairment of sodium 
reabsorption and indirectly reduces the responsiveness 
of the tubule to aldosterone. Usually, the sodium losses 
are mild, and the obligatory urine output is <2 L/d 
(resolving ATN and postobstructive diuresis are excep-
tions and may be associated with significant natriuresis 
and polyuria).
Formation of large volumes of dilute urine is usually 
due to polydipsic states or diabetes insipidus. Primary 
polydipsia can result from habit, psychiatric disorders, 
neurologic lesions, or medications. During deliber-
ate polydipsia, extracellular fluid volume is normal or 
expanded and plasma vasopressin levels are reduced 
POLYURIA (>3 L/24 h)
Urine osmolality
<250 mosmol
History, low
  serum sodium
Water
  deprivation
  test or
  ADH level
Solute diuresis
    Glucose, mannitol,
      radiocontrast, urea
      (from high protein
      feeding), 
      medullary cystic
      diseases, resolving ATN,
      or obstruction, diuretics
Primary polydipsia
  Psychogenic
  Hypothalamic disease
  Drugs (thioridazine,
    chlorpromazine,
    anticholinergic agents)
Central DI (vasopressin sensitive)
  posthypophysectomy, trauma,
  supra- or intrasellar tumor/cyst
  histiocystosis or granuloma,
  encroachment by aneurysm,
  Sheehan's syndrome, infection,
  Guillain-Barré, fat embolus,
  empty sella
Nephrogenic DI (vasopressin insensitive)
Acquired tubular diseases: pyelonephritis, analgesic nephropathy,
  multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, obstruction, sarcoidosis,
  hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, Sjögren’s syndrome, sickle
  cell anemia
Drugs or toxins: lithium, demeclocycline, methoxyflurane, ethanol,
  diphenylhydantoin, propoxyphene, amphotericin
Congenital: hereditary, polycystic or medullary cystic disease
>300 mosmol
EVALUATION OF POLYURIA
Diabetes insipidus (DI)
Figure 3-4
Approach to the patient with polyuria. ADH, antidiuretic 
hormone; ATN, acute tubular necrosis.
 
CHAPTER 3
Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities
31
because serum osmolality tends to be near the lower 
limits of normal. Urine osmolality should also be maxi-
mally dilute at 50 mosmol/L.
Central diabetes insipidus may be idiopathic in origin 
or secondary to a variety of hypothalamic conditions, 
including posthypophysectomy or trauma or neoplastic, 
inflammatory, vascular, or infectious hypothalamic dis-
eases. Idiopathic central diabetes insipidus is associated 
with selective destruction of the vasopressin-secreting 
neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei 
and can be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait or 
occur spontaneously. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
can occur in a variety of clinical situations, as summa-
rized in Fig. 3-4.
A plasma vasopressin level is recommended as the best 
method for distinguishing between central and nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus. Alternatively, a water depri-
vation test plus exogenous vasopressin may distinguish 
primary polydipsia from central and nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus. 
 Agnes B. Fogo  I   Eric G. Neilson 
32
 Key diagnostic features of selected diseases in renal 
biopsy are illustrated, with light, immunoﬂ uorescence, 
 ATLAS OF URINARY SEDIMENTS AND 
RENAL BIOPSIES 
 CHAPTER 4 
 Figure 4-1 
 Minimal-change disease. In minimal-change disease, light microscopy is unremarkable (A), while electron microscopy (B) reveals 
podocyte injury evidenced by complete foot process effacement.  (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.) 
A
B
 Figure 4-2 
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). There is a 
well-defi ned segmental increase in matrix and obliteration of 
capillary loops, the sine qua non of segmental sclerosis not 
otherwise specifi ed (nos) type.  (EGN/UPenn Collection.) 
and electron microscopic images. Common urinalysis 
ﬁ ndings are also documented. 
 Figure 4-3 
 Collapsing glomerulopathy. There is segmental collapse of the 
glomerular capillary loops and overlying podocyte hyperplasia. 
This lesion may be idiopathic or associated with HIV infection and 
has a particularly poor prognosis.  (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.) 
33
 
CHAPTER 4
Atlas of Urinary Sediments and Renal Biopsies 
Figure 4-4
Hilar variant of FSGS. There is segmental sclerosis of the 
glomerular tuft at the vascular pole with associated hyalino-
sis, also present in the afferent arteriole (arrows). This lesion 
often occurs as a secondary response when nephron mass 
is lost due to, e.g., scarring from other conditions. Patients 
usually have less proteinuria and less steroid response than 
FSGS, nos type. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-5
Tip lesion variant of FSGS. There is segmental sclerosis of 
the glomerular capillary loops at the proximal tubular outlet 
(arrow). This lesion has a better prognosis than other types of 
FSGS. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-6
Postinfectious (poststreptococcal) glomerulonephritis. The 
glomerular tuft shows proliferative changes with numerous 
PMNs, with a crescentic reaction in severe cases (A). These 
deposits localize in the mesangium and along the capil-
lary wall in a subepithelial pattern and stain dominantly for 
C3 and to a lesser extent for IgG (B). Subepithelial hump-
shaped deposits are seen by electron microscopy (C). (ABF/
Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
C
34
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Figure 4-7
Membranous glomerulopathy. Membranous glomerulopa-
thy is due to subepithelial deposits, with resulting basement 
membrane reaction, resulting in the appearance of spike-
like projections on silver stain (A). The deposits are directly 
visualized by fluorescent anti-IgG, revealing diffuse granu-
lar capillary loop staining (B). By electron microscopy, the 
subepithelial location of the deposits and early surrounding 
basement membrane reaction is evident, with overlying foot 
process effacement (C). (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
C
Figure 4-8
IgA nephropathy. There is variable mesangial expansion due 
to mesangial deposits, with some cases also showing endo-
capillary proliferation or segmental sclerosis (A). By immuno-
fluorescence, mesangial IgA deposits are evident (B). (ABF/
Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-9
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. There is mesan-
gial expansion and endocapillary proliferation with cellular 
interposition in response to subendothelial deposits, result-
ing in the “tram-track” of duplication of glomerular basement 
membrane. (EGN/UPenn Collection.)
35
 
CHAPTER 4
Atlas of Urinary Sediments and Renal Biopsies 
Figure 4-10
Dense deposit disease (membranoproliferative glomer-
ulonephritis type II). By light microscopy, there is a mem-
branoproliferative pattern. By electron microscopy, there is 
a dense transformation of the glomerular basement mem-
brane with round, globular deposits within the mesangium. 
By immunofluorescence, only C3 staining is usually present. 
(ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-11
Mixed proliferative and membranous glomerulonephritis. 
This specimen shows pink subepithelial deposits with spike 
reaction, and the “tram-track” sign of reduplication of glo-
merular basement membrane, resulting from subendothelial 
deposits, as may be seen in mixed membranous and prolifer-
ative lupus nephritis (ISN/RPS classes V and IV). (EGN/UPenn 
Collection.)
A
B
C
Figure 4-12
Lupus nephritis. Proliferative lupus nephritis, ISN/RPS 
class III (focal) or IV (diffuse), manifests as endocapillary prolifer-
ation, which may result in segmental necrosis due to deposits, 
particularly in the subendothelial area (A). By immunofluores-
cence, chunky irregular mesangial and capillary loop deposits 
are evident, with some of the peripheral loop deposits having a 
smooth, molded outer contour due to their subendothelial loca-
tion. These deposits typically stain for all three immunoglobulins 
(IgG, IgA, IgM) and both C3 and C1q (B). By electron micros-
copy, subendothelial, mesangial, and rare subepithelial dense 
immune complex deposits are evident, along with extensive 
foot process effacement (C). (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
36
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Figure 4-13
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s). This pauci-
immune necrotizing crescentic glomerulonephritis shows 
numerous breaks in the glomerular basement membrane 
with associated segmental fibrinoid necrosis, and a crescent 
formed by proliferation of the parietal epithelium. Note that 
the uninvolved segment of the glomerulus (at ~5 o’clock) 
shows no evidence of proliferation or immune complexes. 
(ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-14
Anti-GBM antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis. There is 
segmental necrosis with a break of the glomerular basement 
membrane and a cellular crescent (A), and immunofluorescence 
for IgG shows linear staining of the glomerular basement mem-
brane with a small crescent at ~1 o’clock (B). (ABF/Vanderbilt 
Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-15
Amyloidosis. Amyloidosis shows amorphous, acellular expan-
sion of the mesangium, with material often also infiltrating glo-
merular basement membranes, vessels, and in the interstitium, 
with apple-green birefringence by polarized congo red stain (A).
the deposits are composed of randomly organized 9- to 11-nm
 fibrils by electron microscopy (B). (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
37
 
CHAPTER 4
Atlas of Urinary Sediments and Renal Biopsies 
A
B
C
Figure 4-16
Light chain deposition disease. There is mesangial expan-
sion, often nodular by light microscopy (A), with immuno-
fluorescence showing monoclonal staining, more commonly 
with kappa than lambda light chain, of tubules (B) and glo-
merular tufts. By electron microscopy (C), the deposits show 
an amorphous granular appearance and line the inside of 
the glomerular basement membrane and are also found 
along the tubular basement membranes. (ABF/Vanderbilt 
Collection.)
Figure 4-17
Light chain cast nephropathy (myeloma kidney). Monoclo-
nal light chains precipitate in tubules and result in a syncytial 
giant cell reaction surrounding the casts, and a surround-
ing chronic interstitial nephritis with tubulointerstitial fibrosis. 
(ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-18
Fabry’s disease. Due to deficiency of α-galactosidase, there 
is abnormal accumulation of glycolipids, resulting in foamy 
podocytes by light microscopy (A). These deposits can be 
directly visualized by electron microscopy (B), where the gly-
cosphingolipid appears as whorled so-called myeloid bodies, 
particularly in the podocytes. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
38
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
A
B
Figure 4-19
Alport’s syndrome and thin glomerular basement membrane
lesion. In Alport’s syndrome, there is irregular thinning alternat-
ing with thickened so-called basket-weaving abnormal orga-
nization of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) (A). 
In benign familial hematuria, or in early cases of Alport’s 
syndrome or female carriers, only extensive thinning of the 
GBM is seen by electron microscopy (B). (ABF/Vanderbilt 
Collection.)
A
B
C
Figure 4-20
Diabetic nephropathy. In the earliest stage of diabetic 
nephropathy, only mild mesangial increase and prominent 
glomerular basement membranes (confirmed to be thick-
ened by electron microscopy) are present (A). In slightly more 
advanced stages, more marked mesangial expansion with 
early nodule formation develops, with evident arteriolar hya-
line (B). In established diabetic nephropathy, there is nodular 
mesangial expansion, so-called Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules, 
with increased mesangial matrix and cellularity, microaneu-
rysm formation in the glomerulus on the left, and prominent 
glomerular basement membranes without evidence of immune 
deposits and arteriolar hyalinosis of both afferent and efferent 
arterioles (C). (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
39
 
CHAPTER 4
Atlas of Urinary Sediments and Renal Biopsies 
Figure 4-21
Arterionephrosclerosis. Hypertension-associated injury often 
manifests extensive global sclerosis of glomeruli, with accom-
panying and proportional tubulointerstitial fibrosis and pericap-
sular fibrosis, and there may be segmental sclerosis (A). The 
vessels show disproportionately severe changes of intimal 
fibrosis, medial hypertrophy, and arteriolar hyaline deposits (B). 
(ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-22
Cholesterol emboli. Cholesterol emboli cause cleft-like spaces 
where the lipid has been extracted during processing, with 
smooth outer contours, and surrounding fibrotic and mononu-
clear cell reaction in these arterioles. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-23
Hemolytic uremic syndrome. There are characteristic intra-
glomerular fibrin thrombi, with a chunky pink appearance 
(thrombotic microangiopathy). The remaining portion of the 
capillary tuft shows corrugation of the glomerular basement 
membrane due to ischemia. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-24
Progressive systemic sclerosis. Acutely, there is fibrinoid 
necrosis of interlobular and larger vessels, with intervening nor-
mal vessels and ischemic change in the glomeruli (A). Chroni-
cally, this injury leads to intimal proliferation, the so-called 
onion-skinning appearance (B). (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
40
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Figure 4-25
Acute pyelonephritis. There are characteristic intratubu-
lar plugs and casts of PMNs with inflammation extending 
into the surrounding interstitium, and accompanying tubular 
injury. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-26
Acute tubular injury. There is extensive flattening of the 
tubular epithelium and loss of the brush border, with mild 
interstitial edema, characteristic of acute tubular injury due to 
ischemia. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-27
Acute interstitial nephritis. There is extensive interstitial lymphoplasmocytic infiltrate with mild edema and associated tubular
injury (A), which is frequently associated with interstitial eosinophils (B) when caused by a drug hypersensitivity reaction. 
(ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
A
B
Figure 4-28
Oxalosis. Calcium oxalate crystals have caused extensive tubular injury, with flattening and regeneration of tubular epithelium 
(A). Crystals are well visualized as sheaves when viewed under polarized light (B). (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
41
 
CHAPTER 4
Atlas of Urinary Sediments and Renal Biopsies 
Figure 4-29
Acute phosphate nephropathy. There is extensive acute 
tubular injury with intratubular nonpolarizable calcium phos-
phate crystals. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-30
Sarcoidosis. There is chronic interstitial nephritis with numer-
ous, confluent, non-necrotizing granulomas. The glomeruli are 
unremarkable, but there is moderate tubular atrophy and inter-
stitial fibrosis. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-31
Hyaline cast. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-32
Coarse granular cast. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-33
Fine granular casts. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-34
Red blood cell cast. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
42
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Figure 4-35
WBC cast. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-36
Triple phosphate crystals. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-37
“Maltese cross” formation in an oval fat body. (ABF/
Vanderbilt Collection.)
Figure 4-38
Uric acid crystals. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.)
 Thomas D. DuBose, Jr. 
43
 NoRMal acid-base HoMeostasis 
 Systemic arterial pH is maintained between 7.35 and 
7.45 by extracellular and intracellular chemical buffering 
together with respiratory and renal regulatory mecha-
nisms. The control of arterial CO 2 tension (Pa co 2 ) by the 
central nervous system (CNS) and respiratory systems 
and the control of the plasma bicarbonate by the kid-
neys stabilize the arterial pH by excretion or retention 
of acid or alkali. The metabolic and respiratory com-
ponents that regulate systemic pH are described by the 
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation: 
pH
HCO
Paco
=
+
×
−
6 1
0 0301
3
2
.
log
.
 Under most circumstances, CO 2 production and 
excretion are matched, and the usual steady-state Pa co 2 is 
maintained at 40 mmHg. Underexcretion of CO 2 pro-
duces hypercapnia, and overexcretion causes hypocap-
nia. Nevertheless, production and excretion are again 
matched at a new steady-state Pa co 2 . Therefore, the 
Pa co 2 is regulated primarily by neural respiratory factors 
and is not subject to regulation by the rate of CO 2 pro-
duction. Hypercapnia is usually the result of hypoven-
tilation rather than of increased CO 2 production. 
Increases or decreases in Pa co 2 represent derangements 
of neural respiratory control or are due to compensa-
tory changes in response to a primary alteration in the 
plasma [HCO 3 − ]. 
 The kidneys regulate plasma [HCO 3 − ] through three 
main processes: (1) “reabsorption” of fi ltered HCO 3 − , 
(2) formation of titratable acid, and (3) excretion of 
NH 4 + in the urine. The kidney fi lters ∼4000 mmol 
of HCO 3 − per day. To reabsorb the fi ltered load 
of HCO 3 − , the renal tubules must therefore secrete 
4000 mmol of hydrogen ions. Between 80 and 90% of 
 ACIDOSIS AND ALKALOSIS 
 cHapteR 5 
HCO 3 − is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. The dis-
tal nephron reabsorbs the remainder and secretes H +
to defend systemic pH. While this quantity of protons, 
40–60 mmol/d, is small, it must be secreted to prevent 
chronic positive H + balance and metabolic acidosis. 
This quantity of secreted protons is represented in the 
urine as titratable acid and NH 4 + . Metabolic acidosis in 
the face of normal renal function increases NH 4 + pro-
duction and excretion. NH 4 + production and excretion 
are impaired in chronic renal failure, hyperkalemia, and 
renal tubular acidosis. 
 diaGNosis oF GeNeRal types 
oF distURbaNces 
 The most common clinical disturbances are simple 
acid-base disorders, i.e., metabolic acidosis or alkalosis 
or respiratory acidosis or alkalosis. Because compensa-
tion is not complete, the pH is abnormal in simple dis-
turbances. More complicated clinical situations can give 
rise to mixed acid-base disturbances. 
 siMPle Acid-BAse disorders 
 Primary respiratory disturbances (primary changes in 
Pa co 2 ) invoke compensatory metabolic responses (sec-
ondary changes in [HCO 3 − ]), and primary metabolic 
disturbances elicit predictable compensatory respira-
tory responses (secondary changes in Pa co 2 ). Physiologic 
compensation can be predicted from the relationships 
displayed in  Table 5-1 . Metabolic acidosis due to an 
increase in endogenous acids (e.g., ketoacidosis) lowers 
extracellular fl uid [HCO 3 − ] and decreases extracellular 
pH. This stimulates the medullary chemoreceptors to 
increase ventilation and to return the ratio of [HCO 3 − ] 
to Pa co 2 , and thus pH, toward, but not to, normal.
44
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
The degree of respiratory compensation expected 
in a simple form of metabolic acidosis can be pre-
dicted from the relationship Paco2 = (1.5 × [HCO3
−]) 
+ 8 ± 2. Thus, a patient with metabolic acidosis and 
[HCO3
−] of 12 mmol/L would be expected to have a 
Paco2 between 24 and 28 mmHg. Values for Paco2 <24 
or >28 mmHg define a mixed disturbance (metabolic 
acidosis and respiratory alkalosis or metabolic alkalosis 
and respiratory acidosis, respectively). Another way to 
judge the appropriateness of the response in [HCO3
−] 
or Paco2 is to use an acid-base nomogram (Fig. 5-1). 
While the shaded areas of the nomogram show the 95% 
confidence limits for normal compensation in simple 
disturbances, finding acid-base values within the shaded 
area does not necessarily rule out a mixed disturbance. 
Imposition of one disorder over another may result in 
values lying within the area of a third. Thus, the nomo-
gram, while convenient, is not a substitute for the 
equations in Table 5-1.
Mixed Acid-Base Disorders
Mixed acid-base disorders—defined as independently 
coexisting disorders, not merely compensatory responses— 
are often seen in patients in critical care units and 
can lead to dangerous extremes of pH (Table 5-2). 
A patient with diabetic ketoacidosis (metabolic aci-
dosis) may develop an independent respiratory prob-
lem (e.g., pneumonia) leading to respiratory acidosis 
or alkalosis. Patients with underlying pulmonary disease 
[e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)] 
may not respond to metabolic acidosis with an appro-
priate ventilatory response because of insufficient respi-
ratory reserve. Such imposition of respiratory acidosis 
on metabolic acidosis can lead to severe acidemia. 
When metabolic acidosis and metabolic alkalosis coex-
ist in the same patient, the pH may be normal or near 
normal. When the pH is normal, an elevated anion gap 
(AG; see below) reliably denotes the presence of an AG 
metabolic acidosis. A discrepancy in the ΔAG (prevail­ing 
Table 5-1 
Prediction of Compensatory Responses on 
Simple Acid-Base Disturbances and Pattern 
of Changes
Disorder
Prediction of 
Compensation
Range of Values
pH
HCO3
−
Paco2
Metabolic 
acidosis
Paco2 = (1.5 × HCO3
−) + 
8 ± 2
Low
Low
Low
or
Paco2 will ↓ 1.25 
mmHg per mmol/L ↓ 
in [HCO3
−]
or
Paco2 = [HCO3
−] + 15
Metabolic 
alkalosis
Paco2 will ↑ 0.75 mmHg 
per mmol/L ↑ in 
[HCO3
−]
High
High
High
or
Paco2 will ↑ 6 mmHg 
per 10 mmol/L ↑ in 
[HCO3
−]
or
Paco2 = [HCO3
−] + 15
Respiratory 
alkalosis
High
Low
Low
  Acute
[HCO3
−] will ↓ 0.2 
mmol/L per mmHg ↓ 
in Paco2
  Chronic
[HCO3
−] will ↓ 0.4 
mmol/L per mmHg ↓ 
in Paco2
Respiratory 
acidosis
Low
High
High
  Acute
[HCO3
−] will ↑ 0.1 
mmol/L per mmHg ↑ 
in Paco2
  Chronic
[HCO3
−] will ↑ 0.4 
mmol/L per mmHg ↑ 
in Paco2
Arterial blood [H+] (nmol/L)
100 90 80 70 60
50
40
30
20
60
56
52
48
44
40
36
32
28
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
Arterial blood, pH
120
100 90 80
70
60
50
40
110
35
30
25
20
15
10
Normal
PCO2(mmHg)
Acute
respiratory
alkalosis
Acute
respiratory
acidosis
Chronic
respiratory
alkalosis
Chronic
respiratory
acidosis
Metabolic
acidosis
Metabolic
alkalosis
Arterial plasma [HCO3] (mmol/L)
–
Figure 5-1
Acid-base nomogram. Shown are the 90% confidence lim-
its (range of values) of the normal respiratory and metabolic 
compensations for primary acid-base disturbances. (From 
TD DuBose Jr: Acid-base disorders, in Brenner and Rector’s 
The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner [ed]. Philadelphia Saunders, 
2008, pp 505-546; used with permission.)
45
 
CHAPTER 5
Acidosis and Alkalosis
minus normal AG) and the ΔHCO3
− (normal minus 
prevailing HCO3
−) indicates the presence of a mixed 
high-gap acidosis—metabolic alkalosis (see example 
below). A diabetic patient with ketoacidosis may have 
renal dysfunction resulting in simultaneous metabolic 
acidosis. Patients who have ingested an overdose of drug 
combinations such as sedatives and salicylates may have 
mixed disturbances as a result of the acid-base response 
to the individual drugs (metabolic acidosis mixed with 
respiratory acidosis or respiratory alkalosis, respectively). 
Triple acid-base disturbances are more complex. For 
example, patients with metabolic acidosis due to alcoholic 
ketoacidosis may develop metabolic alkalosis due to 
vomiting and superimposed respiratory alkalosis due 
to the hyperventilation of hepatic dysfunction or alcohol 
withdrawal.
Table 5-2 
Examples of Mixed Acid-Base Disorders
Mixed Metabolic and Respiratory
Metabolic acidosis—respiratory alkalosis
Key: High- or normal-AG metabolic acidosis; prevailing 
Paco2 below predicted value (Table 5-1)
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl−, 106; HCO3
−, 14; AG, 20; 
Paco2, 24; pH, 7.39 (lactic acidosis, sepsis in ICU)
Metabolic acidosis—respiratory acidosis
Key: High- or normal-AG metabolic acidosis; prevailing 
Paco2 above predicted value (Table 5-1)
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl−, 102; HCO3
−, 18; AG, 20; 
Paco2, 38; pH, 7.30 (severe pneumonia, pulmonary edema)
Metabolic alkalosis—respiratory alkalosis
Key: Paco2 does not increase as predicted; pH higher than 
expected
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl−, 91; HCO3
−, 33; AG, 16; 
Paco2, 38; pH, 7.55 (liver disease and diuretics)
Metabolic alkalosis—respiratory acidosis
Key: Paco2 higher than predicted; pH normal
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 3.5; Cl−, 88; HCO3
−, 42; AG, 10; 
Paco2, 67; pH, 7.42 (COPD and diuretics)
Mixed Metabolic Disorders
Metabolic acidosis—metabolic alkalosis
Key: Only detectable with high-AG acidosis; ΔAG >> 
ΔHCO3
−
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 3.0; Cl−, 95; HCO3
−, 25; AG, 20; 
Paco2, 40; pH, 7.42 (uremia with vomiting)
Metabolic acidosis—metabolic acidosis
Key: Mixed high-AG—normal-AG acidosis; ΔHCO3
− 
accounted for by combined change in ΔAG and ΔCl−
Example: Na+, 135; K+, 3.0; Cl−, 110; HCO3
−, 10; AG, 15; 
Paco2, 25; pH, 7.20 (diarrhea and lactic acidosis, toluene 
toxicity, treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis)
Abbreviations: AG, anion gap; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease; ICU, intensive care unit.
approach to the 
patient	
Acid-Base Disorders
A stepwise approach to the diagnosis of acid-base disor-
ders follows (Table 5-3). Care should be taken when mea-
suring blood gases to obtain the arterial blood sample 
without using excessive heparin. Blood for electrolytes 
and arterial blood gases should be drawn simultaneously 
prior to therapy, because an increase in [HCO3
−] occurs 
with metabolic alkalosis and respiratory acidosis. Con-
versely, a decrease in [HCO3
−] occurs in metabolic acidosis 
and respiratory alkalosis. In the determination of arterial 
blood gases by the clinical laboratory, both pH and Paco2 
are measured, and the [HCO3
−] is calculated from the 
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. This calculated value 
should be compared with the measured [HCO3
−] (total 
CO2) on the electrolyte panel. These two values should 
agree within 2 mmol/L. If they do not, the values may not 
have been drawn simultaneously, a laboratory error may 
be present, or an error could have been made in calculat-
ing the [HCO3
−]. After verifying the blood acid-base val-
ues, the precise acid-base disorder can then be identified.
Calculate the Anion Gap  All evaluations 
of acid-base disorders should include a simple calcula-
tion of the AG; it represents those unmeasured anions 
in plasma (normally 10 to 12 mmol/L) and is calcu-
lated as follows: AG = Na+ − (Cl− + HCO3
−). The unmea-
sured anions include anionic proteins, (e.g., albumin), 
phosphate, sulfate, and organic anions. When acid 
anions, such as acetoacetate and lactate, accumulate 
in extracellular fluid, the AG increases, causing a high-
AG acidosis. An increase in the AG is most often due 
to an increase in unmeasured anions and, less com-
monly, is due to a decrease in unmeasured cations (cal-
cium, magnesium, potassium). In addition, the AG may 
increase with an increase in anionic albumin, because 
of either increased albumin concentration or alkalo-
sis, which alters albumin charge. A decrease in the AG 
Table 5-3 
Steps in Acid-Base Diagnosis
1.  Obtain arterial blood gas (ABG) and electrolytes  
simultaneously.
2.  Compare [HCO3
−] on ABG and electrolytes to verify 
accuracy.
3.  Calculate anion gap (AG).
4.  Know four causes of high-AG acidosis (ketoacidosis, 
lactic acid acidosis, renal failure, and toxins).
5.  Know two causes of hyperchloremic or nongap acidosis 
(bicarbonate loss from GI tract, renal tubular acidosis).
6.  Estimate compensatory response (Table 5-1).
7.  Compare ΔAG and ΔHCO3
−.
8.  Compare change in [Cl−] with change in [Na+].
46
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
be normal because of catecholamine release. Both periph-
eral arterial vasodilation and central venoconstriction can 
be present; the decrease in central and pulmonary vascular 
compliance predisposes to pulmonary edema with even 
minimal volume overload. CNS function is depressed, 
with headache, lethargy, stupor, and, in some cases, even 
coma. Glucose intolerance may also occur.
There are two major categories of clinical metabolic 
acidosis: high-AG and normal-AG, or hyperchloremic, 
acidosis (Table 5-3 and Table 5-4).
Treatment	
Metabolic Acidosis
Treatment of metabolic acidosis with alkali should 
be reserved for severe acidemia except when the 
patient has no “potential HCO3
−” in plasma. Poten-
tial [HCO3
−] can be estimated from the increment (Δ) 
in the AG (ΔAG = patient’s AG – 10). It must be deter-
mined if the acid anion in plasma is metabolizable (i.e., 
β-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, and lactate) or non-
metabolizable (anions that accumulate in chronic renal 
failure and after toxin ingestion). The latter requires 
return of renal function to replenish the [HCO3
−] deficit, 
a slow and often unpredictable process. Consequently, 
patients with a normal AG acidosis (hyperchloremic 
acidosis), a slightly elevated AG (mixed hyperchloremic 
and AG acidosis), or an AG attributable to a nonmetabo-
lizable anion in the face of renal failure should receive 
alkali therapy, either PO (NaHCO3 or Shohl’s solution) or 
IV (NaHCO3), in an amount necessary to slowly increase 
the plasma [HCO3
−] into the 20–22 mmol/L range.
Controversy exists, however, in regard to the use of 
alkali in patients with a pure AG acidosis owing to accu-
mulation of a metabolizable organic acid anion (keto-
acidosis or lactic acidosis). In general, severe acidosis  
(pH <7.10) warrants the IV administration of 50–100 meq  
of NaHCO3 over 30–45 min during the initial 1–2 h of 
therapy. Provision of such modest quantities of alkali 
in this situation seems to provide an added measure of 
safety, but it is essential to monitor plasma electrolytes 
during the course of therapy, because the [K+] may decline 
as pH rises. The goal is to increase the [HCO3
−] to 10 meq/L 
and the pH to 7.20, not to increase these values to normal.
Table 5-4
Causes of High Anion–Gap Metabolic Acidosis
Lactic acidosis
Ketoacidosis
  Diabetic
  Alcoholic
  Starvation
Toxins
  Ethylene glycol
  Methanol
  Salicylates
  Propylene glycol
  Pyroglutamic acid
Renal failure (acute and chronic)
can be due to (1) an increase in unmeasured cations;  
(2) the addition to the blood of abnormal cations, such 
as lithium (lithium intoxication) or cationic immuno-
globulins (plasma cell dyscrasias); (3) a reduction in the 
major plasma anion albumin concentration (nephrotic 
syndrome); (4) a decrease in the effective anionic charge 
on albumin by acidosis; or (5) hyperviscosity and severe 
hyperlipidemia, which can lead to an underestimation 
of sodium and chloride concentrations. A fall in serum 
albumin by 1 g/dL from the normal value (4.5 g/dL)  
decreases the AG by 2.5 meq/L. Know the common 
causes of a high-AG acidosis (Table 5-3).
In the face of a normal serum albumin, a high AG is 
usually due to non–chloride containing acids that con-
tain inorganic (phosphate, sulfate), organic (ketoacids, 
lactate, uremic organic anions), exogenous (salicylate 
or ingested toxins with organic acid production), or 
unidentified anions. The high AG is significant even if an 
additional acid-base disorder is superimposed to mod-
ify the [HCO3
−] independently. Simultaneous metabolic 
acidosis of the high-AG variety plus either chronic respi-
ratory acidosis or metabolic alkalosis represents such a 
situation in which [HCO3
−] may be normal or even high 
(Table 5-3). Compare the change in [HCO3
−] (ΔHCO3
−) 
and the change in the AG (ΔAG).
Similarly, normal values for [HCO3
−], Paco2, and pH do 
not ensure the absence of an acid-base disturbance. 
For instance, an alcoholic who has been vomiting may 
develop a metabolic alkalosis with a pH of 7.55, Paco2 of 47 
mmHg, [HCO3
−] of 40 mmol/L, [Na+] of 135, [Cl−] of 80, and 
[K+] of 2.8. If such a patient were then to develop a super-
imposed alcoholic ketoacidosis with a β-hydroxybutyrate 
concentration of 15 mM, arterial pH would fall to 7.40, 
[HCO3
−] to 25 mmol/L, and the Paco2 to 40 mmHg. 
Although these blood gases are normal, the AG is elevated 
at 30 mmol/L, indicating a mixed metabolic alkalosis and 
metabolic acidosis. A mixture of high-gap acidosis and 
metabolic alkalosis is recognized easily by comparing the 
differences (Δ values) in the normal to prevailing patient 
values. In this example, the ΔHCO3
− is 0 (25 – 25 mmol/L) 
but the ΔAG is 20 (30 – 10 mmol/L). Therefore, 20 mmol/L 
is unaccounted for in the Δ/Δ value (ΔAG to ΔHCO3
−).
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic acidosis can occur because of an increase in 
endogenous acid production (such as lactate and keto-
acids), loss of bicarbonate (as in diarrhea), or accumula-
tion of endogenous acids (as in renal failure). Metabolic 
acidosis has profound effects on the respiratory, cardiac, 
and nervous systems. The fall in blood pH is accompa-
nied by a characteristic increase in ventilation, especially 
the tidal volume (Kussmaul respiration). Intrinsic cardiac 
contractility may be depressed, but inotropic function can 
47
 
CHAPTER 5
Acidosis and Alkalosis
High–Anion GAP Acidoses
approach to the 
patient	
High–Anion Gap Acidoses
There are four principal causes of a high-AG acidosis:  
(1) lactic acidosis, (2) ketoacidosis, (3) ingested toxins, 
and (4) acute and chronic renal failure (Table 5-4). Initial 
screening to differentiate the high-AG acidoses should 
include (1) a probe of the history for evidence of drug 
and toxin ingestion and measurement of arterial blood 
gas to detect coexistent respiratory alkalosis (salicy-
lates); (2) determination of whether diabetes mellitus is 
present (diabetic ketoacidosis); (3) a search for evidence 
of alcoholism or increased levels of β-hydroxybutyrate 
(alcoholic ketoacidosis); (4) observation for clinical signs 
of uremia and determination of the blood urea nitro-
gen (BUN) and creatinine (uremic acidosis); (5) inspec-
tion of the urine for oxalate crystals (ethylene glycol); 
and (6) recognition of the numerous clinical settings 
in which lactate levels may be increased (hypotension, 
shock, cardiac failure, leukemia, cancer, and drug or 
toxin ingestion).
Lactic acidosis
An increase in plasma l-lactate may be secondary to 
poor tissue perfusion [type A—circulatory insufficiency 
(shock, cardiac failure), severe anemia, mitochon-
drial enzyme defects, and inhibitors (carbon monoxide, 
cyanide] or to aerobic disorders [type B—malignancies, 
nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors in 
HIV, diabetes mellitus, renal or hepatic failure, thiamine 
deficiency, severe infections (cholera, malaria), seizures, 
or drugs/toxins (biguanides, ethanol, methanol, propyl-
ene glycol, isoniazid, and fructose)]. Propylene glycol 
may be used as a vehicle for IV medications including 
lorazepam, and toxicity has been reported in several set-
tings. Unrecognized bowel ischemia or infarction in a 
patient with severe atherosclerosis or cardiac decompen-
sation receiving vasopressors is a common cause of lac-
tic acidosis. Pyroglutamic acidemia has been reported in 
critically ill patients receiving acetaminophen, which is 
associated with depletion of glutathione. d-Lactic acid 
acidosis, which may be associated with jejunoileal bypass, 
short bowel syndrome, or intestinal obstruction, is due to 
formation of d-lactate by gut bacteria.
approach to the 
patient	
Lactic Acid Acidosis
The underlying condition that disrupts lactate metabo-
lism must first be corrected; tissue perfusion must be 
restored when inadequate. Vasoconstrictors should 
be avoided, if possible, because they may worsen tis-
sue perfusion. Alkali therapy is generally advocated for 
acute, severe acidemia (pH <7.15) to improve cardiac 
function and lactate use. However, NaHCO3 therapy may 
paradoxically depress cardiac performance and exacer-
bate acidosis by enhancing lactate production (HCO3
− 
stimulates phosphofructokinase). While the use of alkali 
in moderate lactic acidosis is controversial, it is gener-
ally agreed that attempts to return the pH or [HCO3
−] 
to normal by administration of exogenous NaHCO3 are 
deleterious. A reasonable approach is to infuse sufficient 
NaHCO3 to raise the arterial pH to no more than 7.2 over 
30–40 min.
NaHCO3 therapy can cause fluid overload and hyper-
tension because the amount required can be massive 
when accumulation of lactic acid is relentless. Fluid 
administration is poorly tolerated because of central 
venoconstriction, especially in the oliguric patient. 
When the underlying cause of the lactic acidosis can be 
remedied, blood lactate will be converted to HCO3
− and 
may result in an overshoot alkalosis.
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
This condition is caused by increased fatty acid metabo-
lism and the accumulation of ketoacids (acetoacetate 
and β-hydroxybutyrate). DKA usually occurs in insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus in association with cessation 
of insulin or an intercurrent illness such as an infection, 
gastroenteritis, pancreatitis, or myocardial infarction, 
which increases insulin requirements temporarily and 
acutely. The accumulation of ketoacids accounts for the 
increment in the AG and is accompanied most often by 
hyperglycemia [glucose >17 mmol/L (300 mg/dL)]. The 
relationship between the ΔAG and ΔHCO3
− is typically 
∼1:1 in DKA. It should be noted that, because insulin 
prevents production of ketones, bicarbonate therapy is 
rarely needed except with extreme acidemia (pH <7.1), 
and then in only limited amounts. Patients with DKA are 
typically volume depleted and require fluid resuscitation 
with isotonic saline. Volume overexpansion with IV-fluid 
administration is not uncommon, however, and contrib-
utes to the development of a hyperchloremic acidosis 
during treatment of DKA. The mainstay for treatment of 
this condition is IV regular insulin. 
Alcoholic ketoacidosis (AKA)
Chronic alcoholics can develop ketoacidosis when alco-
hol consumption is abruptly curtailed and nutrition 
is poor. AKA is usually associated with binge drink-
ing, vomiting, abdominal pain, starvation, and volume 
depletion. The glucose concentration is variable, and 
acidosis may be severe because of elevated ketones, pre-
dominantly β-hydroxybutyrate. Hypoperfusion may 
enhance lactic acid production; chronic respiratory 
48
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
alkalosis may accompany liver disease; and metabolic 
alkalosis can result from vomiting (refer to the rela-
tionship between ΔAG and ΔHCO3
−). Thus, mixed 
acid-base disorders are common in AKA. As the circu-
lation is restored by administration of isotonic saline, the 
preferential accumulation of β-hydroxybutyrate is then 
shifted to acetoacetate. This explains the common clini-
cal observation of an increasingly positive nitroprus-
side reaction as the patient improves. The nitroprusside 
ketone reaction (Acetest) can detect acetoacetic acid 
but not β-hydroxybutyrate, so that the degree of keto-
sis and ketonuria can not only change with therapy, 
but can be underestimated initially. Patients with AKA 
usually present with relatively normal renal function, as 
opposed to DKA, where renal function is often com-
promised because of volume depletion (osmotic diuresis) 
or diabetic nephropathy. The AKA patient with nor-
mal renal function may excrete relatively large quanti-
ties of ketoacids in the urine, therefore, and may have 
a relatively normal AG and a discrepancy in the ΔAG/
ΔHCO3
− relationship.
Treatment	
Alcoholic Ketoacidosis
Extracellular fluid deficits almost always accompany 
AKA and should be repleted by IV administration of 
saline and glucose (5% dextrose in 0.9% NaCl). Hypo-
phosphatemia, hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia 
may coexist and should be corrected. Hypophospha-
temia usually emerges 12–24 h after admission, may 
be exacerbated by glucose infusion, and, if severe, may 
induce rhabdomyolysis. Upper gastrointestinal hemor-
rhage, pancreatitis, and pneumonia may accompany 
this disorder.
Drug- and toxin-induced acidosis
Salicylates
Salicylate intoxication in adults usually causes respira-
tory alkalosis or a mixture of high-AG metabolic aci-
dosis and respiratory alkalosis. Only a portion of the AG 
is due to salicylates. Lactic acid production is also often 
increased.
Treatment	
Salicylate-Induced Acidosis
Vigorous gastric lavage with isotonic saline (not NaHCO3)
should be initiated immediately, followed by administra-
tion of activated charcoal per nasogastric (NG) tube. In the 
acidotic patient, to facilitate removal of salicylate, intra-
venous NaHCO3 is administered in amounts adequate to 
alkalinize the urine and to maintain urine output (urine 
pH >7.5). While this form of therapy is straightforward 
in acidotic patients, a coexisting respiratory alkalosis 
may make this approach hazardous. Alkalemic patients 
should not receive NaHCO3. Acetazolamide may be 
administered in the face of alkalemia, when an alkaline 
diuresis cannot be achieved, or to ameliorate volume 
overload associated with NaHCO3 administration, but 
this drug can cause systemic metabolic acidosis if HCO3
− 
is not replaced. Hypokalemia should be anticipated with 
an alkaline diuresis and should be treated promptly 
and aggressively. Glucose-containing fluids should be 
administered because of the danger of hypoglycemia. 
Excessive insensible fluid losses may cause severe vol-
ume depletion and hypernatremia. If renal failure pre-
vents rapid clearance of salicylate, hemodialysis can be 
performed against a bicarbonate dialysate.
Alcohols
Under most physiologic conditions, sodium, urea, 
and glucose generate the osmotic pressure of blood. 
Plasma osmolality is calculated according to the fol-
lowing expression: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu + BUN (all in 
mmol/L), or, using conventional laboratory values in 
which glucose and BUN are expressed in milligrams per 
deciliter: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu/18 + BUN/2.8. The cal-
culated and determined osmolality should agree within 
10–15 mmol/kg H2O. When the measured osmolality 
exceeds the calculated osmolality by >15–20 mmol/kg 
H2O, one of two circumstances prevails. Either the 
serum sodium is spuriously low, as with hyperlipidemia 
or hyperproteinemia (pseudohyponatremia), or osmo-
lytes other than sodium salts, glucose, or urea have accu-
mulated in plasma. Examples of such osmolytes include 
mannitol, radiocontrast media, ethanol, isopropyl alco-
hol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, methanol, and 
acetone. In this situation, the difference between the cal-
culated osmolality and the measured osmolality (osmolar 
gap) is proportional to the concentration of the unmea-
sured solute. With an appropriate clinical history and 
index of suspicion, identification of an osmolar gap is 
helpful in identifying the presence of poison-associated 
AG acidosis. Three alcohols may cause fatal intoxica-
tions: ethylene glycol, methanol, and isopropyl alcohol. 
All cause an elevated osmolal gap, but only the first two 
cause a high-AG acidosis.
Ethylene glycol
Ingestion of ethylene glycol (commonly used in anti-
freeze) leads to a metabolic acidosis and severe damage 
to the CNS, heart, lungs, and kidneys. The increased 
AG and osmolar gap are attributable to ethylene glycol 
and its metabolites, oxalic acid, glycolic acid, and other 
organic acids. Lactic acid production increases second-
ary to inhibition of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and 
49
 
CHAPTER 5
Acidosis and Alkalosis
altered intracellular redox state. Diagnosis is facilitated 
by recognizing oxalate crystals in the urine, the pres-
ence of an osmolar gap in serum, and a high-AG aci-
dosis. Treatment should not be delayed while awaiting 
measurement of ethylene glycol levels in this setting.
Treatment	
Ethylene Glycol–Induced Acidosis
This includes the prompt institution of a saline or 
osmotic diuresis, thiamine and pyridoxine supplements, 
fomepizole or ethanol, and hemodialysis. The IV admin-
istration of the alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor fomepi-
zole (4-methylpyrazole; 15 mg/kg as a loading dose) or 
ethanol IV to achieve a level of 22 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) 
serves to lessen toxicity because they compete with eth-
ylene glycol for metabolism by alcohol dehydrogenase. 
Fomepizole, although expensive, is the agent of choice 
and offers the advantages of a predictable decline in 
ethylene glycol levels without excessive obtundation 
during ethyl alcohol infusion. Hemodialysis is indicated 
when the arterial pH is <7.3, or the osmolar gap exceeds 
20 mOsm/kg.
Methanol
The ingestion of methanol (wood alcohol) causes met-
abolic acidosis, and its metabolites formaldehyde and 
formic acid cause severe optic nerve and CNS damage. 
Lactic acid, ketoacids, and other unidentified organic 
acids may contribute to the acidosis. Due to its low 
molecular mass (32 Da), an osmolar gap is usually present.
Treatment 	
Methanol-Induced Acidosis
This is similar to that for ethylene glycol intoxication, 
including general supportive measures, fomepizole, and 
hemodialysis (as above).
Isopropyl alcohol
Ingested isopropanol is absorbed rapidly and may be fatal 
when as little as 150 mL of rubbing alcohol, solvent, or 
de-icer is consumed. A plasma level >400 mg/dL is life 
threatening. Isopropyl alcohol differs from ethylene gly-
col and methanol in that the parent compound, not the 
metabolites, causes toxicity, and an AG acidosis is not 
present because acetone is rapidly excreted.
Treatment	
Isopropyl Alcohol Toxicity
Isopropanol alcohol toxicity is treated by watchful wait-
ing and supportive therapy; IV fluids, pressors, ventilatory 
support if needed, and occasionally hemodialysis for pro-
longed coma or levels >400 mg/dL.
Renal failure
(See also Chap. 11) The hyperchloremic acidosis of 
moderate renal insufficiency is eventually converted to 
the high-AG acidosis of advanced renal failure. Poor fil-
tration and reabsorption of organic anions contribute to 
the pathogenesis. As renal disease progresses, the num-
ber of functioning nephrons eventually becomes insuf-
ficient to keep pace with net acid production. Uremic 
acidosis is characterized, therefore, by a reduced rate 
of NH4
+ production and excretion. The acid retained 
in chronic renal disease is buffered by alkaline salts 
from bone. Despite significant retention of acid (up to 
20 mmol/d), the serum [HCO3
−] does not decrease 
further, indicating participation of buffers outside the 
extracellular compartment. Chronic metabolic acido-
sis results in significant loss of bone mass due to reduc-
tion in bone calcium carbonate. Chronic acidosis also 
increases urinary calcium excretion, proportional to 
cumulative acid retention.
Treatment	
Renal Failure
Because of the association of renal failure acido-
sis with muscle catabolism and bone disease, both 
uremic acidosis and the hyperchloremic acidosis of 
renal failure require oral alkali replacement to main-
tain the [HCO3
−] between 20 and 24 mmol/L. This can 
be accomplished with relatively modest amounts of 
alkali (1.0–1.5 mmol/kg body weight per day). Sodium 
citrate (Shohl’s solution) or NaHCO3 tablets (650-mg 
tablets contain 7.8 meq) are equally effective alkalin-
izing salts. Citrate enhances the absorption of alumi-
num from the gastrointestinal tract and should never 
be given together with aluminum-containing antacids 
because of the risk of aluminum intoxication. When 
hyperkalemia is present, furosemide (60–80 mg/d) 
should be added.
Non–anion Gap Metabolic Acidoses
Alkali can be lost from the gastrointestinal tract in diar-
rhea or from the kidneys (renal tubular acidosis, RTA). 
In these disorders (Table 5-5), reciprocal changes in 
[Cl−] and [HCO3
−] result in a normal AG. In pure non-
AG acidosis, therefore, the increase in [Cl−] above the 
normal value approximates the decrease in [HCO3
−]. 
The absence of such a relationship suggests a mixed 
disturbance.
50
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Treatment 	
Non–Anion Gap Metabolic Acidoses
In diarrhea, stools contain a higher [HCO3
−] and decom-
posed HCO3
− than plasma so that metabolic acidosis 
develops along with volume depletion. Instead of an 
acid urine pH (as anticipated with systemic acidosis), 
urine pH is usually around 6 because metabolic acidosis 
and hypokalemia increase renal synthesis and excretion 
of NH4
+, thus providing a urinary buffer that increases 
urine pH. Metabolic acidosis due to gastrointestinal 
Table 5-5
Causes of Non–Anion Gap Acidosis
  I. Gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss
A. Diarrhea
B. External pancreatic or small-bowel drainage
C. Ureterosigmoidostomy, jejunal loop, ileal loop
D. Drugs
1. Calcium chloride (acidifying agent)
2. Magnesium sulfate (diarrhea)
3. Cholestyramine (bile acid diarrhea)
 II. Renal acidosis
A. Hypokalemia
1. Proximal RTA (type 2)
Drug induced: acetazolamide, topiramate
2. Distal (classic) RTA (type 1)
Drug induced: amphotericin B, ifosfamide
B. Hyperkalemia
1. Generalized distal nephron dysfunction (type 4 RTA)
a. Mineralocorticoid deficiency
b. Mineralocorticoid resistance (autosomal domi-
nant PHA I)
c. Voltage defect (autosomal dominant PHA I and 
PHA II)
d. Tubulointerstitial disease
III. Drug-induced hyperkalemia (with renal insufficiency)
A. Potassium-sparing diuretics (amiloride, triamterene, 
spironolactone)
B. Trimethoprim
C. Pentamidine
D. ACE-Is and ARBs
E. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
F. Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
IV. Other
A. Acid loads (ammonium chloride, hyperalimentation)
B. Loss of potential bicarbonate: ketosis with ketone 
excretion
C. Expansion acidosis (rapid saline administration)
D. Hippurate
E. Cation exchange resins
Abbreviations: ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; 
ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; PHA, pseudohypoaldosteronism; 
RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
losses with a high urine pH can be differentiated from 
RTA because urinary NH4
+ excretion is typically low in 
RTA and high with diarrhea. Urinary NH4
+ levels can be 
estimated by calculating the urine anion gap (UAG): 
UAG = [Na+ + K+]u – [Cl−]u. When [Cl−]u > [Na+ + K+]u, the 
UAG is negative by definition. This indicates that the 
urine ammonium level is appropriately increased, sug-
gesting an extrarenal cause of the acidosis. Conversely, 
when the UAG is positive, the urine ammonium level is 
low, suggesting a renal cause of the acidosis.
Loss of functioning renal parenchyma by progres-
sive renal disease leads to hyperchloremic acidosis when 
the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is between 20 and 
50 mL/min and to uremic acidosis with a high AG when 
the GFR falls to <20 mL/min. In advanced renal failure, 
ammoniagenesis is reduced in proportion to the loss of 
functional renal mass, and ammonium accumulation and 
trapping in the outer medullary collecting tubule may 
also be impaired. Because of adaptive increases in K+ 
secretion by the collecting duct and colon, the acidosis of 
chronic renal insufficiency is typically normokalemic.
Proximal RTA (type 2 RTA) (Chap. 16) is most often 
due to generalized proximal tubular dysfunction manifested 
by glycosuria, generalized aminoaciduria, and phosphatu-
ria (Fanconi syndrome). With a low plasma [HCO3
−], the 
urine pH is acid (pH <5.5). The fractional excretion of 
[HCO3
−] may exceed 10–15% when the serum HCO3
− 
>20 mmol/L. Because HCO3
− is not reabsorbed normally in 
the proximal tubule, therapy with NaHCO3 will enhance 
renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia.
The typical findings in acquired or inherited forms of 
classic distal RTA (type 1 RTA) include hypokalemia, non-
AG metabolic acidosis, low urinary NH4
+ excretion (posi-
tive UAG, low urine [NH4
+]), and inappropriately high 
urine pH (pH >5.5). Most patients have hypocitraturia 
and hypercalciuria, so nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and 
bone disease are common. In generalized distal nephron 
dysfunction (type 4 RTA), hyperkalemia is disproportion-
ate to the reduction in GFR because of coexisting dysfunc-
tion of potassium and acid secretion. Urinary ammonium 
excretion is invariably depressed, and renal function may be 
compromised, for example, due to diabetic nephropathy, 
obstructive uropathy, or chronic tubulointerstitial disease.
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism typically causes 
non-AG metabolic acidosis, most commonly in older 
adults with diabetes mellitus or tubulointerstitial dis-
ease and renal insufficiency. Patients usually have mild 
to moderate CKD (GFR, 20–50 mL/min) and acidosis, 
with elevation in serum [K+] (5.2–6.0 mmol/L), con-
current hypertension, and congestive heart failure. Both 
the metabolic acidosis and the hyperkalemia are out of 
proportion to impairment in GFR. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, trimethoprim, pentamidine, and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can 
51
 
CHAPTER 5
Acidosis and Alkalosis
also cause non-AG metabolic acidosis in patients with 
renal insufficiency (Table 5-5).
Metabolic Alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis is manifested by an elevated arterial 
pH, an increase in the serum [HCO3
−], and an increase in 
Paco2 as a result of compensatory alveolar hypoventilation 
(Table 5-1). It is often accompanied by hypochloremia 
and hypokalemia. The arterial pH establishes the diagnosis, 
because it is increased in metabolic alkalosis and decreased 
or normal in respiratory acidosis. Metabolic alkalosis fre-
quently occurs in association with other disorders such as 
respiratory acidosis or alkalosis, or metabolic acidosis.
Pathogenesis
Metabolic alkalosis occurs as a result of net gain of 
[HCO3
−] or loss of nonvolatile acid (usually HCl by 
vomiting) from the extracellular fluid. For HCO3
− to be 
added to the extracellular fluid, it must be administered 
exogenously or synthesized endogenously, in part or 
entirely by the kidneys. Because it is unusual for alkali 
to be added to the body, the disorder involves a genera-
tive stage, in which the loss of acid usually causes alka-
losis, and a maintenance stage, in which the kidneys fail 
to compensate by excreting HCO3
−.
Under normal circumstances, the kidneys have an 
impressive capacity to excrete HCO3
−. Continuation of 
metabolic alkalosis represents a failure of the kidneys to 
eliminate HCO3
− in the usual manner. The kidneys will 
retain, rather than excrete, the excess alkali and maintain 
the alkalosis if (1) volume deficiency, chloride deficiency, 
and K+ deficiency exist in combination with a reduced 
GFR, which augments distal tubule H+ secretion; or 
(2) hypokalemia exists because of autonomous hyperal-
dosteronism. In the first example, alkalosis is corrected by 
administration of NaCl and KCl, whereas, in the latter, 
it is necessary to repair the alkalosis by pharmacologic or 
surgical intervention, not with saline administration.
Differential Diagnosis
To establish the cause of metabolic alkalosis (Table 5-6), 
it is necessary to assess the status of the extracellular fluid 
volume (ECFV), the recumbent and upright blood pres-
sure, the serum [K+], and the renin-aldosterone system. 
For example, the presence of chronic hypertension and 
chronic hypokalemia in an alkalotic patient suggests either 
mineralocorticoid excess or that the hypertensive patient 
is receiving diuretics. Low plasma renin activity and nor-
mal urine [Na+] and [Cl−] in a patient who is not taking 
diuretics indicate a primary mineralocorticoid excess syn-
drome. The combination of hypokalemia and alkalosis 
in a normotensive, nonedematous patient can be due to 
Table 5-6
Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis
  I. Exogenous HCO3
− loads
A. Acute alkali administration
B. Milk-alkali syndrome
 II. Effective ECFV contraction, normotension, K+ deficiency, 
and secondary hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism
A. Gastrointestinal origin
1. Vomiting
2. Gastric aspiration
3. Congenital chloridorrhea
4. Villous adenoma
B. Renal origin
1. Diuretics
2. Posthypercapnic state
3. Hypercalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
4. Recovery from lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis
5. Nonreabsorbable anions including penicillin,  
carbenicillin
6. Mg2+ deficiency
7. K+ depletion
8. Bartter’s syndrome (loss of function mutations in 
TALH)
9. Gitelman’s syndrome (loss of function mutation in 
Na+-Cl− cotransporter in DCT)
III. ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deficiency, and 
mineralocorticoid excess
A. High renin
1. Renal artery stenosis
2. Accelerated hypertension
3. Renin-secreting tumor
4. Estrogen therapy
B. Low renin
1. Primary aldosteronism
a. Adenoma
b. Hyperplasia
c. Carcinoma
2. Adrenal enzyme defects
a. 11 β-Hydroxylase deficiency
b. 17 α-Hydroxylase deficiency
3. Cushing’s syndrome or disease
4. Other
a. Licorice
b. Carbenoxolone
c. Chewer’s tobacco
IV. Gain-of-function mutation of renal sodium channel 
with ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deficiency, and 
hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteronism
A. Liddle’s syndrome
Abbreviations: DCT, distal convoluted tubule; ECFV, extracellular 
fluid volume; TALH, thick ascending limb of Henle’s loop.
52
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Bartter’s or Gitelman’s syndrome, magnesium deficiency, 
vomiting, exogenous alkali, or diuretic ingestion. Deter-
mination of urine electrolytes (especially the urine [Cl−]) 
and screening of the urine for diuretics may be helpful. If 
the urine is alkaline, with an elevated [Na+] and [K+] but 
low [Cl−], the diagnosis is usually either vomiting (overt 
or surreptitious) or alkali ingestion. If the urine is relatively 
acid and has low concentrations of Na+, K+, and Cl−, the 
most likely possibilities are prior vomiting, the posthyper-
capnic state, or prior diuretic ingestion. If, on the other 
hand, neither the urine sodium, potassium, nor chloride 
concentrations are depressed, magnesium deficiency, Bart-
ter’s or Gitelman’s syndrome, or current diuretic ingestion 
should be considered. Bartter’s syndrome is distinguished 
from Gitelman’s syndrome because of hypocalciuria and 
hypomagnesemia in the latter disorder.
Alkali administration
Chronic administration of alkali to individuals with nor-
mal renal function rarely causes alkalosis. However, in 
patients with coexistent hemodynamic disturbances, alka-
losis can develop because the normal capacity to excrete 
HCO3
− may be exceeded or there may be enhanced 
reabsorption of HCO3
−. Such patients include those 
who receive HCO3
− (PO or IV), acetate loads (paren-
teral hyperalimentation solutions), citrate loads (transfu-
sions), or antacids plus cation-exchange resins (aluminum 
hydroxide and sodium polystyrene sulfonate). Nursing-
home patients receiving tube feedings have a higher inci-
dence of metabolic alkalosis than nursing-home patients 
receiving oral feedings.
Metabolic Alkalosis Associated 
with ECFV Contraction, K+ Depletion, 
and Secondary Hyperreninemic 
Hyperaldosteronism
Gastrointestinal origin
Gastrointestinal loss of H+ from vomiting or gastric aspi-
ration results in retention of HCO3
−. The loss of fluid 
and NaCl in vomitus or nasogastric suction results in 
contraction of the ECFV and an increase in the secretion 
of renin and aldosterone. Volume contraction through a 
reduction in GFR results in an enhanced capacity of the 
renal tubule to reabsorb HCO3
−. During active vomit-
ing, however, the filtered load of bicarbonate is acutely 
increased to the point that the reabsorptive capacity of 
the proximal tubule for HCO3
− is exceeded. The excess 
NaHCO3 issuing out of the proximal tubule reaches 
the distal tubule, where H+ secretion is enhanced by an 
aldosterone and the delivery of the poorly reabsorbed 
anion, HCO3
−. Correction of the contracted ECFV 
with NaCl and repair of K+ deficits corrects the acid-
base disorder, and chloride deficiency.
Renal origin
Diuretics
Drugs that induce chloruresis, such as thiazides and loop 
diuretics (furosemide, bumetanide, torsemide, and ethac-
rynic acid), acutely diminish the ECFV without altering 
the total body bicarbonate content. The serum [HCO3
−] 
increases because the reduced ECFV “contracts” the 
[HCO3
−] in the plasma (contraction alkalosis). The chronic 
administration of diuretics tends to generate an alkalo-
sis by increasing distal salt delivery, so that K+ and H+ 
secretion are stimulated. The alkalosis is maintained by 
persistence of the contraction of the ECFV, secondary 
hyperaldosteronism, K+ deficiency, and the direct effect 
of the diuretic (as long as diuretic administration con-
tinues). Repair of the alkalosis is achieved by providing 
isotonic saline to correct the ECFV deficit.
Solute losing disorders: Bartter’s syndrome and 
Gitelman’s syndrome
See Chap. 16.
Nonreabsorbable anions and magnesium 
deficiency
Administration of large quantities of nonreabsorbable 
anions, such as penicillin or carbenicillin, can enhance 
distal acidification and K+ secretion by increasing the 
transepithelial potential difference. Mg2+ deficiency 
results in hypokalemic alkalosis by enhancing distal acid-
ification through stimulation of renin and hence aldoste-
rone secretion.
Potassium depletion
Chronic K+ depletion may cause metabolic alkalosis by 
increasing urinary acid excretion. Both NH4
+ production 
and absorption are enhanced and HCO3
− reabsorption is 
stimulated. Chronic K+ deficiency upregulates the renal 
H+, K+-ATPase to increase K+ absorption at the expense 
of enhanced H+ secretion. Alkalosis associated with 
severe K+ depletion is resistant to salt administration, but 
repair of the K+ deficiency corrects the alkalosis.
After treatment of lactic acidosis or 
ketoacidosis
When an underlying stimulus for the generation of lac-
tic acid or ketoacid is removed rapidly, as with repair 
of circulatory insufficiency or with insulin therapy, the 
lactate or ketones are metabolized to yield an equivalent 
amount of HCO3
−. Other sources of new HCO3
− are 
additive with the original amount generated by organic 
anion metabolism to create a surfeit of HCO3
−. Such 
sources include (1) new HCO3
− added to the blood 
by the kidneys as a result of enhanced acid excretion 
during the preexisting period of acidosis, and (2) alkali 
therapy during the treatment phase of the acidosis. Aci-
dosis-induced contraction of the ECFV and K+ defi-
ciency act to sustain the alkalosis.
53
 
CHAPTER 5
Acidosis and Alkalosis
Posthypercapnia
Prolonged CO2 retention with chronic respiratory acido-
sis enhances renal HCO3
− absorption and the generation 
of new HCO3
− (increased net acid excretion). If the Paco2 
is returned to normal, metabolic alkalosis results from 
the persistently elevated [HCO3
−]. Alkalosis develops if the 
elevated Paco2 is abruptly returned toward normal by a 
change in mechanically controlled ventilation. Associated 
ECFV contraction does not allow complete repair of the 
alkalosis by correction of the Paco2 alone, and alkalosis 
persists until Cl− supplementation is provided.
Metabolic Alkalosis Associated with 
ECFV Expansion, Hypertension, and 
Hyperaldosteronism
Increased aldosterone levels may be the result of auton-
omous primary adrenal overproduction or of secondary 
aldosterone release due to renal overproduction of renin. 
Mineralocorticoid excess increases net acid excretion and 
may result in metabolic alkalosis, which may be wors-
ened by associated K+ deficiency. ECFV expansion from 
salt retention causes hypertension. The kaliuresis per-
sists because of mineralocorticoid excess and distal Na+ 
absorption causing enhanced K+ excretion, continued 
K+ depletion with polydipsia, inability to concentrate the 
urine, and polyuria.
Liddle’s syndrome (Chap. 16) results from increased 
activity of the collecting duct Na+ channel (ENaC) and 
is a rare monogenic form of hypertension due to vol-
ume expansion manifested as hypokalemic alkalosis and 
normal aldosterone levels.
Symptoms
With metabolic alkalosis, changes in CNS and periph-
eral nervous system function are similar to those of 
hypocalcemia. Symptoms include mental confusion; obtun-
dation; and a predisposition to seizures, paresthesia, mus-
cular cramping, tetany, aggravation of arrhythmias, and 
hypoxemia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Related electrolyte abnormalities include hypokalemia 
and hypophosphatemia.
Treatment 	
Metabolic Alkalosis
This is primarily directed at correcting the underlying 
stimulus for HCO3
− generation. If primary aldosteronism, 
renal artery stenosis, or Cushing’s syndrome is present, 
correction of the underlying cause will reverse the alka-
losis. [H+] loss by the stomach or kidneys can be miti-
gated by the use of proton pump inhibitors or the dis-
continuation of diuretics. The second aspect of treatment 
is to remove the factors that sustain the inappropriate 
increase in HCO3
− reabsorption, such as ECFV contraction 
or K+ deficiency. K+ deficits should always be repaired. 
Isotonic saline is usually sufficient to reverse the alkalosis 
if ECFV contraction is present.
If associated conditions preclude infusion of saline, 
renal HCO3
− loss can be accelerated by administration 
of acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, which 
is usually effective in patients with adequate renal func-
tion but can worsen K+ losses. Dilute hydrochloric acid 
(0.1 N HCl) is also effective, but can cause hemolysis, and 
must be delivered centrally and slowly. Hemodialysis 
against a dialysate low in [HCO3
−] and high in [Cl−] can 
be effective when renal function is impaired.
Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory acidosis can be due to severe pulmonary 
disease, respiratory muscle fatigue, or abnormalities in 
ventilatory control and is recognized by an increase in 
Paco2 and decrease in pH (Table 5-7). In acute respira-
tory acidosis, there is an immediate compensatory eleva-
tion (due to cellular buffering mechanisms) in HCO3
−, 
which increases 1 mmol/L for every 10-mmHg increase 
in Paco2. In chronic respiratory acidosis (>24 h), renal 
adaptation increases the [HCO3
−] by 4 mmol/L for 
every 10-mmHg increase in Paco2. The serum HCO3
− 
usually does not increase above 38 mmol/L.
The clinical features vary according to the severity and 
duration of the respiratory acidosis, the underlying dis-
ease, and whether there is accompanying hypoxemia. A 
rapid increase in Paco2 may cause anxiety, dyspnea, con-
fusion, psychosis, and hallucinations and may progress to 
coma. Lesser degrees of dysfunction in chronic hypercap-
nia include sleep disturbances; loss of memory; daytime 
somnolence; personality changes; impairment of coordi-
nation; and motor disturbances such as tremor, myoclonic 
jerks, and asterixis. Headaches and other signs that mimic 
raised intracranial pressure, such as papilledema, abnormal 
reflexes, and focal muscle weakness, are due to vasocon-
striction secondary to loss of the vasodilator effects of CO2.
Depression of the respiratory center by a variety of 
drugs, injury, or disease can produce respiratory aci-
dosis. This may occur acutely with general anesthetics, 
sedatives, and head trauma or chronically with seda-
tives, alcohol, intracranial tumors, and the syndromes of 
sleep-disordered breathing including the primary alveo-
lar and obesity-hypoventilation syndromes. Abnormali-
ties or disease in the motor neurons, neuromuscular 
junction, and skeletal muscle can cause hypoventilation 
via respiratory muscle fatigue. Mechanical ventilation, 
when not properly adjusted and supervised, may result 
in respiratory acidosis, particularly if CO2 production 
suddenly rises (because of fever, agitation, sepsis, or over-
feeding) or alveolar ventilation falls because of worsening 
54
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
pulmonary function. High levels of positive end-expi-
ratory pressure in the presence of reduced cardiac out-
put may cause hypercapnia as a result of large increases in 
alveolar dead space. Permissive hypercapnia is being used 
with increasing frequency because of studies suggesting 
lower mortality rates than with conventional mechanical 
ventilation, especially with severe CNS or heart disease. 
The respiratory acidosis associated with permissive hyper-
capnia may require administration of NaHCO3 to increase 
the arterial pH to 7.25, but overcorrection of the acidemia 
may be deleterious.
Acute hypercapnia follows sudden occlusion of the 
upper airway or generalized bronchospasm as in severe 
asthma, anaphylaxis, inhalational burn, or toxin injury. 
Chronic hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis occur in 
end-stage obstructive lung disease. Restrictive disorders 
involving both the chest wall and the lungs can cause 
respiratory acidosis because the high metabolic cost of 
respiration causes ventilatory muscle fatigue. Advanced 
stages of intrapulmonary and extrapulmonary restrictive 
defects present as chronic respiratory acidosis.
The diagnosis of respiratory acidosis requires the 
measurement of Paco2 and arterial pH. A detailed his-
tory and physical examination often indicate the cause. 
Pulmonary function studies, including spirometry, diffu-
sion capacity for carbon monoxide, lung volumes, and 
arterial Paco2 and O2 saturation, usually make it possible 
to determine if respiratory acidosis is secondary to lung 
disease. The workup for nonpulmonary causes should 
include a detailed drug history, measurement of hema-
tocrit, and assessment of upper airway, chest wall, pleura, 
and neuromuscular function.
Treatment 	
Respiratory Acidosis
The management of respiratory acidosis depends on its 
severity and rate of onset. Acute respiratory acidosis can 
be life threatening, and measures to reverse the under-
lying cause should be undertaken simultaneously with 
restoration of adequate alveolar ventilation. This may 
necessitate tracheal intubation and assisted mechani-
cal ventilation. Oxygen administration should be titrated 
carefully in patients with severe obstructive pulmonary 
disease and chronic CO2 retention who are breathing 
spontaneously. When oxygen is used injudiciously, these 
patients may experience progression of the respiratory 
acidosis. Aggressive and rapid correction of hypercap-
nia should be avoided, because the falling Paco2 may 
provoke the same complications noted with acute 
respiratory alkalosis (i.e., cardiac arrhythmias, reduced 
cerebral perfusion, and seizures). The Paco2 should be 
lowered gradually in chronic respiratory acidosis, aim-
ing to restore the Paco2 to baseline levels and to provide 
sufficient Cl− and K+ to enhance the renal excretion of 
HCO3
−.
Table 5-7 
Respiratory Acid-Base Disorders
I. Alkalosis
A. Central nervous system stimulation
1. Pain
2. Anxiety, psychosis
3. Fever
4. Cerebrovascular accident
5. Meningitis, encephalitis
6. Tumor
7. Trauma
B. Hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia
1. High altitude
2. Pneumonia, pulmonary edema
3. Aspiration
4. Severe anemia
C. Drugs or hormones
1. Pregnancy, progesterone
2. Salicylates
3. Cardiac failure
D. Stimulation of chest receptors
1. Hemothorax
2. Flail chest
3. Cardiac failure
4. Pulmonary embolism
E. Miscellaneous
1. Septicemia
2. Hepatic failure
3. Mechanical hyperventilation
4. Heat exposure
5. Recovery from metabolic acidosis
II. Acidosis
A. Central
1. Drugs (anesthetics, morphine, sedatives)
2. Stroke
3. Infection
B. Airway
1. Obstruction
2. Asthma
C. Parenchyma
1. Emphysema
2. Pneumoconiosis
3. Bronchitis
4. Adult respiratory distress syndrome
5. Barotrauma
D. Neuromuscular
1. Poliomyelitis
2. Kyphoscoliosis
3. Myasthenia
4. Muscular dystrophies
E. Miscellaneous
1. Obesity
2. Hypoventilation
3. Permissive hypercapnia
55
 
CHAPTER 5
Acidosis and Alkalosis
Chronic respiratory acidosis is frequently difficult to 
correct, but measures aimed at improving lung function 
can help some patients and forestall further deteriora-
tion in most.
Respiratory Alkalosis
Alveolar hyperventilation decreases Paco2 and increases the 
HCO3
−/Paco2 ratio, thus increasing pH (Table 5-7). Non-
bicarbonate cellular buffers respond by consuming HCO3
−. 
Hypocapnia develops when a sufficiently strong ventila-
tory stimulus causes CO2 output in the lungs to exceed its 
metabolic production by tissues. Plasma pH and [HCO3
−] 
appear to vary proportionately with Paco2 over a range 
from 40 to 15 mmHg. The relationship between arterial 
[H+] concentration and Paco2 is ∼0.7 mmol/L per mmHg 
(or 0.01 pH unit/mmHg), and that for plasma [HCO3
−] is 
0.2 mmol/L per mmHg. Hypocapnia sustained for >2–6 h 
is further compensated by a decrease in renal ammonium 
and titratable acid excretion and a reduction in filtered 
HCO3
− reabsorption. Full renal adaptation to respira-
tory alkalosis may take several days and requires normal 
volume status and renal function. The kidneys appear to 
respond directly to the lowered Paco2 rather than to alkalo-
sis per se. In chronic respiratory alkalosis a 1-mmHg fall in 
Paco2 causes a 0.4- to 0.5-mmol/L drop in [HCO3
−] and a 
0.3-mmol/L fall (or 0.003 rise in pH) in [H+].
The effects of respiratory alkalosis vary according 
to duration and severity but are primarily those of the 
underlying disease. Reduced cerebral blood flow as a 
consequence of a rapid decline in Paco2 may cause dizzi-
ness, mental confusion, and seizures, even in the absence 
of hypoxemia. The cardiovascular effects of acute hypo-
capnia in the conscious human are generally minimal, but 
in the anesthetized or mechanically ventilated patient, 
cardiac output and blood pressure may fall because of 
the depressant effects of anesthesia and positive-pressure 
ventilation on heart rate, systemic resistance, and venous 
return. Cardiac arrhythmias may occur in patients with 
heart disease as a result of changes in oxygen unloading 
by blood from a left shift in the hemoglobin-oxygen dis-
sociation curve (Bohr effect). Acute respiratory alkalo-
sis causes intracellular shifts of Na+, K+, and PO4
2– and 
reduces free [Ca2+] by increasing the protein-bound frac-
tion. Hypocapnia-induced hypokalemia is usually minor.
Chronic respiratory alkalosis is the most common 
acid-base disturbance in critically ill patients and, when 
severe, portends a poor prognosis. Many cardiopul-
monary disorders manifest respiratory alkalosis in their 
early to intermediate stages, and the finding of normo-
capnia and hypoxemia in a patient with hyperventila-
tion may herald the onset of rapid respiratory failure and 
should prompt an assessment to determine if the patient 
is becoming fatigued. Respiratory alkalosis is common 
during mechanical ventilation.
The hyperventilation syndrome may be disabling. 
Paresthesia; circumoral numbness; chest wall tightness 
or pain; dizziness; inability to take an adequate breath; 
and, rarely, tetany may be sufficiently stressful to per-
petuate the disorder. Arterial blood-gas analysis dem-
onstrates an acute or chronic respiratory alkalosis, often 
with hypocapnia in the range of 15–30 mmHg and no 
hypoxemia. CNS diseases or injury can produce several 
patterns of hyperventilation and sustained Paco2 levels of 
20–30 mmHg. Hyperthyroidism, high caloric loads, and 
exercise raise the basal metabolic rate, but ventilation 
usually rises in proportion so that arterial blood gases are 
unchanged and respiratory alkalosis does not develop. 
Salicylates are the most common cause of drug-induced 
respiratory alkalosis as a result of direct stimulation of 
the medullary chemoreceptor. The methylxanthines, the-
ophylline, and aminophylline stimulate ventilation and 
increase the ventilatory response to CO2. Progesterone 
increases ventilation and lowers arterial Paco2 by as much 
as 5–10 mmHg. Therefore, chronic respiratory alkalosis is 
a common feature of pregnancy. Respiratory alkalosis 
is also prominent in liver failure, and the severity corre-
lates with the degree of hepatic insufficiency. Respiratory 
alkalosis is often an early finding in gram-negative septi-
cemia, before fever, hypoxemia, or hypotension develops.
The diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis depends on mea-
surement of arterial pH and Paco2. The plasma [K+] is 
often reduced and the [Cl−] increased. In the acute phase, 
respiratory alkalosis is not associated with increased renal 
HCO3
− excretion, but within hours net acid excretion 
is reduced. In general, the HCO3
− concentration falls 
by 2.0 mmol/L for each 10-mmHg decrease in Paco2. 
Chronic hypocapnia reduces the serum [HCO3
−] by 
4.0 mmol/L for each 10-mmHg decrease in Paco2. It is 
unusual to observe a plasma HCO3
− <12 mmol/L as a 
result of a pure respiratory alkalosis.
When a diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis is made, its 
cause should be investigated. The diagnosis of hyper-
ventilation syndrome is made by exclusion. In difficult 
cases, it may be important to rule out other conditions 
such as pulmonary embolism, coronary artery disease, and 
hyperthyroidism.
Treatment 	
Respiratory Alkalosis
The management of respiratory alkalosis is directed 
toward alleviation of the underlying disorder. If respiratory 
alkalosis complicates ventilator management, changes in 
dead space, tidal volume, and frequency can minimize the 
hypocapnia. Patients with the hyperventilation syndrome 
may benefit from reassurance, rebreathing from a paper 
bag during symptomatic attacks, and attention to underly-
ing psychological stress. Antidepressants and sedatives are 
not recommended. β-Adrenergic blockers may ameliorate 
peripheral manifestations of the hyperadrenergic state.
 David B. Mount 
56
 Sodium aNd Water 
 ComPoSITIon of Body fluIdS 
 Water is the most abundant constituent in the body, 
accounting for ∼50% of body weight in women and 60% 
in men. Total body water is distributed in two major com-
partments: 55–75% is intracellular [intracellular fl uid (ICF)], 
and 25–45% is extracellular [extracellular fl uid (ECF)]. ECF 
is subdivided into intravascular (plasma water) and extra-
vascular (interstitial) spaces in a ratio of 1:3. Fluid move-
ment between the intravascular and interstitial spaces 
occurs across the capillary wall and is determined by Star-
ling forces, i.e., capillary hydraulic pressure and colloid 
osmotic pressure. The transcapillary hydraulic pressure gra-
dient exceeds the corresponding oncotic pressure gradient, 
thus favoring the movement of plasma ultrafi ltrate into the 
extravascular space. The return of fl uid into the intravascu-
lar compartment occurs via lymphatic fl ow. 
 The solute or particle concentration of a fl uid is 
known as its osmolality and is expressed as milliosmoles 
per kilogram of water (mosmol/kg). Water easily diffuses 
across most cell membranes to achieve osmotic equilib-
rium (ECF osmolality = ICF osmolality). Notably, the 
extracellular and intracellular solute compositions differ 
considerably, owing to the activity of various transport-
ers, channels, and ATP-driven membrane pumps. The 
major ECF particles are Na + and its accompanying anions 
Cl − and HCO3
−, whereas K + and organic phosphate esters 
(ATP, creatine phosphate, and phospholipids) are the 
predominant ICF osmoles. Solutes that are restricted to 
the ECF or the ICF determine the tonicity or effective 
osmolality of that compartment. Certain solutes, particu-
larly urea, do not contribute to water shifts across most 
membranes and are thus known as  ineffective osmoles . 
 Water balance 
 Vasopressin secretion, water ingestion, and renal water 
transport collaborate to maintain human body fl uid 
 FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCES 
 CHaPter 6 
osmolality between 280 and 295 mosmol/kg. Vaso-
pressin (AVP) is synthesized in magnocellular neurons 
within the hypothalamus; the distal axons of those neu-
rons project to the posterior pituitary or neurohypophy-
sis, from which AVP is released into the circulation. A 
network of central osmoreceptor neurons that includes 
the AVP-expressing magnocellular neurons themselves 
sense circulating osmolality via nonselective, stretch-
activated cation channels. These osmoreceptor neu-
rons are activated or inhibited by modest increases and 
decreases in circulating osmolality, respectively; activa-
tion leads to AVP release and thirst. 
 AVP secretion is stimulated as systemic osmolality 
increases above a threshold level of ∼285 mosmol/kg, 
above which there is a linear relationship between 
osmolality and circulating AVP ( Fig. 6-1 ). Thirst and 
Hypovolemic
Euvolemic
Hypervolemic
12
8
4
0
Plasma AVP (pg/mL)
260
270
280
290
300
310
Plasma osmolality (mosmol/kg)
 Figure 6-1 
Circulating levels of vasopressin (aVP) in response to 
changes in osmolality. Plasma vasopressin becomes 
detectable in euvolemic, healthy individuals at a threshold of 
∼285 mosmol/kg, above which there is a linear relationship 
between osmolality and circulating AVP. The vasopressin 
response to osmolality is modulated strongly by volume sta-
tus. The osmotic threshold is thus slightly lower in hypovo-
lemia, with a steeper response curve; hypervolemia reduces 
the sensitivity of circulating AVP levels to osmolality. 
57
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
thus water ingestion also are activated at ∼285 mosmol/kg, 
beyond which there is an equivalent linear increase in 
the perceived intensity of thirst as a function of circu-
lating osmolality. Changes in blood volume and blood 
pressure are also direct stimuli for AVP release and 
thirst, albeit with a less sensitive response profile. Of 
perhaps greater clinical relevance to the pathophysiol-
ogy of water homeostasis, ECF volume strongly modu-
lates the relationship between circulating osmolality and 
AVP release so that hypovolemia reduces the osmotic 
threshold and increases the slope of the response curve 
to osmolality; hypervolemia has the opposite effect, 
increasing the osmotic threshold and reducing the slope 
of the response curve (Fig. 6-1). Notably, AVP has a 
half-life in the circulation of only 10–20 min; thus, 
changes in extracellular fluid volume and/or circulating 
osmolality can affect water homeostasis rapidly. In addi-
tion to volume status, a number of nonosmotic stimuli 
have potent activating effects on osmosensitive neurons 
and AVP release, including nausea, intracerebral angio-
tensin II, serotonin, and multiple drugs.
The excretion or retention of electrolyte-free water 
by the kidney is modulated by circulating AVP. AVP 
acts on renal V2-type receptors in the thick ascend-
ing limb of Henle and principal cells of the collecting 
duct (CD), increasing cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate (AMP) and activating protein kinase A (PKA)- 
dependent phosphorylation of multiple transport proteins. 
The AVP- and PKA-dependent activation of Na+-Cl– 
and K+ transport by the thick ascending limb of the 
loop of Henle (TALH) is a key participant in the coun-
tercurrent mechanism (Fig. 6-2). The countercurrent 
mechanism ultimately increases the interstitial osmolal-
ity in the inner medulla of the kidney, driving water 
absorption across the renal collecting duct. However, 
water, salt, and solute transport by both proximal and 
distal nephron segments participates in the renal con-
centrating mechanism (Fig. 6-2). Water transport across 
apical and basolateral aquaporin-1 water channels in 
the descending thin limb of the loop of Henle is thus 
involved, as is passive absorption of Na+-Cl– by the thin 
ascending limb, via apical and basolateral CLC-K1 chlo-
ride channels and paracellular Na+ transport. Renal urea 
transport in turn plays important roles in the genera-
tion of the medullary osmotic gradient and the ability to 
excrete solute-free water under conditions of both high 
and low protein intake (Fig. 6-2).
AVP-induced, PKA-dependent phosphorylation of 
the aquaporin-2 water channel in principal cells stim-
ulates the insertion of active water channels into the 
lumen of the collecting duct, resulting in transepithe-
lial water absorption down the medullary osmotic gra-
dient (Fig. 6-3). Under antidiuretic conditions, with 
increased circulating AVP, the kidney reabsorbs water 
filtered by the glomerulus, equilibrating the osmolal-
ity across the collecting duct epithelium to excrete a 
hypertonic, concentrated urine (osmolality of up to 
1200 mosmol/kg). In the absence of circulating AVP, 
insertion of aquaporin-2 channels and water absorption 
across the collecting duct are essentially abolished, result-
ing in secretion of a hypotonic, dilute urine (osmolality 
as low as 30–50 mosmol/kg). Abnormalities in this final 
common pathway are involved in most disorders of 
water homeostasis, e.g., a reduced or absent insertion 
of active aquaporin-2 water channels into the mem-
brane of principal cells in diabetes insipidus.
Maintenance of arterial circulatory integrity
Sodium is actively pumped out of cells by the Na+, K+-
ATPase membrane pump. In consequence, 85–90% 
of body Na+ is extracellular, and the extracellular fluid 
volume (ECFV) is a function of total-body Na+ con-
tent. Arterial perfusion and circulatory integrity are, in 
turn, determined by renal Na+ retention or excretion, 
in addition to the modulation of systemic arterial resis-
tance. Within the kidney, Na+ is filtered by the glom-
eruli and then sequentially reabsorbed by the renal 
tubules. The Na+ cation typically is reabsorbed with 
the chloride anion (Cl−); thus, chloride homeostasis also 
affects the ECFV. On a quantitative level, at a glomeru-
lar filtration rate (GFR) of 180 L/d and serum Na+ of 
∼140 mM, the kidney filters some 25,200 mmol/d of 
Na+. This is equivalent to ∼1.5 kg of salt, which would 
NaCI
NaCI
AQP1
AQP2,3
AQP2-4
AQP2-4
AQP1
AQP1
UT-A2
Urea
Urea
Urea
Urea
Urea
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
Descending
Vasa Recta:
AQP1, UT-B
Na
K
2Cl
Cortex
Outer
Medulla
Inner
Medulla
UT-A1
UT-A3
Na
Urea
Na
Urea
  K
ROMK1
NKCC2
(BSC1)
NaCl
CIC-K1
Figure 6-2
The renal concentrating mechanism. Water, salt, and sol-
ute transport by both proximal and distal nephron segments 
participates in the renal concentrating mechanism (see 
text for details). Diagram showing the location of the major 
transport proteins involved; a loop of Henle is depicted 
on the left, a collecting duct on the right. AQP, aquaporin; 
CLC-K1, chloride channel; NKCC2, Na-K-2Cl cotransporter; 
ROMK, renal outer medullary K+ channel; UT, urea trans-
porter. (From JM Sands: J Am Soc Nephrol 13:2795, 2002; 
with permission.)
58
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
occupy roughly 10 times the extracellular space; 99.6% 
of filtered Na+-Cl− must be reabsorbed to excrete 100 mM 
per day. Minute changes in renal Na+-Cl− excretion will 
thus have significant effects on the ECFV, leading to 
edema syndromes or hypovolemia.
Approximately two-thirds of filtered Na+-Cl– is 
reabsorbed by the renal proximal tubule via both para-
cellular and transcellular mechanisms. The TALH 
subsequently reabsorbs another 25–30% of filtered 
Na+-Cl– via the apical, furosemide-sensitive Na+-K+-
2Cl– cotransporter. The adjacent aldosterone-sensitive 
distal nephron, which encompasses the distal convo-
luted tubule (DCT), connecting tubule (CNT), and 
collecting duct, accomplishes the “fine-tuning” of renal 
Na+-Cl− excretion. The thiazide-sensitive apical Na+-
Cl− cotransporter (NCC) reabsorbs 5–10% of filtered 
Na+-Cl− in the DCT. Principal cells in the CNT and 
CD reabsorb Na+ via electrogenic, amiloride-sensitive 
epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC); Cl– ions are reabsorbed 
primarily by adjacent intercalated cells via apical Cl− 
exchange (Cl−-OH− and Cl−-HCO3
− exchange, medi-
ated by the SLC26A4 anion exchanger) (Fig. 6-4).
Renal tubular reabsorption of filtered Na+-Cl− is reg-
ulated by multiple circulating and paracrine hormones 
in addition to the activity of renal nerves. Angiotensin II 
activates proximal Na+-Cl− reabsorption, as do adrener-
gic receptors under the influence of renal sympathetic 
innervation; locally generated dopamine, in contrast, has 
a natriuretic effect. Aldosterone primarily activates Na+-
Cl− reabsorption within the aldosterone-sensitive distal 
nephron. In particular, aldosterone activates the ENaC 
channel in principal cells, inducing Na+ absorption and 
promoting K+ excretion (see Fig. 6-4).
Circulatory integrity is critical for the perfusion and 
function of vital organs. Underfilling of the arterial 
circulation is sensed by ventricular and vascular pres-
sure receptors, resulting in a neurohumoral activation 
(increased sympathetic tone, activation of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone axis, and increased circulating AVP) 
Collecting duct
principal cell
Tubule
Lumen
(Urine)
Medullary
Interstitium
(Vasa Recta
or Blood Side)
V2R
AQP3/
AQP4
AQP2
pAQP2
H2O
Vasopressin,
also called
antidiuretic
hormone (ADH)
AC
PKA
cAMP
Figure 6-3
Vasopressin and the regulation of water permeability in 
the renal collecting duct. Vasopressin binds to the type 2 
vasopressin receptor (V2R) on the basolateral membrane 
of principal cells, activates adenylyl cyclase (AC), increases 
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphatase (cAMP), 
and stimulates protein kinase A (PKA) activity. Cytoplasmic 
vesicles carrying aquaporin-2 (AQP) water channel pro-
teins are inserted into the luminal membrane in response to 
vasopressin, increasing the water permeability of this mem-
brane. When vasopressin stimulation ends, water channels 
are retrieved by an endocytic process and water permeabil-
ity returns to its low basal rate. The AQP3 and AQP4 water 
channels are expressed on the basolateral membrane and 
complete the transcellular pathway for water reabsorption. 
pAQP2, phosphorylated aquaporin-2. (From JM Sands, DG 
Bichet: Ann Intern Med 144:186, 2006; with permission.)
H+
ATP
H+-ATPase
SLC26A4
CLC-KB  Cl–
Cl–
Na+
H2O
H2O
HCO3
–
B-IC
PC
ATP
3Na+
ENaC
Maxi-K
ROMK
AQP-2
Interstitium
Lumen
AQP-3,4
K+
Cl–
Na+
K+
(–)
2K+
Figure 6-4
Sodium, water, and potassium transport in principal cells 
(PC) and adjacent a-intercalated cells (B-IC). The absorp-
tion of Na+ via the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium 
channel (ENaC) generates a lumen-negative potential differ-
ence that drives K+ excretion through the apical secretory K+ 
channel ROMK (renal outer medullary K+ channel) and/or the 
flow-dependent maxi-K channel. Transepithelial Cl– trans-
port occurs in adjacent β-intercalated cells via apical Cl–-
HCO3
− and Cl–-OH– exchange (SLC26A4 anion exchanger, 
also known as pendrin) basolateral CLC chloride channels. 
Water is absorbed down the osmotic gradient by principal 
cells, through the apical aquaporin-2 (AQP-2) and basolateral 
aquaporin-3 and aquaporin-4 (Fig. 6-3).
59
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
that synergistically increases renal Na+-Cl− reabsorp-
tion, vascular resistance, and renal water reabsorption. 
This occurs in the context of decreased cardiac output, 
as occurs in hypovolemic states, low-output cardiac failure, 
decreased oncotic pressure, and/or increased capillary 
permeability. Alternatively, excessive arterial vasodila-
tion results in relative arterial underfilling, leading to 
neurohumoral activation in the defense of tissue perfu-
sion. These physiologic responses play important roles 
in many of the disorders discussed in this chapter. In 
particular, it is important to appreciate that AVP func-
tions in the defense of circulatory integrity, inducing 
vasoconstriction, increasing sympathetic nervous system 
tone, increasing renal retention of both water and Na+-
Cl–, and modulating the arterial baroreceptor reflex. 
Most of these responses involve activation of systemic 
V1A AVP receptors, but concomitant activation of V2 
receptors in the kidney can result in renal water reten-
tion and hyponatremia.
Hypovolemia
Etiology
True volume depletion, or hypovolemia, generally 
refers to a state of combined salt and water loss that 
leads to contraction of the ECFV. The loss of salt and 
water may be renal or nonrenal in origin.
Renal causes
Excessive urinary Na+-Cl– and water loss is a feature of 
several conditions. A high filtered load of endogenous 
solutes, such as glucose and urea, can impair tubular 
reabsorption of Na+-Cl– and water, leading to an osmotic 
diuresis. Exogenous mannitol, which often is used to 
decrease intracerebral pressure, is filtered by glomeruli 
but not reabsorbed by the proximal tubule, thus causing 
an osmotic diuresis. Pharmacologic diuretics selectively 
impair Na+-Cl– reabsorption at specific sites along the 
nephron, leading to increased urinary Na+-Cl– excre-
tion. Other drugs can induce natriuresis as a side effect. 
For example, acetazolamide can inhibit proximal tubu-
lar Na+-Cl– absorption through its inhibition of car-
bonic anhydrase; other drugs, such as the antibiotics 
trimethoprim and pentamidine, inhibit distal tubular 
Na+ reabsorption through the amiloride-sensitive ENaC 
channel, leading to urinary Na+-Cl– loss. Hereditary 
defects in renal transport proteins also are associated with 
reduced reabsorption of filtered Na+-Cl– and/or water. 
Alternatively, mineralocorticoid deficiency, mineralocor-
ticoid resistance, or inhibition of the mineralocorticoid 
receptor (MLR) can reduce Na+-Cl– reabsorption by the 
aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron. Finally, tubuloin-
terstitial injury, as occurs in interstitial nephritis, acute 
tubular injury, or obstructive uropathy, can reduce distal 
tubular Na+-Cl– and/or water absorption.
Excessive excretion of free water, i.e., water without 
electrolytes, also can lead to hypovolemia. However, 
the effect on ECFV is usually less marked in light of 
the fact that two-thirds of the water volume is lost from 
the ICF. Excessive renal water excretion occurs in the 
setting of decreased circulating AVP or renal resistance 
to AVP (central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 
respectively).
Extrarenal causes
Nonrenal causes of hypovolemia include fluid loss from the 
gastrointestinal tract, skin, and respiratory system. Accu-
mulations of fluid within specific tissue compartments— 
typically the interstitium, peritoneum, or gastrointestinal 
tract—also can cause hypovolemia.
Approximately 9 L of fluid enters the gastrointesti-
nal tract daily, 2 L by ingestion and 7 L by secretion; 
almost 98% of this volume is absorbed so that daily 
fecal fluid loss is only 100–200 mL. Impaired gastro-
intestinal reabsorption or enhanced secretion of fluid 
can cause hypovolemia. Since gastric secretions have 
a low pH (high H+ concentration), whereas biliary, 
pancreatic, and intestinal secretions are alkaline (high 
HCO3
− concentration), vomiting and diarrhea often 
are accompanied by metabolic alkalosis and acidosis, 
respectively.
Evaporation of water from the skin and respira-
tory tract (so-called insensible losses) is the major 
route for loss of solute-free water, which is typically 
500–650 mL/d in healthy adults. This evaporative loss 
can increase during febrile illness or prolonged heat 
exposure. Hyperventilation also can increase insensible 
losses via the respiratory tract, particularly in ventilated 
patients; the humidity of inspired air is another deter-
mining factor. In addition, increased exertion and/or 
ambient temperature will increase insensible losses via 
sweat, which is hypotonic to plasma. Profuse sweating 
without adequate repletion of water and Na+-Cl– thus 
can lead to both hypovolemia and hypertonicity. Alter-
natively, replacement of these insensible losses with a 
surfeit of free water without adequate replacement of 
electrolytes may lead to hypovolemic hyponatremia.
Excessive fluid accumulation in interstitial and/or 
peritoneal spaces also can cause intravascular hypovolemia. 
Increases in vascular permeability and/or a reduction 
in oncotic pressure (hypoalbuminemia) alter Starling 
forces, resulting in excessive “third spacing” of the 
ECFV. This occurs in sepsis syndrome, burns, pancre-
atitis, nutritional hypoalbuminemia, and peritonitis. 
Alternatively, distributive hypovolemia can result from 
accumulation of fluid within specific compartments, 
for example, within the bowel lumen in gastrointesti-
nal obstruction or ileus. Hypovolemia also can occur 
after extracorporeal hemorrhage or after significant 
hemorrhage into an expandable space, for example, the 
retroperitoneum.
60
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Diagnostic evaluation
A careful history usually determines the etiologic cause 
of hypovolemia. Symptoms of hypovolemia are non-
specific and include fatigue, weakness, thirst, and pos-
tural dizziness; more severe symptoms and signs include 
oliguria, cyanosis, abdominal and chest pain, and con-
fusion or obtundation. Associated electrolyte disorders 
may cause additional symptoms, for example, muscle 
weakness in patients with hypokalemia. On exami-
nation, diminished skin turgor and dry oral mucous 
membranes are less than ideal markers of a decreased 
ECFV in adult patients; reliable signs of hypovole-
mia include a decreased jugular venous pressure (JVP), 
orthostatic tachycardia (an increase of >15–20 beats per 
minute upon standing), and orthostatic hypotension 
(a >10- to 20-mmHg drop in blood pressure on stand-
ing). More severe fluid loss leads to hypovolemic shock, 
with hypotension, tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstric-
tion, and peripheral hypoperfusion; these patients may 
exhibit peripheral cyanosis, cold extremities, oliguria, 
and altered mental status.
Routine chemistries may reveal an increase in 
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, reflecting 
a decrease in GFR. Creatinine is the more dependable 
measure of GFR, since BUN levels may be influenced 
by an increase in tubular reabsorption (prerenal azote-
mia), an increase in urea generation in catabolic states, 
hyperalimentation, or gastrointestinal bleeding and/or a 
decreased urea generation in decreased protein intake. 
In hypovolemic shock, liver function tests and cardiac bio­- 
markers may show evidence of hepatic and cardiac 
ischemia, respectively. Routine chemistries and/or blood 
gases may reveal evidence of acid-base disorders. For 
example, bicarbonate loss due to diarrheal illness is a 
very common cause of metabolic acidosis; alternatively, 
patients with severe hypovolemic shock may develop 
lactic acidosis with an elevated anion gap.
The neurohumoral response to hypovolemia stimu-
lates an increase in renal tubular Na+ and water reab-
sorption. Therefore, the urine Na+ concentration is 
typically <20 mM in nonrenal causes of hypovole-
mia, with a urine osmolality of >450 mosmol/kg. The 
reduction in both GFR and distal tubular Na+ delivery 
may cause a defect in renal potassium excretion, with an 
increase in plasma K+ concentration. Of note, patients 
with hypovolemia and a hypochloremic alkalosis due to 
vomiting, diarrhea, or diuretics typically have a urine 
Na+ concentration >20 mM and urine pH >7.0 due 
to the increase in filtered HCO3
−; the urine Cl− con-
centration in this setting is a more accurate indicator of 
volume status, with a level <25 mM suggestive of hypo-
volemia. The urine Na+ concentration is often >20 mM 
in patients with renal causes of hypovolemia, such as 
acute tubular necrosis; similarly, patients with diabetes 
insipidus will have an inappropriately dilute urine.
Treatment	
Hypovolemia
The therapeutic goals in hypovolemia are to restore nor-
movolemia and replace ongoing fluid losses. Mild hypo-
volemia usually can be treated with oral hydration and 
resumption of a normal maintenance diet. More severe 
hypovolemia requires intravenous hydration, with the 
choice of solution tailored to the underlying patho-
physiology. Isotonic, “normal” saline (0.9% NaCl, 154 mM 
Na+) is the most appropriate resuscitation fluid for nor-
monatremic or hyponatremic patients with severe hypo-
volemia; colloid solutions such as intravenous albumin 
are not demonstrably superior for this purpose. Hyper-
natremic patients should receive a hypotonic solution: 
5% dextrose if there has been only water loss (as in dia-
betes insipidus) or hypotonic saline (1/2 or 1/4 normal 
saline) if there has been water and Na+-Cl– loss. Patients 
with bicarbonate loss and metabolic acidosis, as occurs 
frequently in diarrhea, should receive intravenous bicar-
bonate, either an isotonic solution (150 meq of Na+-
HCO3
− in 5% dextrose) or a more hypotonic bicarbonate 
solution in dextrose or dilute saline. Patients with severe 
hemorrhage or anemia should receive red cell transfu-
sions without increasing the hematocrit beyond 35%.
Sodium Disorders
Disorders of serum Na+ concentration are caused by 
abnormalities in water homeostasis that lead to changes 
in the relative ratio of Na+ to body water. Water intake 
and circulating AVP constitute the two key effectors in 
the defense of serum osmolality; defects in one or both 
of these defense mechanisms cause most cases of hypo-
natremia and hypernatremia. In contrast, abnormalities 
in sodium homeostasis per se lead to a deficit or surplus 
of whole-body Na+-Cl– content, a key determinant of 
the ECFV and circulatory integrity. Notably, volume 
status also modulates the release of AVP by the poste-
rior pituitary so that hypovolemia is associated with 
higher circulating levels of the hormone at each level of 
serum osmolality. Similarly, in hypervolemic causes of 
arterial underfilling, e.g., heart failure and cirrhosis, the 
associated neurohumoral activation is associated with an 
increase in circulating AVP, leading to water retention 
and hyponatremia. Therefore, a key concept in sodium 
disorders is that the absolute plasma Na+ concentration 
tells one nothing about the volume status of a specific 
patient; this must be taken into account in the diagnos-
tic and therapeutic approach.
Hyponatremia
Hyponatremia, which is defined as a plasma Na+ con-
centration <135 mM, is a very common disorder, 
61
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
occurring in up to 22% of hospitalized patients. This 
disorder is almost always the result of an increase in 
circulating AVP and/or increased renal sensitivity to 
AVP, combined with any intake of free water; a notable 
exception is hyponatremia due to low solute intake (see 
below). The underlying pathophysiology for the exag-
gerated or inappropriate AVP response differs in patients 
with hyponatremia as a function of their ECFV. Hypo-
natremia thus is subdivided diagnostically into three 
groups, depending on clinical history and volume status: 
hypovolemic, euvolemic, and hypervolemic (Fig. 6-5).
Hypovolemic hyponatremia
Hypovolemia causes a marked neurohumoral activa-
tion, increasing circulating levels of AVP. The increase 
in circulating AVP helps preserve blood pressure via 
vascular and baroreceptor V1A receptors and increases 
water reabsorption via renal V2 receptors; activation of
V2 receptors can lead to hyponatremia in the setting of  in-
creased free-water intake. Nonrenal causes of hypovo-
lemic hyponatremia include gastrointestinal (GI) loss 
(vomiting, diarrhea, tube drainage, etc.) and insensi-
ble loss (sweating, burns) of Na+-Cl– and water in the 
absence of adequate oral replacement; urine Na+ con-
centration is typically <20 mM. Notably, these patients 
may be clinically classified as euvolemic, with only the 
reduced urinary Na+ concentration to indicate the cause 
of their hyponatremia. Indeed, a urine Na+ concentra-
tion <20 mM in the absence of a cause of hypervolemic 
hyponatremia predicts a rapid increase in plasma Na+ 
concentration in response to intravenous normal saline; 
saline induces a water diuresis in this setting, as circulat-
ing AVP levels plummet.
The renal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia share an 
inappropriate loss of Na+-Cl– in the urine, leading to vol-
ume depletion and an increase in circulating AVP; urine 
Na+ concentration is typically >20 mM (Fig. 6-5). A defi-
ciency in circulating aldosterone and/or its renal effects 
can lead to hyponatremia in primary adrenal insuffi-
ciency and other causes of hypoaldosteronism; hyper-
kalemia and hyponatremia in a hypotensive and/or 
hypovolemic patient with high urine Na+ concentration 
(much >20 mM) should strongly suggest this diagnosis. 
Salt-losing nephropathies may lead to hyponatremia 
when sodium intake is reduced due to impaired renal 
tubular function; typical causes include reflux nephrop-
athy, interstitial nephropathies, post-obstructive uropa-
thy, medullary cystic disease, and the recovery phase 
of acute tubular necrosis. Thiazide diuretics cause 
hyponatremia via a number of mechanisms, includ-
ing polydipsia and diuretic-induced volume depletion. 
Notably, thiazides do not inhibit the renal concentrat-
ing mechanism so that circulating AVP has a maximal 
effect on renal water retention. In contrast, loop diuret-
ics, which are associated less frequently with hyponatre-
mia, inhibit Na+-Cl– and K+ absorption by the TALH, 
blunting the countercurrent mechanism and reducing 
the ability to concentrate the urine. Increased excre-
tion of an osmotically active nonreabsorbable or poorly 
reabsorbable solute also can lead to volume depletion 
and hyponatremia; important causes include glycosuria, 
ketonuria (e.g., in starvation or in diabetic or alcoholic 
ketoacidosis), and bicarbonaturia (e.g., in renal tubular 
Assessment of volume status
UNa >20
UNa <20
UNa >20
UNa >20
UNa <20
Hypovolemia
• Total body water ↓
• Total body sodium ↓↓
Hypervolemia
• Total body water ↑↑
• Total body sodium ↑
Euvolemia (no edema)
• Total body water ↑
• Total body sodium ←→
Renal losses
Diuretic excess
Mineral corticoid deficiency
Salt-losing deficiency
Bicarbonaturia with
 renal tubal acidosis and
 metabolic alkalosis
Ketonuria
Osmotic diuresis
Cerebral salt wasting
syndrome
Extrarenal losses
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Third spacing of fluids
Burns
Pancreatitis
Trauma
Glucocorticoid deficiency
Hypothyroidism
Stress
Drugs
Syndrome of inappropriate
 antidiuretic hormone
 secretion
Acute or chronic
renal failure
Nephrotic syndrome
Cirrhosis
Cardiac failure
Figure 6-5
The diagnostic approach to hyponatremia. (From S Kumar, 
T Berl: Diseases of water metabolism, in Atlas of Diseases of 
the Kidney, RW Schrier [ed ]. Philadelphia, Current Medicine, 
Inc, 1999; with permission.)
62
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
acidosis or metabolic alkalosis, in which the associated 
bicarbonaturia leads to loss of Na+).
Finally, the syndrome of “cerebral salt wasting” is a 
rare cause of hypovolemic hyponatremia, encompassing 
hyponatremia with clinical hypovolemia and inappro-
priate natriuresis in association with intracranial disease; 
associated disorders include subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
traumatic brain injury, craniotomy, encephalitis, and 
meningitis. Distinction from the more common syn-
drome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD) is critical, 
since cerebral salt wasting typically responds to aggres-
sive Na+-Cl− repletion.
Hypervolemic hyponatremia
Patients with hypervolemic hyponatremia develop an 
increase in total body Na+-Cl– that is accompanied by a 
proportionately greater increase in total body water, leading 
to a reduced plasma Na+ concentration. As in hypovo-
lemic hyponatremia, the causative disorders can be sep­
arated by the effect on urine Na+ concentration, with 
acute or chronic renal failure uniquely associated with an 
increase in urine Na+ concentration (Fig. 6-5). The 
pathophysiology of hyponatremia in the sodium-avid 
edematous disorders [congestive heart failure (CHF), 
cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome] is similar to that in 
hypovolemic hyponatremia except that arterial filling 
and circulatory integrity are decreased due to the spe-
cific etiologic factors, e.g., cardiac dysfunction in CHF 
and peripheral vasodilation in cirrhosis. Urine Na+ con-
centration is typically very low, i.e., <10 mM, even after 
hydration with normal saline; this Na+-avid state may 
be obscured by diuretic therapy. The degree of hypo-
natremia provides an indirect index of the associated 
neurohumoral activation and is an important prognostic 
indicator in hypervolemic hyponatremia.
Euvolemic hyponatremia
Euvolemic hyponatremia can occur in moderate to 
severe hypothyroidism, with correction after the 
achievement of a euthyroid state. Severe hyponatremia 
also can be a consequence of secondary adrenal insuf-
ficiency due to pituitary disease; whereas the deficit in 
circulating aldosterone in primary adrenal insufficiency 
causes hypovolemic hyponatremia, the predominant glu-
cocorticoid deficiency in secondary adrenal failure is 
associated with euvolemic hyponatremia. Glucocorticoids 
exert a negative feedback on AVP release by the pos-
terior pituitary so that hydrocortisone replacement in 
these patients will rapidly normalize the AVP response 
to osmolality, reducing circulating AVP.
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis is the 
most common cause of euvolemic hyponatremia 
(Table 6-1). The generation of hyponatremia in SIAD 
requires an intake of free water, with persistent intake at 
serum osmolalities that are lower than the usual thresh-
old for thirst; as one would expect, the osmotic thresh-
old and osmotic response curves for the sensation of 
thirst are shifted downward in patients with SIAD. Four 
distinct patterns of AVP secretion have been recognized 
in patients with SIAD, independent for the most part of 
the underlying cause. Unregulated, erratic AVP secre-
tion is seen in about a third of patients, with no obvious 
correlation between serum osmolality and circulating 
AVP levels. Other patients fail to suppress AVP secre-
tion at lower serum osmolalities, with a normal response 
curve to hyperosmolar conditions; others have a reset 
osmostat, with a lower threshold osmolality and a left-
shifted osmotic response curve. The fourth subset consists 
of patients who have essentially no detectable circulating 
AVP, suggesting either a gain in function in renal water 
reabsorption or a circulating antidiuretic substance that 
is distinct from AVP. Gain-in-function mutations of 
a single specific residue in the V2 vasopressin receptor 
have been described in some of these patients, leading 
to constitutive activation of the receptor in the absence 
of AVP and a nephrogenic subset of SIAD.
Strictly speaking, patients with SIAD are not 
euvolemic but are subclinically volume expanded due 
to AVP-induced water and Na+-Cl– retention; vasopres-
sin escape mechanisms invoked by sustained increases in 
AVP serve to limit distal renal tubular transport, preserv-
ing a modestly hypervolemic steady state. Serum uric 
acid is often low (<4 mg/dL) in patients with SIAD, 
consistent with suppressed proximal tubular transport in 
the setting of increased distal tubular Na+-Cl– and water 
transport; in contrast, patients with hypovolemic hypo-
natremia are often hyperuricemic due to a shared activa-
tion of proximal tubular Na+-Cl– and urate transport.
Common causes of SIAD include pulmonary disease 
(pneumonia, tuberculosis, pleural effusion, etc.) and cen-
tral nervous system (CNS) diseases (tumor, subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, meningitis, etc.). SIAD also occurs with 
malignancies, most commonly with small cell lung car-
cinoma (75% of cases of malignancy-associated SIAD); 
∼10% of patients with this tumor will have a plasma Na+ 
concentration <130 mM at presentation. SIAD is also a 
common complication of certain drugs, most commonly 
the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). 
Other drugs can potentiate the renal effect of AVP with-
out exerting direct effects on circulating AVP levels 
(Table 6-1).
Low solute intake and hyponatremia
Hyponatremia occasionally can occur in patients with a 
very low intake of dietary solutes. Classically, this occurs 
in alcoholics whose sole nutrient is beer, hence the diag-
nostic label “beer potomania”; beer is very low in pro-
tein and salt content, containing only 1–2 millimoles of 
Na+ per liter. The syndrome also has been described 
63
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
in nonalcoholic patients with highly restricted solute 
intake due to nutrient-restricted diets, e.g., extreme 
vegetarian diets. Patients with hyponatremia due to low 
solute intake typically present with a very low urine 
osmolality, <100–200 mosmol/kg, with a urine Na+ 
concentration that is <10–20 mM. The fundamental 
abnormality is the inadequate dietary intake of solutes; 
the reduced urinary solute excretion limits water excre-
tion so that hyponatremia ensues after relatively mod-
est polydipsia. The ability to excrete a free-water load 
is thus a function of urinary solute excretion; at a urine 
osmolality of 80 mosmol/kg, free-water clearance is 
2.7 L daily for a solute excretion of 300 mosmol/d, 5.4 L 
daily at 600 mosmol/d, and 8.1 L at 900 mosmol/d. 
AVP levels have not been reported in patients with 
beer potomania but are expected to be suppressed or 
rapidly suppressible with saline hydration; this fits with 
the overly rapid correction in plasma Na+ concentra-
tion that can be seen with saline hydration. Resumption 
of a normal diet and/or saline hydration also will cor-
rect the causative deficit in urinary solute excretion so 
that patients with beer potomania typically correct their 
plasma Na+ concentration promptly after admission to 
the hospital.
Clinical features of hyponatremia
Hyponatremia induces generalized cellular swelling, 
a consequence of water movement down the osmotic 
gradient from the hypotonic ECF to the ICF. The symp-
toms of hyponatremia are primarily neurologic, reflect-
ing the development of cerebral edema within a rigid 
skull. The initial CNS response to acute hyponatremia 
is an increase in interstitial pressure, leading to shunting 
of ECF and solutes from the interstitial space into the 
cerebrospinal fluid and then into the systemic circu-
lation. This is accompanied by an efflux of the major 
intracellular ions—Na+, K+, and Cl–—from brain cells. 
Acute hyponatremic encephalopathy ensues when 
these volume regulatory mechanisms are overwhelmed 
by a rapid decrease in tonicity, resulting in acute cere-
bral edema. Early symptoms can include nausea, head-
ache, and vomiting. However, severe complications 
can evolve rapidly, including seizure activity, brainstem 
Table 6-1 
Causes of the Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis
Malignant 
Diseases
Pulmonary  
Disorders
Disorders of the Central 
Nervous System
Drugs
Other Causes
Carcinoma
Lung
Small cell
Mesothelioma
Oropharynx
Gastrointestinal tract
Stomach
Duodenum
Pancreas
Genitourinary tract
Ureter
Bladder
Prostate
Endometrium
Endocrine thymoma
Lymphomas
Sarcomas
Ewing’s sarcoma
Infections
Bacterial pneumonia
Viral pneumonia
Pulmonary abscess
Tuberculosis
Aspergillosis
Asthma
Cystic fibrosis
Respiratory failure asso-
ciated with positive-
pressure breathing
Infection
Encephalitis
Meningitis
Brain abscess
Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever
AIDS
Bleeding and masses
Subdural hematoma
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Cerebrovascular accident
Brain tumors
Head trauma
Hydrocephalus
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Other
Multiple sclerosis
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Shy-Drager syndrome
Delerium tremens
Acute intermittent  
polyphyria
Drugs that stimulate 
release of AVP or 
enhance its action
Chlorpropamide
SSRIs
Tricyclic antidepres-
sants
Clofibrate
Carbamazepine
Vincristine
Nicotine
Narcotics
Antipsychotic drugs
Ifosfamide
Cyclophosphamide
Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
MDMA (ecstasy)
AVP analogues
Desmopressin
Oxytocin
Vasopressin
Hereditary (gain-of-
function mutations 
in the vasopressin 
V2 receptor)
Idiopathic
Transient
Endurance exercise
General anesthesia
Nausea
Pain
Stress
Abbreviations: AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; AVP, vasopressin; MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); SSRI, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Source: From DH Ellison and T Berl: N Engl J Med 356:2064, 2007.
64
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
herniation, coma, and death. A key complication of 
acute hyponatremia is normocapnic or hypercap-
nic respiratory failure; the associated hypoxemia may 
amplify the neurologic injury. Normocapnic respiratory 
failure in this setting typically is due to noncardiogenic, 
neurogenic pulmonary edema, with a normal pulmo-
nary capillary wedge pressure.
Acute symptomatic hyponatremia is a medical 
emergency that occurs in a number of specific settings 
(Table 6-2). Women, particularly before menopause, 
are much more likely to develop encephalopathy and 
severe neurologic sequelae. Acute hyponatremia often 
has an iatrogenic component, e.g., when hypotonic 
intravenous fluids are given to postoperative patients 
with an increase in circulating AVP. Exercise-associated 
hyponatremia, an important clinical issue at marathons 
and other endurance events, similarly has been linked 
to both a nonosmotic increase in circulating AVP and 
excessive free-water intake. The recreational drug 
ecstasy 
(MDMA, 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine) causes a rapid and potent induction of both thirst 
and AVP, leading to severe acute hyponatremia.
Persistent, chronic hyponatremia results in an efflux 
of organic osmolytes (creatine, betaine, glutamate, myo-
inositol, and taurine) from brain cells; this response 
reduces intracellular osmolality and the osmotic gradi-
ent, favoring water entry. This reduction in intracellu-
lar osmolytes is largely complete within 48 h, the time 
period that clinically defines chronic hyponatremia; this 
temporal definition has considerable relevance for the 
treatment of hyponatremia (see below). The cellular 
response to chronic hyponatremia does not fully protect 
patients from symptoms, which can include vomiting, 
nausea, confusion, and seizures, usually at a plasma Na+ 
concentration <125 mM. Even patients who are judged 
asymptomatic can manifest subtle gait and cognitive 
defects that reverse with correction of hyponatremia; 
notably, chronic asymptomatic hyponatremia increases 
the risk of falls. Chronic hyponatremia also increases the 
risk of bony fractures owing to the associated neuro-
logic dysfunction and to a hyponatremia-associated 
reduction in bone density. Therefore, every attempt 
should be made to correct plasma Na+ concentration 
safely in patients with chronic hyponatremia, even in 
the absence of overt symptoms (see the section on treat-
ment of hyponatremia, later).
The management of chronic hyponatremia is com-
plicated significantly by the asymmetry of the cellular 
response to correction of plasma Na+ concentration. 
Specifically, the reaccumulation of organic osmolytes 
by brain cells is attenuated and delayed as osmolality 
increases after correction of hyponatremia, sometimes 
resulting in degenerative loss of oligodendrocytes and 
an osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS). Overly 
rapid correction of hyponatremia (>8–10 mM in 24 h 
or 18 mM in 48 h) also is associated with a disruption in 
integrity of the blood-brain barrier, allowing the entry 
of immune mediators that may contribute to demyelin-
ation. The lesions of ODS classically affect the pons, a 
structure in which the delay in the reaccumulation of 
osmotic osmolytes is particularly pronounced; clinically, 
patients with central pontine myelinolysis can present 
one or more days after overcorrection of hyponatremia 
with para- or quadraparesis, dysphagia, dysarthria, diplo-
pia, a “locked-in syndrome,” and/or loss of conscious-
ness. Other regions of the brain also can be involved in 
ODS, most commonly in association with lesions of the 
pons but occasionally in isolation; in order of frequency, 
the lesions of extrapontine myelinolysis can occur in the 
cerebellum, lateral geniculate body, thalamus, putamen, 
and cerebral cortex or subcortex. The clinical presen-
tation of ODS therefore can vary as a function of the 
extent and localization of extrapontine myelinoly-
sis, with the reported development of ataxia, mutism, 
parkinsonism, dystonia, and catatonia. Relowering of 
plasma Na+ concentration after overly rapid correction 
can prevent or attenuate ODS (see the section on treat-
ment of hyponatremia, later). However, even appro-
priately slow correction can be associated with ODS, 
particularly in patients with additional risk factors; these 
factors include alcoholism, malnutrition, hypokalemia, 
and liver transplantation.
Diagnostic evaluation of hyponatremia
Clinical assessment of hyponatremic patients should 
focus on the underlying cause; a detailed drug history is 
particularly crucial (Table 6-1). A careful clinical assess-
ment of volume status is obligatory for the classical 
diagnostic approach to hyponatremia (Fig. 6-5). Hypo-
natremia is frequently multifactorial, particularly when 
severe; clinical evaluation should consider all the possible 
Table 6-2
Causes of Acute Hyponatremia
Iatrogenic
  Postoperative: premenopausal women
  Hypotonic fluids with cause of ↑ vasopressin
  Glycine irrigation: TURP, uterine surgery
  Colonoscopy preparation
  Recent institution of thiazides
Polydipsia
MDMA ingestion
Exercise induced
Multifactorial, e.g., thiazide and polydipsia
Abbreviations: MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); 
TURP, transurethral resection of the prostate.
65
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
causes for excessive circulating AVP, including volume 
status, drugs, and the presence of nausea and/or pain. 
Radiologic imaging also may be appropriate to assess 
whether patients have a pulmonary or CNS cause for 
hyponatremia. A screening chest x-ray may fail to detect 
a small cell carcinoma of the lung; CT scanning of the 
thorax should be considered in patients at high risk for 
this tumor, e.g., patients with a history of smoking.
Laboratory investigation should include a measure-
ment of serum osmolality to exclude pseudohyponatre-
mia, which is defined as the coexistence of hyponatremia 
with a normal or increased plasma tonicity. Most clinical 
laboratories measure plasma Na+ concentration by testing 
diluted samples with automated ion-sensitive electrodes, 
correcting for this dilution by assuming that plasma 
is 93% water; this correction factor can be inaccurate 
in patients with pseudohyponatremia due to extreme 
hyperlipidemia and/or hyperproteinemia, in whom 
serum lipid or protein makes up a greater percentage of 
plasma volume. The measured osmolality also should be 
converted to the effective osmolality (tonicity) by sub-
tracting the measured concentration of urea (divided by 
2.8 if in mg/dL); patients with hyponatremia have an 
effective osmolality <275 mosmol/kg.
Elevated BUN and creatinine in routine chemistries 
also can indicate renal dysfunction as a potential cause of 
hyponatremia, whereas hyperkalemia may suggest adre-
nal insufficiency or hypoaldosteronism. Serum glucose 
also should be measured; plasma Na+ concentration falls 
by ∼1.6 to 2.4 mM for every 100-mg/dL increase in glu-
cose due to glucose-induced water efflux from cells; this 
“true” hyponatremia resolves after correction of hyper-
glycemia. Measurement of serum uric acid also should be 
performed; whereas patients with SIAD-type physiology 
typically will be hypouricemic (serum uric acid <4 mg/
dL), volume-depleted patients often will be hyperurice-
mic. In the appropriate clinical setting, thyroid, adrenal, 
and pituitary function should also be tested; hypothy-
roidism and secondary adrenal failure due to pituitary 
insufficiency are important causes of euvolemic hypona-
tremia, whereas primary adrenal failure causes hypovo-
lemic hyponatremia. A cosyntropin stimulation test is 
necessary to assess for primary adrenal insufficiency.
Urine electrolytes and osmolality are crucial tests in 
the initial evaluation of hyponatremia. A urine Na+ con-
centration <20–30 mM is consistent with hypovolemic 
hyponatremia in the clinical absence of a hypervolemic, 
Na+-avid syndrome such as CHF (Fig. 6-5). In contrast, 
patients with SIAD typically excrete urine with a Na+ 
concentration that is >30 mM. However, there can be 
substantial overlap in urine Na+ concentration values in 
patients with SIAD and hypovolemic hyponatremia, par-
ticularly in the elderly; the ultimate “gold standard” for 
the diagnosis of hypovolemic hyponatremia is the dem-
onstration that plasma Na+ concentration corrects after 
hydration with normal saline. Patients with thiazide- 
associated hyponatremia also may present with a higher 
than expected urine Na+ concentration and other find-
ings suggestive of SIAD; one should defer making a 
diagnosis of SIAD in these patients until 1–2 weeks 
after discontinuation of the thiazide. A urine osmolality 
<100 mosmol/kg is suggestive of polydipsia; urine 
osmolality >400 mosmol/kg indicates that AVP excess is 
playing a more dominant role, whereas intermediate val-
ues are more consistent with multifactorial pathophysiol-
ogy (e.g., AVP excess with a significant component of 
polydipsia). Patients with hyponatremia due to decreased 
solute intake (beer potomania) typically have urine Na+ 
concentration <20 mM and urine osmolality in the 
range of <100 to the low 200s. Finally, the measurement 
of urine K+ concentration is required to calculate the 
urine:plasma electrolyte ratio, which is useful to predict 
the response to fluid restriction (see the section on treat-
ment of hyponatremia, below).
Treatment	
Hyponatremia
Three major considerations guide therapy for hypona-
tremia. First, the presence and/or severity of symptoms 
determine the urgency and goals of therapy. Patients 
with acute hyponatremia (Table 6-2) present with symp-
toms that can range from headache, nausea, and/or  
vomiting to seizures, obtundation, and central hernia-
tion; patients with chronic hyponatremia that is present  
for >48 h are less likely to have severe symptoms.  
Second, patients with chronic hyponatremia are at 
risk for ODS if plasma Na+ concentration is corrected 
by >8–10 mM within the first 24 h and/or by >18 mM 
within the first 48 h. Third, the response to interventions 
such as hypertonic saline, isotonic saline, vasopressin 
antagonists can be highly unpredictable, so frequent 
monitoring of plasma Na+ concentration during correc-
tive therapy is imperative.
Once the urgency in correcting the plasma Na+ 
concentration has been established and appropriate 
therapy instituted, the focus should be on treatment 
or withdrawal of the underlying cause. Patients with 
euvolemic hyponatremia due to SIAD, hypothyroidism, 
or secondary adrenal failure will respond to success-
ful treatment of the underlying cause, with an increase 
in plasma Na+ concentration. However, not all causes 
of SIAD are immediately reversible, necessitating phar-
macologic therapy to increase the plasma Na+ concen-
tration (see below). Hypovolemic hyponatremia will 
respond to intravenous hydration with isotonic normal 
saline, with a rapid reduction in circulating AVP and a 
brisk water diuresis; it may be necessary to reduce the 
rate of correction if the history suggests that hypona-
tremia has been chronic, i.e., present for more than 48 h 
66
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
(see below). Hypervolemic hyponatremia due to con-
gestive heart failure often responds to improved ther-
apy of the underlying cardiomyopathy, e.g., after the 
institution or intensification of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibition. Finally, patients with hypo-
natremia due to beer potomania and low solute intake 
respond very rapidly to intravenous saline and the 
resumption of a normal diet. Notably, patients with beer 
potomania have a very high risk of developing ODS due 
to the associated hypokalemia, alcoholism, and malnu-
trition and the high risk of overcorrecting the plasma 
Na+ concentration.
Water deprivation has long been a cornerstone of 
therapy for chronic hyponatremia. However, patients 
who are excreting minimal electrolyte-free water will 
require aggressive fluid restriction; this can be very dif-
ficult for patients with SIAD to tolerate because their 
thirst is also inappropriately stimulated. The urine:plasma 
electrolyte ratio (urinary [Na+] + [K+]/plasma [Na+]) can be 
exploited as a quick indicator of electrolyte-free water 
excretion (Table 6-3); patients with a ratio >1 should 
be restricted more aggressively (<500 mL/d), those 
with a ratio ∼1 should be restricted to 500–700 mL/d, 
and those with a ratio <1 should be restricted to  
<1 L/d. In hypokalemic patients, potassium replace-
ment will serve to increase plasma Na+ concentration 
in light of the fact that the plasma Na+ concentration is 
a function of both exchangeable Na+ and exchange-
able K+ divided by total body water; a corollary is that 
aggressive repletion of K+ has the potential to overcor-
rect the plasma Na+ concentration even in the absence 
of hypertonic saline. Plasma Na+ concentration also 
tends to respond to an increase in dietary solute intake, 
which increases the ability to excrete free water; how-
ever, the use of oral urea and/or salt tablets for this pur-
pose is generally not practical or well tolerated.
Patients in whom therapy with fluid restriction, 
potassium replacement, and/or increased solute intake 
fails may require pharmacologic therapy to increase 
their plasma Na+ concentration. Many patients with 
SIAD respond to combined therapy with oral furose-
mide, 20 mg twice a day (higher doses may be nec-
essary in renal insufficiency), and oral salt tablets; 
furosemide serves to inhibit the renal countercurrent 
mechanism and blunt urinary concentrating ability, 
whereas the salt tablets counteract diuretic-associated 
natriuresis. Demeclocycline is a potent inhibitor of prin-
cipal cells and can be utilized in patients whose Na+ 
levels do not increase in response to furosemide and 
salt tablets. However, this agent can be associated with 
a reduction in GFR due to excessive natriuresis and/
or direct renal toxicity; it should be avoided in cirrhotic 
patients in particular, who are at higher risk of nephro-
toxicity due to drug accumulation.
Vasopressin antagonists (vaptans) are highly effec-
tive in treating SIAD and hypervolemic hyponatre-
mia due to heart failure or cirrhosis, reliably increasing 
plasma Na+ concentration as a result of their aquaretic 
effects (augmentation of free-water clearance). Most of 
these agents specifically antagonize the V2 vasopressin 
receptor; tolvaptan is currently the only oral V2 antago-
nist approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion. Conivaptan, the only available intravenous vap-
tan, is a mixed V1A/V2 antagonist with a modest risk of 
hypotension due to V1A receptor inhibition. Therapy 
with vaptans must be initiated in a hospital setting, with 
a liberalization of fluid restriction (>2 L/d) and close 
monitoring of plasma Na+ concentration. Although 
these agents are approved for the management of all 
but hypovolemic hyponatremia and acute hyponatre-
mia, the clinical indications for them are not completely 
clear. Oral tolvaptan is perhaps most appropriate for the 
management of significant and persistent SIAD (e.g., in 
small cell lung carcinoma) that has not responded to 
water restriction and/or oral furosemide and salt tablets.
Treatment of acute symptomatic hyponatremia 
should include hypertonic 3% saline (513 mM) to acutely 
increase plasma Na+ concentration by 1–2 mM/h to a 
total of 4–6 mM; this modest increase is typically suf-
ficient to alleviate severe acute symptoms, after which 
corrective guidelines for “chronic” hyponatremia are 
appropriate (see below). A number of equations have 
been developed to estimate the required rate of hyper-
tonic saline. The traditional approach is to calculate a 
Table 6-3
Management of Hypernatremia
Water Deficit
1. Estimate total-body water (TBW): 50% of body weight 
in women and 60% in men
2. Calculate free-water deficit: {([Na+]-140)/140} × TBW
3. Administer deficit over 48–72 h, without decreasing the 
plasma Na+ concentration by >10 mM/24 h
Ongoing Water Losses
4. Calculate electrolyte-free water clearance, CeH2O:
C H O
V
U
U
P
P
e
Na
K
Na
Na
2
1
=
−
+
(
[
] /
)
  where V is urinary volume, UNa is urinary [Na+], UK is 
urinary [K+], and PNa is plasma [Na+]
Insensible Losses
5. ∼10 mL/kg per day: less if ventilated, more if febrile
Total
6. Add components to determine water deficit and ongo-
ing water loss; correct the water deficit over 48–72 h 
and replace daily water loss. Avoid correction of plasma 
[Na+] by >10 mM/d
67
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
Na+ deficit, in which the Na+ deficit = 0.6 × body weight × 
(target plasma Na+ concentration − starting plasma Na+ 
concentration), followed by a calculation of the required 
rate. Regardless of the method used to determine the 
rate of administration, the increase in plasma Na+ con-
centration can be highly unpredictable during treat-
ment with hypertonic saline due to rapid changes in 
the underlying physiology; plasma Na+ concentration 
should be monitored every 2–4 h during treatment, with 
appropriate changes in therapy based on the observed 
rate of change. The administration of supplemental 
oxygen and ventilatory support is also critical in the 
management of patients with acute hyponatremia who 
develop acute pulmonary edema or hypercapnic respi-
ratory failure. Intravenous loop diuretics will help treat 
acute pulmonary edema and also increase free-water 
excretion by interfering with the renal countercurrent 
multiplication system. Vasopressin antagonists do not 
have an approved role in the management of acute 
hyponatremia.
The rate of correction should be comparatively slow 
in chronic hyponatremia (<8–10 mM in the first 24 h and 
<18 mM in the first 48 h) to avoid ODS. Overcorrection of 
the plasma Na+ concentration can occur when AVP levels 
rapidly normalize, for example, after treatment of patients 
with chronic hypovolemic hyponatremia with intravenous 
saline or after glucocorticoid replacement in patients with 
hypopituitarism and secondary adrenal failure. Approxi-
mately 10% of patients treated with vaptans will over-
correct; the risk is increased if water intake is not liberal-
ized. If the plasma Na+ concentration overcorrects after 
therapy—whether with hypertonic saline, isotonic saline, 
or a vaptan—hyponatremia can be reinduced safely or 
stabilized by the administration of the vasopressin agonist 
desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) and/or the administration 
of free water, typically intravenous D5W; the goal is to pre-
vent or reverse the development of ODS.
Hypernatremia
Etiology
Hypernatremia is defined as an increase in the plasma 
Na+ concentration to >145 mM. Considerably less com-
mon than hyponatremia, hypernatremia nonetheless is 
associated with mortality rates as high as 40–60%, mostly 
due to the severity of the associated underlying disease 
processes. Hypernatremia is usually the result of a com-
bined water and electrolyte deficit, with losses of H2O in 
excess of those of Na+. Less frequently, the ingestion or 
iatrogenic administration of excess Na+ can be causative, 
for example, after IV administration of excessive hyper-
tonic Na+-Cl– or Na+-HCO3
– (Fig. 6-6).
Elderly individuals with reduced thirst and/or 
diminished access to fluids are at the highest risk of 
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Central diabetes insipidus
Diuretic
Osmotic diureses
No
Insensible water loss
Gastrointestinal water loss
Remote renal water loss
Renal response
  to desmopressin
Urine osmole
   excretion rate
   >750 mosmol/d 
ECF Volume
Increased
Not increased
Administration of
   hypertonic NaCl
   or NaHCO3
Minimum volume of
   maximally concentrated urine
Yes
No
Yes
Urine osmolality unchanged
Urine osmolality increased
Figure 6-6
The diagnostic approach to hypernatremia. ECF, extracel-
lular fluid.
developing hypernatremia. Patients with hypernatremia 
may rarely have a central defect in hypothalamic osmo-
receptor function, with a mixture of both decreased 
thirst and reduced AVP secretion. Causes of this adipsic 
diabetes insipidus include primary or metastatic tumor, 
occlusion or ligation of the anterior communicating 
artery, trauma, hydrocephalus, and inflammation.
Hypernatremia can develop after the loss of water 
via both renal and nonrenal routes. Insensible losses 
of water may increase in the setting of fever, exercise, 
heat exposure, severe burns, or mechanical ventilation. 
Diarrhea is the most common gastrointestinal cause of 
hypernatremia. Notably, osmotic diarrhea and viral gas-
troenteritis typically generate stools with Na+ and K+ 
<100 mM, thus leading to water loss and hypernatre-
mia; in contrast, secretory diarrhea typically results in 
isotonic stool and thus hypovolemia with or without 
hypovolemic hyponatremia.
Common causes of renal water loss include osmotic 
diuresis secondary to hyperglycemia, excess urea, post­
obstructive diuresis, and mannitol; these disorders share 
an increase in urinary solute excretion and urinary 
osmolality (see “Diagnostic Approach,” below). Hyper-
natremia due to a water diuresis occurs in central or 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI).
Nephrogenic DI (NDI) is characterized by renal 
resistance to AVP, which can be partial or complete 
(see “Diagnostic Approach,” below). Genetic causes 
include loss-of-function mutations in the X-linked V2 
receptor; mutations in the AVP-responsive aquaporin-2 
68
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
water channel can cause autosomal recessive and auto-
somal dominant nephrogenic DI, whereas recessive 
deficiency of the aquaporin-1 water channel causes a 
more modest concentrating defect (Fig. 6-2). Hypercal-
cemia also can cause polyuria and NDI; calcium signals 
directly through the calcium-sensing receptor to down-
regulate Na+, K+, and Cl– transport by the TALH and 
water transport in principal cells, thus reducing renal 
concentrating ability in hypercalcemia. Another com-
mon acquired cause of NDI is hypokalemia, which 
inhibits the renal response to AVP and downregulates 
aquaporin-2 expression. Several drugs can cause 
acquired NDI, in particular lithium, ifosfamide, and 
several antiviral agents. Lithium causes NDI by mul-
tiple mechanisms, including direct inhibition of renal 
glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3), a kinase thought to 
be the pharmacologic target of lithium in bipolar dis-
ease; GSK3 is required for the response of principal cells 
to AVP. The entry of lithium through the amiloride-
sensitive Na+ channel ENaC (Fig. 6-4) is required for 
the effect of the drug on principal cells; thus, combined 
therapy with lithium and amiloride can mitigate lith-
ium-associated NDI. However, lithium causes chronic 
tubulointerstitial scarring and chronic kidney disease 
after prolonged therapy so that patients may have a per-
sistent NDI long after stopping the drug, with a reduced 
therapeutic benefit from amiloride.
Finally, gestational diabetes insipidus is a rare compli-
cation of late-term pregnancy in which increased activ-
ity of a circulating placental protease with vasopressinase 
activity leads to reduced circulating AVP and polyuria, 
often accompanied by hypernatremia. DDAVP is an 
effective therapy for this syndrome because of its resis-
tance to the vasopressinase enzyme.
Clinical features
Hypernatremia increases osmolality of the ECF, gen-
erating an osmotic gradient between the ECF and 
the ICF, an efflux of intracellular water, and cellular 
shrinkage. As in hyponatremia, the symptoms of hyper-
natremia are predominantly neurologic. Altered mental 
status is the most common manifestation, ranging from 
mild confusion and lethargy to deep coma. The sudden 
shrinkage of brain cells in acute hypernatremia may lead 
to parenchymal or subarachnoid hemorrhages and/or 
subdural hematomas; however, these vascular com-
plications are encountered primarily in pediatric and 
neonatal patients. Osmotic damage to muscle mem-
branes also can lead to hypernatremic rhabdomyolysis. 
Brain cells accommodate to a chronic increase in ECF 
osmolality (>48 h) by activating membrane transport-
ers that mediate influx and intracellular accumulation 
of organic osmolytes (creatine, betaine, glutamate, myo-
inositol, and taurine); this results in an increase in ICF 
water and normalization of brain parenchymal volume. 
In consequence, patients with chronic hypernatremia are 
less likely to develop severe neurologic compromise. 
However, the cellular response to chronic hypernatre-
mia predisposes these patients to the development of 
cerebral edema and seizures during overly rapid hydra-
tion (overcorrection of plasma Na+ concentration by 
>10 mM/d).
Diagnostic approach
The history should focus on the presence or absence of 
thirst, polyuria, and/or an extrarenal source for water 
loss, such as diarrhea. The physical examination should 
include a detailed neurologic exam and an assessment of 
the ECFV; patients with a particularly large water defi-
cit and/or a combined deficit in electrolytes and water 
may be hypovolemic, with reduced JVP and orthostasis. 
Accurate documentation of daily fluid intake and daily 
urine output is also critical for the diagnosis and man-
agement of hypernatremia.
Laboratory investigation should include a measure-
ment of serum and urine osmolality in addition to urine 
electrolytes. The appropriate response to hypernatremia 
and a serum osmolality >295 mosmol/kg is an increase in 
circulating AVP and the excretion of low volumes (<500 
mL/d) of maximally concentrated urine, i.e., urine with 
osmolality >800 mosmol/kg; if this is the case, an extra-
renal source of water loss is primarily responsible for the 
generation of hypernatremia. Many patients with hyper-
natremia are polyuric; if an osmotic diuresis is responsi-
ble, with excessive excretion of Na+-Cl–, glucose, and/
or urea, solute excretion will be >750–1000 mosmol/d 
(>15 mosmol/kg body water per day) (Fig. 6-6). More 
commonly, patients with hypernatremia and polyuria will 
have a predominant water diuresis, with excessive excre-
tion of hypotonic, dilute urine.
Adequate differentiation between nephrogenic and 
central causes of DI requires the measurement of the 
response in urinary osmolality to DDAVP, combined 
with measurement of circulating AVP in the setting 
of hypertonicity. By definition, patients with baseline 
hypernatremia are hypertonic, with an adequate stimulus 
for AVP by the posterior pituitary. Therefore, in con-
trast to polyuric patients with a normal or reduced base-
line plasma Na+ concentration and osmolality, a water 
deprivation test (Chap. 3) is unnecessary in hypernatre-
mia; indeed, water deprivation is absolutely contraindi-
cated in this setting because of the risk for worsening the 
hypernatremia. Patients with NDI will fail to respond to 
DDAVP, with a urine osmolality that increases by <50% 
or <150 mosmol/kg from baseline, in combination with a 
normal or high circulating AVP level; patients with cen-
tral DI will respond to DDAVP, with a reduced cir-
culating AVP. Patients may exhibit a partial response 
to DDAVP, with a >50% rise in urine osmolality that 
nonetheless fails to reach 800 mosmol/kg; the level of 
69
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
circulating AVP will help differentiate the underlying 
cause, i.e., nephrogenic versus central DI. In pregnant 
patients, AVP assays should be drawn in tubes containing 
the protease inhibitor 1,10-phenanthroline to prevent in 
vitro degradation of AVP by placental vasopressinase.
For patients with hypernatremia due to renal loss of 
water it is critical to quantify ongoing daily losses using 
the calculated electrolyte-free water clearance in addi-
tion to calculation of the baseline water deficit (the rel-
evant formulas are discussed in Table 6-3). This requires 
daily measurement of urine electrolytes, combined with 
accurate measurement of daily urine volume.
Treatment	
Hypernatremia
The underlying cause of hypernatremia should be with-
drawn or corrected, whether it is drugs, hyperglycemia, 
hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, or diarrhea. The approach 
to the correction of hypernatremia is outlined in  
Table 6-3. It is imperative to correct hypernatremia 
slowly to avoid cerebral edema, typically replacing the cal-
culated free-water deficit over 48 h. Notably, the plasma 
Na+ concentration should be corrected by no more than 
10 mM/d, which may take longer than 48 h in patients 
with severe hypernatremia (>160 mM). A rare excep-
tion is patients with acute hypernatremia (<48 h) due to 
sodium loading, who can safely be corrected rapidly at a 
rate of 1 mM/h.
Water ideally should be administered by mouth or 
by nasogastric tube as the most direct way to provide 
free water, i.e., water without electrolytes. Alternatively, 
patients can receive free water in dextrose-containing 
IV solutions such as 5% dextrose (D5W); blood glucose 
should be monitored to avoid hyperglycemia. Depend-
ing on the history, blood pressure, or clinical volume 
status, it may be appropriate to treat initially with hypo-
tonic saline solutions (1/4 or 1/2 normal saline); normal 
saline is usually inappropriate in the absence of very 
severe hypernatremia, in which normal saline is pro-
portionally more hypotonic relative to plasma, or frank 
hypotension. Calculation of urinary electrolyte-free 
water clearance (see Table 6-3) is required to estimate 
daily, ongoing loss of free water in patients with neph-
rogenic or central DI, which should be replenished daily.
Additional therapy may be feasible in specific cases. 
Patients with central DI should respond to the adminis-
tration of intravenous, intranasal, or oral DDAVP. Patients 
with NDI due to lithium may reduce their polyuria 
with amiloride (2.5–10 mg/d), which decreases entry 
of lithium into principal cells by inhibiting ENaC (see 
above); in practice, however, most patients with lithium-
associated DI are able to compensate for their polyuria 
simply by increasing their daily water intake. Thiazides 
may reduce polyuria due to NDI, ostensibly by inducing 
hypovolemia and increasing proximal tubular water reab-
sorption. Occasionally, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) have been used to treat polyuria associ-
ated with NDI, reducing the negative effect of intrarenal 
prostaglandins on urinary concentrating mechanisms; 
however, this creates the risk of NSAID-associated gastric 
and/or renal toxicity. Furthermore, it must be empha-
sized that thiazides, amiloride, and NSAIDs are appropri-
ate only for chronic management of polyuria from NDI 
and have no role in the acute management of associated 
hypernatremia, in which the focus is on replacing free-
water deficits and ongoing free-water loss.
Potassium Disorders
Homeostatic mechanisms maintain plasma K+ con-
centration between 3.5 and 5.0 mM despite marked 
variation in dietary K+ intake. In a healthy individ-
ual at steady state, the entire daily intake of potassium 
is excreted, approximately 90% in the urine and 10% 
in the stool; the kidney thus plays a dominant role in 
potassium homeostasis. However, more than 98% of 
total-body potassium is intracellular, chiefly in muscle; 
buffering of extracellular K+ by this large intracellu-
lar pool plays a crucial role in the regulation of plasma 
K+ concentration. Changes in the exchange and distri-
bution of intra- and extracellular K+ thus can lead to 
marked hypo- or hyperkalemia. A corollary is that mas-
sive necrosis and the attendant release of tissue K+ can 
cause severe hyperkalemia, particularly in the setting of 
acute kidney injury and reduced excretion of K+.
Changes in whole-body K+ content are mediated 
primarily by the kidney, which reabsorbs filtered K+ 
in hypokalemic, K+-deficient states and secretes K+ in 
hyperkalemic, K+-replete states. Although K+ is trans-
ported along the entire nephron, it is the principal cells 
of the connecting tubule (CNT) and cortical collect-
ing duct (CD) that play a dominant role in renal K+ 
secretion, whereas alpha-intercalated cells of the outer 
medullary CD function in renal tubular reabsorption of 
filtered K+ in K+-deficient states. In principal cells, api-
cal Na+ entry via the amiloride-sensitive ENaC gener-
ates a lumen-negative potential difference that drives 
passive K+ exit through apical K+ channels (Fig. 6-4). 
Two major K+ channels mediate distal tubular K+ secre-
tion: the secretory K+ channel ROMK (the renal outer 
medullary K+ channel, also known as Kir1.1 or KcnJ1) 
and the flow-sensitive maxi-K K+ channel (also known 
as the BK K+ channel). ROMK is thought to mediate 
the bulk of constitutive K+ secretion, whereas increases 
in distal flow rate and/or genetic absence of ROMK 
activate K+ secretion via the maxi-K channel.
An appreciation of the relationship between ENaC-
dependent Na+ entry and distal K+ secretion (Fig. 6-4) 
70
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
is required for the bedside interpretation of potassium 
disorders. For example, decreased distal delivery of Na+, 
as occurs in hypovolemic, prerenal states, tends to blunt 
the ability to excrete K+, leading to hyperkalemia; in 
contrast, an increase in distal delivery of Na+ and distal 
flow rate, as occurs after treatment with thiazide and 
loop diuretics, can enhance K+ secretion and lead to 
hypokalemia. Hyperkalemia is also a predictable conse-
quence of drugs that directly inhibit ENaC due to the 
role of this Na+ channel in generating a lumen-negative 
potential difference. Aldosterone in turn has a major 
influence on potassium excretion, increasing the activ-
ity of ENaC channels and thus amplifying the driving 
force for K+ secretion across the luminal membrane of 
principal cells. Abnormalities in the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system thus can cause both hypokalemia 
and hyperkalemia. Notably, however, potassium excess 
and potassium restriction have opposing, aldosterone-
independent effects on the density and activity of api-
cal K+ channels in the distal nephron; i.e., other factors 
modulate the renal capacity to secrete K+. In addition, 
potassium restriction and hypokalemia activate aldoste-
rone-independent distal reabsorption of filtered K+, acti-
vating apical H+/K+-ATPase activity in intercalated cells 
within the outer medullary CD. Reflective perhaps of 
this physiology, changes in plasma K+ concentration 
are not universal in disorders associated with changes in 
aldosterone activity.
Hypokalemia
Hypokalemia, defined as a plasma K+ concentration 
<3.6 mM, occurs in up to 20% of hospitalized patients. 
Hypokalemia is associated with a tenfold increase in in-
hospital mortality rates due to adverse effects on cardiac 
rhythm, blood pressure, and cardiovascular morbid-
ity rate. Mechanistically, hypokalemia can be caused 
by redistribution of K+ between tissues and the ECF or 
by renal and nonrenal loss of K+ (Table 6-4). Systemic 
hypomagnesemia also can cause treatment-resistant 
hypokalemia due to a combination of reduced cellular 
uptake of K+ and exaggerated renal secretion. Spurious 
hypokalemia or pseudohypokalemia occasionally can 
result from in vitro cellular uptake of K+ after venipunc-
ture, for example, due to profound leukocytosis in acute 
leukemia.
Redistribution and hypokalemia
Insulin, β2-adrenergic activity, and thyroid hormone 
promote Na+,K+-ATPase–mediated cellular uptake of 
K+, leading to hypokalemia. Inhibition of passive efflux 
of K+ also can cause hypokalemia, albeit rarely; this 
typically occurs in the setting of systemic inhibition of 
K+ channels by toxic barium ions. Exogenous insulin 
can cause iatrogenic hypokalemia, particularly during 
Table 6-4
Causes of Hypokalemia
I. Decreased intake
A. Starvation
B. Clay ingestion
 II. Redistribution into cells
A. Acid-base
1. Metabolic alkalosis
B. Hormonal
1. Insulin
2. Increased β2-adrenergic sympathetic activity: post-
myocardial infarction, head injury
3. β2-Adrenergic agonists: bronchodilators, tocolytics
4. α-Adrenergic antagonists
5. Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis
6. Downstream stimulation of Na+/K+-ATPase: theophyl-
line, caffeine
C. Anabolic state
1. Vitamin B12 or folic acid administration (red blood cell 
production)
2. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(white blood cell production)
3. Total parenteral nutrition
D. Other
1. Pseudohypokalemia
2. Hypothermia
3. Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis
4. Barium toxicity: systemic inhibition of “leak” K+ channels
III. Increased loss
A. Nonrenal
1. Gastrointestinal loss (diarrhea)
2. Integumentary loss (sweat)
B. Renal
1. Increased distal flow and distal Na+ delivery: diuretics, 
osmotic diuresis, salt-wasting nephropathies
2. Increased secretion of potassium
a. Mineralocorticoid excess: primary hyperaldoste-
ronism [aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs), 
primary or unilateral adrenal hyperplasia (PAH), 
idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA) due to bilateral 
adrenal hyperplasia, and adrenal carcinoma], familial 
hyperaldosteronism (FH-I, FH-II, congenital adre-
nal hyperplasias), secondary hyperaldosteronism 
(malignant hypertension, renin-secreting tumors, 
renal artery stenosis, hypovolemia), Cushing’s syn-
drome, Bartter’s syndrome, Gitelman’s syndrome
b. Apparent mineralocorticoid excess: genetic defi-
ciency of 11β-dehydrogenase-2 (syndrome of 
apparent mineralocorticoid excess), inhibition of 
11β-dehydrogenase-2 (glycyrrhetinic/glycyrrhizinic 
acid and/or carbenoxolone; licorice, food products, 
drugs), Liddle’s syndrome [genetic activation of  
epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC)]
c. Distal delivery of nonreabsorbed anions: vomiting, 
nasogastric suction, proximal renal tubular acidosis, 
diabetic ketoacidosis, glue sniffing (toluene abuse), 
penicillin derivatives (penicillin, nafcillin, dicloxacillin, 
ticarcillin, oxacillin, and carbenicillin)
3. Magnesium deficiency
71
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
the management of K+-deficient states such as diabetic 
ketoacidosis. Alternatively, the stimulation of endogenous 
insulin can provoke hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, 
and/or hypophosphatemia in malnourished patients 
who are given a carbohydrate load. Alterations in the 
activity of the endogenous sympathetic nervous system 
can cause hypokalemia in several settings, including 
alcohol withdrawal, hyperthyroidism, acute myocardial 
infarction, and severe head injury. β2 agonists, includ-
ing both bronchodilators and tocolytics (ritodrine), are 
powerful activators of cellular K+ uptake; “hidden” 
sympathomimetics such as pseudoephedrine and ephed-
rine in cough syrup or dieting agents also may cause 
unexpected hypokalemia. Finally, xanthine-dependent 
activation of cyclic AMP–dependent signaling down-
stream of the β2 receptor can lead to hypokalemia, usu-
ally in the setting of overdose (theophylline) or marked 
overingestion (dietary caffeine).
Redistributive hypokalemia also can occur in the set-
ting of hyperthyroidism, with periodic attacks of hypo-
kalemic paralysis [thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP)]. 
Similar episodes of hypokalemic weakness in the absence 
of thyroid abnormalities occur in familial hypokalemic 
periodic paralysis, usually caused by missense muta-
tions of voltage sensor domains within the α1 subunit 
of L-type calcium channels or the skeletal Na+ channel; 
these mutations generate an abnormal gating pore cur-
rent activated by hyperpolarization. TPP develops more 
frequently in patients of Asian or Hispanic origin; this 
shared predisposition has been linked to genetic varia-
tion in Kir2.6, a muscle-specific, thyroid hormone–
responsive K+ channel. Patients typically present with 
weakness of the extremities and limb girdles, with para-
lytic episodes that occur most frequently between 1 and 
6 a.m. Signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism are not 
invariably present. Hypokalemia is usually profound 
and almost invariably is accompanied by hypophospha-
temia and hypomagnesemia. The hypokalemia in TPP 
is attributed to both direct and indirect activation of 
Na+,K+-ATPase, resulting in increased uptake of K+ by 
muscle and other tissues. Increases in β-adrenergic activ-
ity play an important role in that high-dose propranolol 
(3 mg/kg) rapidly reverses the associated hypokalemia, 
hypophosphatemia, and paralysis.
Nonrenal loss of potassium
The loss of K+ in sweat is typically low except under 
extremes of physical exertion. Direct gastric losses of 
K+ due to vomiting or nasogastric suctioning are also 
minimal; however, the ensuing hypochloremic alka-
losis results in persistent kaliuresis due to secondary 
hyperaldosteronism and bicarbonaturia, i.e., a renal loss 
of K+. Intestinal loss of K+ due to diarrhea is a globally 
important cause of hypokalemia in light of the world-
wide prevalence of diarrheal disease. Noninfectious 
gastrointestinal processes such as celiac disease, ileos-
tomy, villous adenomas, VIPomas, and chronic laxative 
abuse also can cause significant hypokalemia. Colonic 
pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie’s syndrome) can lead to 
hypokalemia from secretory diarrhea with an abnor-
mally high potassium content caused by a marked acti-
vation of colonic K+ secretion.
Renal loss of potassium
Drugs can increase renal K+ excretion by a variety of 
different mechanisms. Diuretics are a particularly com-
mon cause due to associated increases in distal tubu-
lar Na+ delivery and distal tubular flow rate in addition 
to secondary hyperaldosteronism. Thiazides have an 
effect on plasma K+ concentration greater than that of 
loop diuretics despite their lesser natriuretic effect. The 
higher propensity of thiazides to cause hypokalemia may 
be secondary to thiazide-associated hypocalciuria versus 
the hypercalciuria seen with loop diuretics; increases in 
downstream luminal calcium in response to loop diuret-
ics will inhibit ENaC in principal cells, thus reducing 
the lumen-negative potential difference and attenuating 
distal K+ excretion. High doses of penicillin-related anti-
biotics (nafcillin, dicloxacillin, ticarcillin, oxacillin, and 
carbenicillin) can increase obligatory K+ excretion by 
acting as nonreabsorbable anions in the distal neph-
ron. Finally, several renal tubular toxins cause renal K+ 
and magnesium wasting, leading to hypokalemia and 
hypomagnesemia; these drugs include aminoglycosides, 
amphotericin, foscarnet, cisplatin, and ifosfamide (see 
also “Magnesium Deficiency and Hypokalemia,” later).
Aldosterone activates the ENaC channel in principal 
cells via multiple synergistic mechanisms, thus increas-
ing the driving force for K+ excretion. In consequence, 
increases in aldosterone bioactivity and/or gains in func-
tion of aldosterone-dependent signaling pathways are 
associated with hypokalemia. Increases in circulating 
aldosterone (hyperaldosteronism) may be primary or sec-
ondary. Increased levels of circulating renin in secondary 
forms of hyperaldosteronism lead to increased angioten-
sin II (AT-II) and thus aldosterone; renal artery stenosis 
is perhaps the most common cause (Table 6-4). Primary 
hyperaldosteronism may be genetic or acquired. Hyper-
tension and hypokalemia due to increases in circulating 
11-deoxycorticosterone occur in patients with congeni-
tal adrenal hyperplasia caused by defects in either ste-
roid 11β-hydroxylase or steroid 17α-hydroxylase; defi-
cient 11β-hydroxylase results in associated virilization 
and other signs of androgen excess, whereas reduced sex 
steroids in 17α-hydroxylase deficiency lead to hypo-
gonadism. The two major forms of isolated primary 
hyperaldosteronism are familial hyperaldosteronism type I 
[FH-I, also known as glucocorticoid-remediable hyper-
aldosteronism (GRA)] and familial hyperaldosteronism 
type II (FH-II), in which aldosterone production is not 
72
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
repressible by exogenous glucocorticoids. FH-I is caused 
by a chimeric gene duplication between the homologous 
11β-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) and aldosterone synthase 
(CYP11B2) genes, fusing the adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH)-responsive 11β-hydroxylase promoter to 
the coding region of aldosterone synthase; this chimeric 
gene is under the control of ACTH and thus is repres-
sible by glucocorticoids.
Acquired causes of primary hyperaldosteronism 
include aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs), pri-
mary or unilateral adrenal hyperplasia (PAH), idiopathic 
hyperaldosteronism (IHA) due to bilateral adrenal hyper-
plasia, and adrenal carcinoma; APA and IHA account for 
close to 60% and 40%, respectively, of diagnosed cases 
of hyperaldosteronism. Random testing of plasma renin 
activity (PRA) and aldosterone is a helpful screening 
tool in hypokalemic and/or hypertensive patients, with 
an aldosterone:PRA ratio >50 suggestive of primary 
hyperaldosteronism.
The glucocorticoid cortisol has affinity for the min-
eralocorticoid receptor (MLR) equal to that of aldo-
sterone, with resultant mineralocorticoid-like activity. 
However, cells in the aldosterone-sensitive distal neph-
ron are protected from this illicit activation by the enzyme 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2 (11βHSD-2), which 
converts cortisol to cortisone; cortisone has minimal 
affinity for the MLR. Recessive loss-of-function muta-
tions in the 11bHSD-2 gene thus are associated with 
cortisol-dependent activation of the MLR and the syn-
drome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess (SAME), 
encompassing hypertension, hypokalemia, hypercalci-
uria, and metabolic alkalosis, with suppressed PRA and 
suppressed aldosterone. A similar syndrome is caused by 
biochemical inhibition of 11βHSD-2 by glycyrrhetinic/
glycyrrhizinic acid and/or carbenoxolone. Glycyrrhizinic 
acid is a natural sweetener found in licorice root, typically 
encountered in licorice and its many guises or as a flavor-
ing agent in tobacco and food products.
Finally, hypokalemia may occur with systemic 
increases in glucocorticoids. In Cushing’s syndrome 
caused by increases in pituitary ACTH the incidence 
of hypokalemia is only 10%, whereas it is 60–100% in 
patients with ectopic secretion of ACTH despite a simi-
lar incidence of hypertension. Indirect evidence suggests 
that the activity of renal 11βHSD-2 is reduced in patients 
with ectopic ACTH compared with Cushing’s syndrome, 
resulting in a syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess.
Finally, defects in multiple renal tubular transport 
pathways are associated with hypokalemia. For example, 
loss-of-function mutations in subunits of the acidifying 
H+-ATPAse in alpha-intercalated cells cause hypoka-
lemic distal renal tubular acidosis, as do many acquired 
disorders of the distal nephron. Liddle’s syndrome is 
caused by autosomal dominant gain-in-function mutations 
of ENaC subunits. Disease-associated mutations either 
activate the channel directly or abrogate aldosterone-
inhibited retrieval of ENaC subunits from the plasma 
membrane; the end result is increased expression of acti-
vated ENaC channels at the plasma membrane of princi-
pal cells. Patients classically manifest severe hypertension 
with hypokalemia that is unresponsive to spironolactone 
yet sensitive to amiloride. Hypertension and hypokale-
mia are, however, variable aspects of the Liddle’s phe-
notype; more consistent features include a blunted 
aldosterone response to ACTH and reduced urinary 
aldosterone excretion.
Loss of the transport functions of the TALH and 
DCT nephron segments causes two distinct subtypes of 
hereditary hypokalemic alkalosis, with TALH dysfunc-
tion causing Bartter’s syndrome (BS) and DCT dys­
function causing Gitelman’s syndrome (GS). Patients with 
“classic” BS typically have polyuria and polydipsia due to 
the reduction in renal concentrating ability. They may 
have an increase in urinary calcium excretion, and 20% 
are hypomagnesemic. Other features include marked 
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. 
Patients with “antenatal” BS have a severe systemic dis-
order characterized by marked electrolyte wasting, poly-
hydramnios, and hypercalciuria with nephrocalcinosis; 
renal prostaglandin synthesis and excretion are increased 
significantly, accounting for many of the systemic symp-
toms. There are five disease genes for BS, all of which 
function in some aspect of regulated Na+, K+, and Cl− 
transport by the TALH. Gitelman’s syndrome is, in con-
trast, genetically homogeneous, caused almost exclusively 
by loss-of-function mutations in the thiazide-sensitive 
Na+-Cl– cotransporter of the DCT. Patients with GS are 
uniformly hypomagnesemic and exhibit marked hypocal-
ciuria rather than the hypercalciuria typically seen in BS; 
urinary calcium excretion is thus a critical diagnostic test 
in GS. GS has a milder phenotype than BS; however, 
patients with GS may suffer from chondrocalcinosis, an 
abnormal deposition of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate 
(CPPD) in joint cartilage (Chap. 16).
Magnesium deficiency and hypokalemia
Magnesium depletion has inhibitory effects on muscle 
Na+,K+-ATPase activity, reducing influx into muscle 
cells and causing a secondary kaliuresis. In addition, 
magnesium depletion causes exaggerated K+ secretion 
by the distal nephron; this is attributed to a reduction 
in the magnesium-dependent, intracellular block of K+ 
efflux through the secretory K+ channel of principal 
cells (ROMK; Fig. 6-4). Regardless of the dominant 
mechanism(s), hypomagnesemic patients are clinically 
refractory to K+ replacement in the absence of Mg2+ 
repletion. Notably, magnesium deficiency is also a com-
mon concomitant of hypokalemia, since many disorders 
of the distal nephron may cause both potassium and 
magnesium wasting (Chap. 16).
73
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
Clinical features
Hypokalemia has prominent effects on cardiac, skel-
etal, and intestinal muscle cells. In particular, it is a 
major risk factor for both ventricular and atrial arrhyth-
mias. Hypokalemia predisposes to digoxin toxicity by 
a number of mechanisms, including reduced competi-
tion between K+ and digoxin for shared binding sites on 
cardiac Na+,K+-ATPase subunits. Electrocardiographic 
changes in hypokalemia include broad, flat T waves, 
ST depression, and QT prolongation; these are most 
marked when serum K+ is <2.7 mmol/L. Hypokale-
mia also results in hyperpolarization of skeletal muscle, 
thus impairing the capacity to depolarize and contract; 
weakness and even paralysis may ensue. It also causes a 
skeletal myopathy and predisposes to rhabdomyolysis. 
Finally, the paralytic effects of hypokalemia on intestinal 
smooth muscle may cause intestinal ileus.
The functional effects of hypokalemia on the kid-
ney include Na+-Cl– and HCO3
− retention, polyuria, 
phosphaturia, hypocitraturia, and an activation of renal 
ammoniagenesis. Bicarbonate retention and other acid-
base effects of hypokalemia can contribute to the gen-
eration of metabolic alkalosis. Hypokalemic polyuria is 
due to a combination of polydipsia and an AVP-resistant 
renal concentrating defect. Structural changes in the 
kidney due to hypokalemia include a relatively specific 
vacuolizing injury to proximal tubular cells, interstitial 
nephritis, and renal cysts. Hypokalemia also predisposes 
to acute kidney injury and can lead to end-stage renal 
disease in patients with long-standing hypokalemia due 
to eating disorders and/or laxative abuse.
Hypokalemia and/or reduced dietary K+ are 
implicated in the pathophysiology and progression of 
hypertension, heart failure, and stroke. For example, 
short-term K+ restriction in healthy humans and patients 
with essential hypertension induces Na+-Cl– retention 
and hypertension. Correction of hypokalemia is par-
ticularly important in hypertensive patients treated with 
diuretics, in whom blood pressure improves with the 
establishment of normokalemia.
Diagnostic approach
The cause of hypokalemia is usually evident from his-
tory, physical examination, and/or basic laboratory tests. 
The history should focus on medications (e.g., laxatives, 
diuretics, antibiotics), diet and dietary habits (e.g., lico-
rice), and/or symptoms that suggest a particular cause 
(e.g., periodic weakness, diarrhea). The physical exami-
nation should pay particular attention to blood pressure, 
volume status, and signs suggestive of specific hypoka-
lemic disorders, e.g., hyperthyroidism and Cushing’s 
syndrome. Initial laboratory evaluation should include 
electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, serum osmolality, Mg2+, 
Ca2+, a complete blood count, and urinary pH (Fig. 6-7). 
The presence of a non-anion-gap acidosis suggests a dis-
tal, hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis or diarrhea; cal-
culation of the urinary anion gap can help differentiate 
these two diagnoses. Renal K+ excretion can be assessed 
with a 24-h urine collection; a 24-h K+ excretion of 
<15 mM is indicative of an extrarenal cause of hypoka-
lemia (Fig. 6-7). Alternatively, serum and urine osmo-
lality can be used to calculate the transtubular K+ gradi-
ent (TTKG), which should be <3-4 in the presence of 
hypokalemia (see the section on hyperkalemia in this 
chapter). Urine Cl– is usually decreased in patients with 
hypokalemia from a nonreabsorbable anion, such as anti-
biotics or HCO3
−. Other causes of chronic, hypokale-
mic alkalosis are surreptitious vomiting, diuretic abuse, 
and GS. Hypokalemic patients with bulimia thus have a 
urinary Cl– <10 mmol/L; urine Na+, K+, and Cl– are 
persistently elevated in GS due to loss of function in the 
thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl– cotransporter but less elevated 
in diuretic abuse and with greater variability. Urine 
diuretic screens for loop diuretics and thiazides may be 
necessary to further exclude diuretic abuse.
Other tests, such as urinary Ca2+, thyroid func-
tion tests, and/or PRA and aldosterone levels, may be 
appropriate in specific cases. A plasma aldosterone:PRA 
ratio >50 is suggestive of hyperaldosteronism. Patients 
with hyperaldosteronism or apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess may require further testing, for example, adrenal 
vein sampling or the clinically available tests for spe-
cific genetic causes (FH-I, SAME, Liddle’s syndrome, 
etc.). Patients with primary aldosteronism thus should be 
tested for the chimeric FH-I/GRA gene (see above) if 
they are younger than 20 years of age or have a fam-
ily history of primary aldosteronism or stroke at a young 
age (<40 years). Preliminary differentiation of Liddle’s 
syndrome due to mutant ENaC channels from SAME 
due to mutant 11βHSD-2 (see above)—both of which 
cause hypokalemia and hypertension with aldosterone 
suppression—can be made on a clinical basis; patients 
with Liddle’s syndrome should respond to amiloride 
(ENaC inhibition) but not spironolactone, whereas 
patients with SAME will respond to spironolactone.
Treatment	
Hypokalemia
The goals of therapy for hypokalemia are to prevent life-
threatening and/or chronic consequences, replace the 
associated K+ deficit, and correct the underlying cause 
and/or mitigate future hypokalemia. The urgency of 
therapy depends on the severity of hypokalemia, asso-
ciated clinical factors (cardiac disease, digoxin ther-
apy, etc.), and the rate of decline in serum K+. Urgent 
but cautious K+ replacement should be considered in 
patients with severe redistributive hypokalemia (plasma 
K+ concentration <2.5 mM) and/or when serious com-
plications ensue; however, this creates a risk of rebound 
74
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Hypokalemia (Serum K+<3.5 mmol/L)
<15 mmol/day OR <15 mmol/g Cr
>15 mmol/g Cr OR >15 mmol/day
Renal loss
TTKG
↑ Distal K+ secretion
↑ Tubular flow
 -Osmotic diuresis
BP and/or Volume
Extrarenal loss/remote renal loss
Metabolic acidosis
 - GI K+ loss
Normal
-Profuse
sweating
Metabolic alkalosis
 -Remote diuretic use
 -Remote vomiting or
  stomach drainage
 -Profuse sweating
Non-reabsorbable
anions other than
HCO3
–
 -Hippurate
 -Penicillins
Metabolic acidosis
 -Proximal RTA
 -Distal RTA
 -DKA
 -Amphotericin B
 -Acetazolamide
Acid-base status
Low OR normal
Acid-base status
Variable
Aldosterone
High
Low
High
High
Low
High
Normal
Cortisol
Renin
Urine K+
Emergency?
Pseudohypokalemia?
Move to therapy
History, physical examination
& basic laboratory tests
Clear evidence of
transcellular shift
No further
workup
Treat
accordingly
Clear evidence
of low intake
Treat accordingly
and re-evaluate
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
-Insulin excess
-β2-adrenergic agonists
-FHPP
-Hyperthyroidism
-Barium intoxication
-Theophylline
-Chloroquine
>4
>20
>0.20
<0.15
<10
<2
Metabolic alkalosis
Urine Ca/Cr
(molar ratio)
-Vomiting
-Chloride
 diarrhea
-Loop diuretic
-Bartter’s syndrome
-Thiazide diuretic
-Gitelman’s syndrome
Urine Cl– (mmol/L)
-RAS
-RST
-Malignant HTN
-PA
-FH-I
-Cushing’s
syndrome
-Liddle’s syndrome
-Licorice
-SAME
hyperkalemia after resolution of the underlying cause. 
When excessive activity of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem is thought to play a dominant role in redistributive 
hypokalemia, as in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, high-
dose propranolol (3 mg/kg) should be considered; this 
nonspecific β-adrenergic blocker will correct hypokale-
mia without the risk of rebound hyperkalemia.
Oral replacement with K+-Cl− is the mainstay of 
therapy for hypokalemia. Potassium phosphate, oral 
or IV, may be appropriate in patients with combined 
hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. Potassium bicar-
bonate or potassium citrate should be considered in 
patients with concomitant metabolic acidosis. Notably, 
hypomagnesemic patients are refractory to K+ replace-
ment alone, so concomitant Mg2+ deficiency should 
always be corrected with oral or intravenous repletion. 
The deficit of K+ and the rate of correction should be esti-
mated as accurately as possible; renal function, medica-
tions, and comorbid conditions such as diabetes should 
be considered to gauge the risk of overcorrection. 
Figure 6-7
The diagnostic approach to hypokalemia. See text for 
details. BP, blood pressure; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; 
FHPP, familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis; FH-I, familial 
hyperaldosteronism type I; GI, gastrointestinal; HTN, hyper-
tension; PA, primary aldosteronism; RAS, renal artery steno-
sis; RST, renin-secreting tumor; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; 
SAME, syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess; 
TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (From Mount DB, 
Zandi-Nejad K: Disorders of potassium balance, in Brenner 
and Rector’s The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner [ed]. Philadel-
phia, W.B. Saunders, 2008, pp 547-587; with permission.)
75
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
In the absence of abnormal K+ redistribution, the 
total deficit correlates with serum K+ so that serum K+ 
drops by approximately 0.27 mM for every 100-mmol 
reduction in total-body stores; loss of 400 to 800 
mmol of total-body K+ results in a reduction in serum 
K+ of approximately 2.0 mM. However, because of the 
difficulty in assessing the deficit accurately, plasma 
K+ concentration must be monitored carefully during 
repletion.
The use of intravenous administration should be 
limited to patients unable to utilize the enteral route 
or in the setting of severe complications (paralysis, 
arrhythmia, etc.). Intravenous K+-Cl– should always 
be administered in saline solutions rather than dex-
trose since the dextrose-induced increase in insulin 
can acutely exacerbate hypokalemia. The peripheral 
intravenous dose is usually 20–40 mmol of K+-Cl– per 
liter; higher concentrations can cause localized pain 
from chemical phlebitis, irritation, and sclerosis. If 
hypokalemia is severe (<2.5 mmol/L) and/or critically 
symptomatic, intravenous K+-Cl– can be administered 
through a central vein with cardiac monitoring in an 
intensive care setting at rates of 10–20 mmol/h; higher 
rates should be reserved for acutely life-threatening 
complications. The absolute amount of administered 
K+ should be restricted (e.g., 20 mmol in 100 mL of 
saline solution) to prevent inadvertent infusion of a 
large dose. Femoral veins are preferable, since infusion 
through internal jugular or subclavian central lines can 
acutely increase the local concentration of K+ and affect 
cardiac conduction.
Strategies to minimize K+ losses also should be con-
sidered. These measures may include minimizing the 
dose of non-K+-sparing diuretics, restricting Na+ intake, 
and using clinically appropriate combinations of non-
K+-sparing and K+-sparing medications (e.g., loop diuret-
ics with ACE inhibitors).
Hyperkalemia
Hyperkalemia is defined as a plasma potassium level 
of 5.5 mM. It occurs in up to 10% of hospitalized 
patients; severe hyperkalemia (>6.0 mM) occurs in 
approximately 1%, with a significantly increased risk 
of mortality. Although redistribution and reduced tis-
sue uptake can acutely cause hyperkalemia, a decrease 
in renal K+ excretion is the most common under-
lying cause (Table 6-5). Excessive intake of K+ is a 
rare cause because of the adaptive capacity to increase 
renal secretion; however, dietary intake can have 
a major effect in susceptible patients, e.g., diabetic 
patients with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism and 
chronic kidney disease. Drugs that have an impact on 
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis are also a major 
cause of hyperkalemia.
Table 6-5 
Causes of Hyperkalemia
I. “Pseudo” hyperkalemia
A. Cellular efflux: thrombocytosis, erythrocytosis, leukocytosis, 
in vitro hemolysis
B. Hereditary defects in red cell membrane transport
 II. Intra- to extracellular shift
A. Acidosis
B. Hyperosmolality; radiocontrast, hypertonic dextrose, mannitol
C. β-adrenergic antagonists (noncardioselective agents)
D. Digoxin and related glycosides (yellow oleander, foxglove, 
bufadienolide)
E. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
F. Lysine, arginine, and e-aminocaproic acid (structurally 
similar, positively charged)
G. Succinylcholine; thermal trauma, neuromuscular injury,  
disuse atrophy, mucositis, or prolonged immobilization
H. Rapid tumor lysis
III. Inadequate excretion
A. Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis; ↑ risk 
of hyperkalemia when used in combination
1. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
2. Renin inhibitors: aliskiren [in combination with ACE 
inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)]
3. ARBs
4. Blockade of the mineralocorticoid receptor: spironolac-
tone, eplerenone, drospirenone
5. Blockade of ENaC: amiloride, triamterene, trimethoprim, 
pentamidine, nafamostat
B. Decreased distal delivery
1. Congestive heart failure
2. Volume depletion
C. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
1. Tubulointerstitial diseases: systemic lupus erythemato-
sus (SLE), sickle cell anemia, obstructive uropathy
2. Diabetes, diabetic nephropathy
3. Drugs: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, cyclooxy-
genase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors, beta blockers, cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus
4. Chronic kidney disease, advanced age
5. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II: defects in WNK1 or 
WNK4 kinases
D. Renal resistance to mineralocorticoid
1. Tubulointerstitial diseases: SLE, amyloidosis, sickle cell 
anemia, obstructive uropathy, post-acute tubular necrosis
2. Hereditary: pseudohypoaldosteronism type I: defects in 
the mineralocorticoid receptor or ENaC
E. Advanced renal insufficiency
1. Chronic kidney disease
2. End-stage renal disease
3. Acute oliguric kidney injury
F. Primary adrenal insufficiency
1. Autoimmune: Addison’s disease, polyglandular  
endocrinopathy
2. Infectious: HIV, cytomegalovirus, tuberculosis, dissemi-
nated fungal infection
3. Infiltrative: amyloidosis, malignancy, metastatic cancer
4. Drug-associated: heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin
5. Hereditary: adrenal hypoplasia congenita, congenital lipoid 
adrenal hyperplasia, aldosterone synthase deficiency
6. Adrenal hemorrhage or infarction, including in antiphos-
pholipid syndrome
76
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Pseudohyperkalemia
Hyperkalemia should be distinguished from factitious 
hyperkalemia or pseudohyperkalemia, an artifactual 
increase in serum K+ due to the release of K+ during 
or after venipuncture. Pseudohyperkalemia can occur 
in the setting of excessive muscle activity during veni-
puncture (fist clenching, etc.), a marked increase in 
cellular elements (thrombocytosis, leukocytosis, and/
or erythrocytosis) with in vitro efflux of K+, and acute 
anxiety during venipuncture with respiratory alkalosis 
and redistributive hyperkalemia. Cooling of blood after 
venipuncture is another cause, due to reduced cellu-
lar uptake; the converse is the increased uptake of K+ 
by cells at high ambient temperatures, leading to nor-
mal values for hyperkalemic patients and/or to spuri-
ous hypokalemia in normokalemic patients. Finally, 
there are multiple genetic subtypes of hereditary pseu-
dohyperkalemia caused by increases in the passive K+ 
permeability of erythrocytes. For example, causative 
mutations have been described in the red cell anion 
exchanger (AE1, encoded by the SLC4A1 gene), lead-
ing to reduced red cell anion transport, hemolytic ane-
mia, the acquisition of a novel AE1-mediated K+ leak, 
and pseudohyperkalemia.
Redistribution and hyperkalemia
Several different mechanisms can induce an efflux of 
intracellular K+ and hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia due 
to hypertonic mannitol, hypertonic saline, and intrave-
nous immunoglobulin generally is attributed to a “sol-
vent drag” effect as water moves out of cells along the 
osmotic gradient. Diabetic patients are also prone to 
osmotic hyperkalemia in response to intravenous hyper-
tonic glucose when it is given without adequate insulin. 
Cationic amino acids—specifically lysine, arginine, and 
the structurally related drug e-aminocaproic acid—cause 
efflux of K+ and hyperkalemia through an effective cat-
ion-K+ exchange of unknown identity and mechanism. 
Digoxin inhibits Na+,K+-ATPase and impairs the uptake 
of K+ by skeletal muscle so that digoxin overdose pre-
dictably results in hyperkalemia. Structurally related 
glycosides are found in specific plants (yellow olean-
der, foxglove, etc.) and in the cane toad, Bufo mari-
nus (bufadienolide); ingestion of these substances and 
extracts from them also can cause hyperkalemia. Finally, 
fluoride ions also inhibit Na+,K+-ATPase, so fluoride 
poisoning is typically associated with hyperkalemia.
Succinylcholine depolarizes muscle cells, causing an 
efflux of K+ through acetylcholine receptors (AChRs). 
The use of this agent is contraindicated in patients who 
have sustained thermal trauma, neuromuscular injury, 
disuse atrophy, mucositis, or prolonged immobilization. 
These disorders share a marked increase and redistribu-
tion of AChRs at the plasma membrane of muscle cells; 
depolarization of these upregulated AChRs by succinyl-
choline leads to an exaggerated efflux of K+ through the 
receptor-associated cation channels, resulting in acute 
hyperkalemia.
Hyperkalemia due to excess intake or  
tissue necrosis
Increased intake of even small amounts of K+ may pro-
voke severe hyperkalemia in patients with predisposing 
factors; hence, an assessment of dietary intake is cru-
cial. Foods rich in potassium include tomatoes, bananas, 
and citrus fruits; occult sources of K+, particularly K+-
containing salt substitutes, also may contribute signifi-
cantly. Iatrogenic causes include simple overreplacement 
with K+-Cl– and the administration of a potassium-
containing medication (e.g., K+-penicillin) to a suscepti-
ble patient. Red cell transfusion is a well-described cause 
of hyperkalemia, typically in the setting of massive trans-
fusions. Finally, tissue necrosis, as in acute tumor lysis 
syndrome and rhabdomyolysis, predictably causes hyper-
kalemia from the release of intracellular K+.
Hypoaldosteronism and hyperkalemia
Aldosterone release from the adrenal gland may be 
reduced by hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, medi-
cations, or primary hypoaldosteronism or by isolated 
deficiency of ACTH (secondary hypoaldosteronism). 
Primary hypoaldosteronism may be genetic or acquired 
but is commonly caused by autoimmunity either in 
Addison’s disease or in the context of a polyglandular 
endocrinopathy. HIV has surpassed tuberculosis as the 
most important infectious cause of adrenal insufficiency. 
The adrenal involvement in HIV disease is usually sub-
clinical; however, adrenal insufficiency may be precipi-
tated by stress, drugs such as ketoconazole that inhibit 
steroidogenesis, or the acute withdrawal of steroid agents 
such as megestrol.
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism is a very com-
mon predisposing factor in several overlapping subsets 
of hyperkalemic patients: diabetic patients, the elderly, 
and patients with renal insufficiency. Classically, these 
patients should have suppressed PRA and aldosterone; 
approximately 50% have an associated acidosis with 
a reduced renal excretion of NH4
+, a positive urinary 
anion gap, and urine pH <5.5. Most patients are vol-
ume expanded, with secondary increases in circulating 
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) that inhibit both renal 
renin release and adrenal aldosterone release.
Renal disease and hyperkalemia
Chronic kidney disease and end-stage kidney disease 
are very common causes of hyperkalemia because of the 
associated deficit or absence of functioning nephrons. 
77
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
Hyperkalemia is more common in oliguric acute kidney 
injury; distal tubular flow rate and Na+ delivery is less 
of a limiting factor in nonoliguric patients. Hyperkale-
mia out of proportion to GFR can also be seen in the 
context of tubulointerstitial disease that affects the distal 
nephron, such as amyloidosis, sickle cell anemia, inter-
stitial nephritis, and obstructive uropathy.
Hereditary renal causes of hyperkalemia have over-
lapping clinical features with hypoaldosteronism, hence 
the diagnostic label pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA). 
PHA-I has both an autosomal recessive and an autoso-
mal dominant form. The autosomal dominant form is 
due to loss-of-function mutations in MLR; the reces-
sive form is caused by various combinations of muta-
tions in the three subunits of ENaC, resulting in 
impaired Na+ channel activity in principal cells and 
other tissues. Patients with recessive PHA-I experi-
ence lifelong salt wasting, hypotension, and hyperka-
lemia, whereas the phenotype of autosomal dominant 
PHA-I due to MLR dysfunction improves in adult-
hood. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHA-II, also 
known as hereditary hypertension with hyperkalemia) 
is in every respect the mirror image of GS caused by 
loss of function in NCC, the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl– 
cotransporter (see above); the clinical phenotype 
includes hypertension, hyperkalemia, hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis, suppressed PRA and aldosterone, 
hypercalciuria, and reduced bone density. PHA-II thus 
behaves like a gain of function in NCC, and treatment 
with thiazides results in resolution of the entire clinical 
phenotype; however, PHA-II is caused by mutations in 
the WNK1 and WNK4 serine-threonine kinases, which 
regulate NCC activity.
Medication-associated hyperkalemia
Most medications associated with hyperkalemia cause 
inhibition of some component of the renin-angiotensin- 
aldosterone axis. ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor 
blockers, renin inhibitors, and mineralocorticoid recep-
tors are predictable and common causes of hyperkale-
mia, particularly when prescribed in combination. The 
oral contraceptive agent Yasmin-28 contains the pro-
gestin drospirenone, which inhibits the MLR and can 
cause hyperkalemia in susceptible patients. Cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, NSAIDs, and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) 
inhibitors cause hyperkalemia by multiple mechanisms 
but share the ability to cause hyporeninemic hypoal-
dosteronism. Notably, most drugs that affect the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone axis also block the local adre-
nal response to hyperkalemia, thus attenuating the direct 
stimulation of aldosterone release by increased plasma 
K+ concentration.
Inhibition of apical ENaC activity in the distal 
nephron by amiloride and other K+-sparing diuretics 
results in hyperkalemia, often with a voltage-dependent 
hyperchloremic acidosis and/or hypovolemic hypona-
tremia. Amiloride is structurally similar to the antibiotics 
trimethoprim (TMP) and pentamidine, which also block 
ENaC; risk factors for TMP-associated hyperkalemia 
include the administered dose, renal insufficiency, and 
hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism. Indirect inhibition of 
ENaC at the plasma membrane is also a cause of hyper-
kalemia; nafamostat, a protease inhibitor utilized in the 
management of pancreatitis, inhibits aldosterone-induced 
proteases that activate ENaC by proteolytic cleavage.
Clinical features
Hyperkalemia is a medical emergency because of its 
effects on the heart. Cardiac arrhythmias associated with 
hyperkalemia include sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, 
slow idioventricular rhythms, ventricular tachycardia, 
ventricular fibrillation, and asystole. Mild increases in 
extracellular K+ affect the repolarization phase of the 
cardiac action potential, resulting in changes in T-wave 
morphology; further increase in plasma K+ concentra-
tion depresses intracardiac conduction, with progres-
sive prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals. Severe 
hyperkalemia results in loss of the P wave and a pro-
gressive widening of the QRS complex; development 
of a sine-wave sinoventricular rhythm suggests impend-
ing ventricular fibrillation or asystole. Classically, the 
electrocardiographic manifestations in hyperkalemia 
progress from tall peaked T waves (5.5–6.5 mM), to a 
loss of P waves (6.5–7.5 mM), to a widened QRS com-
plex (7–8 mM), and ultimately to a sine wave pattern 
(8 mM). However, these changes are notoriously insen-
sitive, particularly in patients with chronic kidney dis-
ease or end-stage renal disease.
Hyperkalemia from a variety of causes can also pres-
ent with ascending paralysis; this is denoted secondary 
hyperkalemic paralysis to differentiate it from familial 
hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HYPP). The presenta-
tion may include diaphragmatic paralysis and respiratory 
failure. Patients with familial HYPP develop myopathic 
weakness during hyperkalemia induced by increased K+ 
intake or rest after heavy exercise. Depolarization of 
skeletal muscle by hyperkalemia unmasks an inactivation 
defect in skeletal Na+ channels; autosomal dominant 
mutations in the SCN4A gene encoding this channel 
are the predominant cause.
Within the kidney, hyperkalemia has negative effects 
on the ability to excrete an acid load, and so hyperka-
lemia per se can contribute to metabolic acidosis. This 
defect appears to be due in part to competition between 
K+ and NH4
+ for reabsorption by the TALH and subse-
quent countercurrent multiplication, ultimately reduc-
ing the medullary gradient for NH3/NH4 excretion 
by the distal nephron. Regardless of the underlying 
mechanism, restoration of normokalemia can in many 
instances correct hyperkalemic metabolic acidosis.
78
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Diagnostic approach
The first priority in the management of hyperkalemia 
is to assess the need for emergency treatment, followed 
by a comprehensive workup to determine the cause 
(Fig. 6-8). History and physical examination should 
focus on medications, diet and dietary supplements, risk 
factors for kidney failure, reduction in urine output, 
blood pressure, and volume status. Initial laboratory 
tests should include electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, 
serum osmolality, Mg2+ and Ca2+, a complete blood 
count, and urinary pH. A urine Na+ concentration 
<20 mM indicates that distal Na+ delivery is a lim-
iting factor in K+ excretion; volume repletion with 
0.9% saline or treatment with furosemide may be 
effective in reducing plasma K+ concentration. Serum 
and urine osmolality is required for calculation of the 
TTKG (Fig. 6-8). The expected values of the TTKG 
Hyperkalemia
(Serum K+ ≥5.5 mmol/L)
History, physical examination
& basic laboratory tests
Decreased urinary K+ excretion
(<40 mmol/day)
Urine electrolytes
TTKG
Evidence of increased
potassium load
Urine Na+
<25 mmol/L
Reduced tubular
flow
Reduced distal K+ secretion
(GFR >20 mL/min) 
Advanced kidney failure
(GFR ≤20 mL/min)
Reduced ECV
TTKG <8
(Tubular resistance)
TTKG ≥8
Low aldosterone
Renin 
9α-Fludrocortisone
Treat accordingly
and re-evaluate 
Pseudohyperkalemia?
Evidence of
transcellular shift
No further action
K+ ≥6.0 or ECG
changes
Emergency
therapy
Yes
Yes
Decreased distal
Na+ delivery
Yes
Treat accordingly
and re-evaluate
-Hypertonicity (e.g., mannitol)
-Hyperglycemia
-Succinylcholine
-ε-aminocaproic acid
-Digoxin
-β-Blockers
-Metabolic acidosis (non-organic)
-Arginine or lysine infusion
-Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
-↓Insulin
-Exercise
Yes
No
No
No
No
>8
<5
High
Low
Drugs
-Amiloride
-Spironolactone
-Triamterene
-Trimethoprim
-Pentamidine
-Eplerenone
-Drospirenone
-Calcineurin
 inhibitors
Other causes
-Tubulointerstitial
 diseases
-Urinary tract
 obstruction
-PHA type I
-PHA type II
-Sickle cell disease
-Renal transplant
-SLE
-Primary adrenal insufficiency
-Isolated aldosterone deficiency
-Heparin/LMW heparin
-ACE-I/ARB
-Ketoconazole
-Diabetes mellitus
-Acute GN
-Tubulointerstitial diseases
-PHA type II
-NSAIDs
-β-Blockers
Figure 6-8
The diagnostic approach to hyperkalemia. See text for 
details. ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; 
acute GN, acute glomerulonephritis; ARB, angiotensin II 
receptor blocker; ECG, electrocardiogram; ECV, effective cir-
culatory volume; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LMW hep-
arin, low-molecular-weight heparin; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs; PHA, pseudohypoaldosteronism; 
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TTKG, transtubular 
potassium gradient. (From Mount DB, Zandi-Nejad K: Dis-
orders of potassium balance, in Brenner and Rector’s The 
Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner [ed]. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 
2008, pp 547-587; with permission.)
79
 
CHAPTER 6
Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances
are largely based on historic data and are <3–4 in the 
presence of hypokalemia and >6–7 in the presence of 
hyperkalemia. TTKG is measured as follows:
 
TTKG
K
osmol
K
osmol
urine
serum
serum
uri
=
×
×
+
+
[
]
[
]
ne
Treatment	
Hyperkalemia
Electrocardiographic manifestations of hyperkalemia 
should be considered a medical emergency and treated 
urgently. However, patients with significant hyperkalemia 
(plasma K+ concentration ≥6.5–7 mM) in the absence of 
ECG changes should be aggressively managed because 
of the limitations of ECG changes as a predictor of cardiac 
toxicity. Urgent management of hyperkalemia includes 
admission to the hospital, continuous cardiac monitor-
ing, and immediate treatment. The treatment of hyperka-
lemia is divided into three stages:
	 1.	 Immediate antagonism of the cardiac effects of hyper-
kalemia. Intravenous calcium serves to protect the 
heart while measures are taken to correct hyperka-
lemia. Calcium raises the action potential threshold 
and reduces excitability without changing the rest-
ing membrane potential. By restoring the difference 
between the resting and threshold potentials, cal-
cium reverses the depolarization blockade caused 
by hyperkalemia. The recommended dose is 10 mL 
of 10% calcium gluconate (3–4 mL of calcium chlo-
ride), infused intravenously over 2 to 3 min with 
cardiac monitoring. The effect of the infusion starts 
in 1–3 min and lasts 30–60 min; the dose should be 
repeated if there is no change in ECG findings or if 
they recur after initial improvement. Hypercalcemia 
potentiates the cardiac toxicity of digoxin; hence, 
intravenous calcium should be used with extreme 
caution in patients taking this medication. If judged 
necessary, 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate can be 
added to 100 mL of 5% dextrose in water and infused 
over 20–30 min to avoid acute hypercalcemia.
	 2.	 Rapid reduction in plasma K+ concentration by redis-
tribution into cells. Insulin lowers plasma K+ concen-
tration by shifting K+ into cells. The recommended 
dose is 10 units of IV regular insulin followed imme-
diately by 50 mL of 50% dextrose (D50W, 25 g of glu-
cose total); the effect begins in 10–20 min, peaks at  
30–60 min, and lasts 4 to 6 h. Bolus D50W without insu-
lin is never appropriate because of the risk of acutely 
worsening hyperkalemia due to the osmotic effect of 
hypertonic glucose. Hypoglycemia is common with 
insulin plus glucose; hence, this should be followed 
by an infusion of 10% dextrose at 50 to 75 mL/h, with 
close monitoring of plasma glucose concentration. 
	 	
In hyperkalemic patients with glucose concentra-
tions ≥200–250 mg/dL, insulin should be adminis-
tered without glucose, again with close monitoring of 
glucose concentrations.
	 3.	 β2-Agonists, most commonly albuterol, are effective 
but underutilized agents for the acute management 
of hyperkalemia. Albuterol and insulin with glucose 
have an additive effect on plasma K+ concentration; 
however, ∼20% of patients with end-stage renal dis-
ease are resistant to the effect of β2-agonists; hence, 
these drugs should not be used without insulin. 
The recommended dose for inhaled albuterol is  
10–20 mg of nebulized albuterol in 4 mL of normal 
saline, inhaled over 10 min; the effect starts at about 
30 min, reaches its peak at about 90 min, and lasts 
2–6 h. Hyperglycemia is a side effect, along with 
tachycardia; β2-agonists should be used with cau-
tion in hyperkalemic patients with known cardiac 
disease.
Intravenous bicarbonate has no role in the routine 
treatment of hyperkalemia. It should be reserved for 
patients with hyperkalemia and concomitant metabolic 
acidosis, and only if judged appropriate for management 
of the acidosis. It should not be given as a hypertonic 
intravenous bolus in light of the risk of hypernatremia 
but should be infused in an isotonic or hypotonic fluid 
(e.g., 150 meq in 1 L of D5W).
Removal of potassium. This typically is accomplished 
by using cation exchange resins, diuretics, and/or dial-
ysis. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) exchanges 
Na+ for K+ in the gastrointestinal tract and increases 
the fecal excretion of K+. The recommended dose of 
SPS is 15–30 g, typically given in a premade suspension 
with 33% sorbitol to avoid constipation. The effect of 
SPS on plasma K+ concentration is slow; the full effect 
may take up to 24 h and usually requires repeated 
doses every 4–6 h. Intestinal necrosis is the most seri-
ous complication of SPS. Studies in experimental ani-
mals suggest that sorbitol is required for the intestinal 
injury; however, SPS crystals can often be detected in 
the injured human intestine, suggesting a direct role 
for SPS crystals in this complication. Regardless, in light 
of the risk of intestinal necrosis, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration has recently stated that the administra-
tion of sorbitol with SPS is no longer recommended; 
however, administering SPS without sorbitol might not 
eliminate the risk of intestinal necrosis, given the evi-
dent role for the SPS resin. Therefore, clinicians must 
carefully consider whether emergency treatment with 
SPS is necessary and appropriate for the treatment of 
hyperkalemia; for example, SPS is unnecessary if acute 
dialysis is appropriate and immediately available. If 
SPS is administered, the preparation should ideally 
not contain sorbitol. Reasonable substitutes for the 
laxative effect of sorbitol include lactulose and some 
80
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
preparations of polyethylene glycol 3350; however, data 
demonstrating the efficacy and safety of these laxatives 
with SPS are not available. SPS should not be adminis-
tered in patients at higher risk for intestinal necrosis, 
including postoperative patients, patients with a his-
tory of bowel obstruction, patients with slow intestinal 
transit, patients with ischemic bowel disease, and renal 
transplant patients. Loop and thiazide diuretics can be 
utilized to reduce plasma K+ concentration in volume-
replete or hypervolemic patients with sufficient renal 
function for a diuretic response. Finally, hemodialysis 
is the most effective and reliable method to reduce 
plasma K+ concentration; peritoneal dialysis is consid-
erably less effective. The amount of K+ removed dur-
ing hemodialysis depends on the relative distribution 
of K+ between ICF and ECF (potentially affected by 
prior therapy for hyperkalemia), the type and surface 
area of the dialyzer used, dialysate and blood flow 
rates, dialysis duration, and the plasma to dialysate K+ 
gradient.
 Sundeep Khosla 
81
 The calcium ion plays a critical role in normal cellular 
function and signaling, regulating diverse physiologic 
processes such as neuromuscular signaling, cardiac con-
tractility, hormone secretion, and blood coagulation. 
Thus, extracellular calcium concentrations are main-
tained within an exquisitely narrow range through a 
series of feedback mechanisms that involve parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) and the active vitamin D metabolite 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH) 2 D]. These feed-
back mechanisms are orchestrated by integrating sig-
nals between the parathyroid glands, kidney, intestine, 
and bone ( Fig. 7-1 ). 
 Disorders of serum calcium concentration are rela-
tively common and often serve as a harbinger of under-
lying disease. This chapter provides a brief summary 
of the approach to patients with altered serum calcium 
levels. 
 HypeRcalcemia 
 etiology 
 The causes of hypercalcemia can be understood and 
classifi ed based on derangements in the normal feedback 
mechanisms that regulate serum calcium ( Table 7-1 ). 
Excess PTH production, which is not appropriately 
suppressed by increased serum calcium concentrations, 
occurs in primary neoplastic disorders of the parathyroid 
glands (parathyroid adenomas, hyperplasia, or, rarely, 
carcinoma) that are associated with increased parathyroid 
cell mass and impaired feedback inhibition by calcium. 
Inappropriate PTH secretion for the ambient level of 
serum calcium also occurs with heterozygous inactivat-
ing calcium sensor receptor (CaSR) mutations, which 
impair extracellular calcium sensing by the parathyroid 
glands and the kidneys, resulting in familial hypocalciu-
ric hypercalcemia (FHH). Although PTH secretion by 
tumors is extremely rare, many solid tumors produce 
PTH-related peptide (PTHrP), which shares homology
with PTH in the fi rst 13 amino acids and binds the 
PTH receptor, thus mimicking effects of PTH on bone 
and the kidney. In PTHrP-mediated hypercalcemia 
of malignancy, PTH levels are suppressed by the high 
 HYPERCALCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA 
 cHapTeR 7 
Parathyroid glands
Kidney
Bone
Intestine
PTH
1,25 (OH)2D
ECF Ca2+
1
2
2
3
4
 FIGURe 7-1 
 feedback mechanisms maintaining extracellular cal-
cium concentrations within a narrow, physiologic range 
[8.9–10.1 mg/dl (2.2–2.5 m M )] . A decrease in extracellular 
(ECF) calcium (Ca 2+ ) triggers an increase in parathyroid hor-
mone (PTH) secretion (1) via the calcium sensor receptor on 
parathyroid cells. PTH, in turn, results in increased tubular 
reabsorption of calcium by the kidney (2) and resorption of 
calcium from bone (2) and also stimulates renal 1,25(OH) 2 D 
production (3). 1,25(OH) 2 D, in turn, acts principally on the 
intestine to increase calcium absorption (4). Collectively, 
these homeostatic mechanisms serve to restore serum cal-
cium levels to normal. 
82
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
serum calcium levels. Hypercalcemia associated with 
granulomatous disease (e.g., sarcoidosis) or lymphomas 
is caused by enhanced conversion of 25(OH)D to the 
potent 1,25(OH)2D. In these disorders, 1,25(OH)2D 
enhances intestinal calcium absorption, resulting in 
hypercalcemia and suppressed PTH. Disorders that 
directly increase calcium mobilization from bone, such 
as hyperthyroidism or osteolytic metastases, also lead to 
hypercalcemia with suppressed PTH secretion as does 
exogenous calcium overload, as in milk-alkali syndrome, 
or total parenteral nutrition with excessive calcium 
supplementation.
Clinical Manifestations
Mild hypercalcemia (up to 11–11.5 mg/dL) is usually 
asymptomatic and recognized only on routine calcium 
measurements. Some patients may complain of vague 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, including trouble con-
centrating, personality changes, or depression. Other 
presenting symptoms may include peptic ulcer disease 
or nephrolithiasis, and fracture risk may be increased. 
More severe hypercalcemia (>12–13 mg/dL), particu-
larly if it develops acutely, may result in lethargy, stupor, 
or coma, as well as gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, 
anorexia, constipation, or pancreatitis). Hypercalcemia 
decreases renal concentrating ability, which may cause 
polyuria and polydipsia. With long-standing hyper-
parathyroidism, patients may present with bone pain or 
pathologic fractures. Finally, hypercalcemia can result in 
significant electrocardiographic changes, including bra-
dycardia, AV block, and short QT interval; changes in 
serum calcium can be monitored by following the QT 
interval. 
Diagnostic Approach
The first step in the diagnostic evaluation of hyper- or 
hypocalcemia is to ensure that the alteration in serum 
calcium levels is not due to abnormal albumin concen-
trations. About 50% of total calcium is ionized, and the 
rest is bound principally to albumin. Although direct 
measurements of ionized calcium are possible, they are 
easily influenced by collection methods and other arti-
facts; thus, it is generally preferable to measure total 
calcium and albumin to “correct” the serum calcium. 
When serum albumin concentrations are reduced, a 
corrected calcium concentration is calculated by adding 
0.2 mM (0.8 mg/dL) to the total calcium level for every 
decrement in serum albumin of 1.0 g/dL below the ref-
erence value of 4.1 g/dL for albumin, and, conversely, 
for elevations in serum albumin.
A detailed history may provide important clues regard-
ing the etiology of the hypercalcemia (Table 7-1). 
Chronic hypercalcemia is most commonly caused by 
primary hyperparathyroidism, as opposed to the second 
most common etiology of hypercalcemia, an underlying 
malignancy. The history should include medication use, 
previous neck surgery, and systemic symptoms suggestive 
of sarcoidosis or lymphoma.
Once true hypercalcemia is established, the second 
most important laboratory test in the diagnostic evalu-
ation is a PTH level using a two-site assay for the intact 
hormone. Increases in PTH are often accompanied by 
hypophosphatemia. In addition, serum creatinine should 
be measured to assess renal function; hypercalcemia 
may impair renal function, and renal clearance of PTH 
may be altered depending on the fragments detected 
by the assay. If the PTH level is increased (or “inap-
propriately normal”) in the setting of elevated calcium 
and low phosphorus, the diagnosis is almost always pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism. Because individuals with 
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) may also 
present with mildly elevated PTH levels and hypercal-
cemia, this diagnosis should be considered and excluded 
because parathyroid surgery is ineffective in this condi-
tion. A calcium/creatinine clearance ratio (calculated as 
urine calcium/serum calcium divided by urine creati-
nine/serum creatinine) of <0.01 is suggestive of FHH, 
particularly when there is a family history of mild, 
asymptomatic hypercalcemia. In addition, a number of 
Table 7-1
Causes of Hypercalcemia
Excessive PTH production
Primary hyperparathyroidism (adenoma, hyperplasia, 
rarely carcinoma)
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (long-term stimulation of 
PTH secretion in renal insufficiency)
Ectopic PTH secretion (very rare)
Inactivating mutations in the CaSR (FHH)
Alterations in CaSR function (lithium therapy)
Hypercalcemia of malignancy
Overproduction of PTHrP (many solid tumors)
Lytic skeletal metastases (breast, myeloma)
Excessive 1,25(OH)2D production
Granulomatous diseases (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis,  
silicosis)
Lymphomas
Vitamin D intoxication
Primary increase in bone resorption
Hyperthyroidism
Immobilization
Excessive calcium intake
Milk-alkali syndrome
Total parenteral nutrition
Other causes
Endocrine disorders (adrenal insufficiency, pheochromo-
cytoma, VIPoma)
Medications (thiazides, vitamin A, antiestrogens)
Abbreviations: CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; FHH, familial hypo-
calciuric hypercalcemia; PTH, parathyroid hormone; PTHrP, PTH-
related peptide.
83
 
CHAPTER 7
Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia
laboratories are now offering sequence analysis of the 
CaSR gene for the definitive diagnosis of FHH. Ectopic 
PTH secretion is extremely rare.
A suppressed PTH level in the face of hypercalcemia 
is consistent with non-parathyroid-mediated hyper-
calcemia, most often due to underlying malignancy. 
Although a tumor that causes hypercalcemia is gener-
ally overt, a PTHrP level may be needed to establish 
the diagnosis of hypercalcemia of malignancy. Serum 
1,25(OH)2D levels are increased in granulomatous dis-
orders, and clinical evaluation in combination with lab-
oratory testing will generally provide a diagnosis for the 
various disorders listed in Table 7-1.
Treatment	
Hypercalcemia
Mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia does not require 
immediate therapy, and management should be dic-
tated by the underlying diagnosis. By contrast, sig-
nificant, symptomatic hypercalcemia usually requires 
therapeutic intervention independent of the etiology 
of hypercalcemia. Initial therapy of significant hyper-
calcemia begins with volume expansion because 
hypercalcemia invariably leads to dehydration; 4–6 L 
of intravenous saline may be required over the first 
24 h, keeping in mind that underlying comorbidities 
(e.g., congestive heart failure) may require the use of 
loop diuretics to enhance sodium and calcium excre-
tion. However, loop diuretics should not be initiated 
until the volume status has been restored to normal. If 
there is increased calcium mobilization from bone (as 
in malignancy or severe hyperparathyroidism), drugs 
that inhibit bone resorption should be considered. 
Zoledronic acid (e.g., 4 mg intravenously over ∼30 min), 
pamidronate (e.g., 60–90 mg intravenously over 2–4 h),  
and etidronate (e.g., 7.5 mg/kg per day for 3–7 con-
secutive days) are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration for the treatment of hypercalcemia of 
malignancy in adults. Onset of action is within 1–3 days, 
with normalization of serum calcium levels occurring 
in 60–90% of patients. Bisphosphonate infusions may 
need to be repeated if hypercalcemia relapses. Because 
of their effectiveness, bisphosphonates have replaced 
calcitonin or plicamycin, which are rarely used in cur-
rent practice for the management of hypercalcemia. In 
rare instances, dialysis may be necessary. Finally, while 
intravenous phosphate chelates calcium and decreases 
serum calcium levels, this therapy can be toxic because 
calcium-phosphate complexes may deposit in tissues 
and cause extensive organ damage.
In patients with 1,25(OH)2D-mediated hypercalce-
mia, glucocorticoids are the preferred therapy, as they 
decrease 1,25(OH)2D production. Intravenous hydrocor-
tisone (100–300 mg daily) or oral prednisone (40–60 mg 
daily) for 3–7 days are used most often. Other drugs, 
such as ketoconazole, chloroquine, and hydroxychlo-
roquine, may also decrease 1,25(OH)2D production and 
are used occasionally.
Hypocalcemia
Etiology
The causes of hypocalcemia can be differentiated accord-
ing to whether serum PTH levels are low (hypopara-
thyroidism) or high (secondary hyperparathyroidism). 
Although there are many potential causes of hypocal-
cemia, impaired PTH or vitamin D production are the 
most common etiologies (Table 7-2). Because PTH is 
the main defense against hypocalcemia, disorders associ-
ated with deficient PTH production or secretion may be 
Table 7-2
Causes of Hypocalcemia
Low Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Hypoparathyroidism)
Parathyroid agenesis
Isolated
DiGeorge syndrome
Parathyroid destruction
Surgical
Radiation
Infiltration by metastases or systemic diseases
Autoimmune
Reduced parathyroid function
Hypomagnesemia
Activating CaSR mutations
High Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Secondary 
Hyperparathyroidism)
Vitamin D deficiency or impaired 1,25(OH)2D production/
action
Nutritional vitamin D deficiency (poor intake or  
absorption)
Renal insufficiency with impaired 1,25(OH)2D production
Vitamin D resistance, including receptor defects
Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes
PTH receptor mutations
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (G protein mutations)
Drugs
Calcium chelators
Inhibitors of bone resorption (bisphosphonates,  
plicamycin)
Altered vitamin D metabolism (phenytoin, ketoconazole)
Miscellaneous causes
Acute pancreatitis
Acute rhabdomyolysis
Hungry bone syndrome after parathyroidectomy
Osteoblastic metastases with marked stimulation of 
bone formation (prostate cancer)
Abbreviations: CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; PTH, parathyroid 
hormone.
84
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
associated with profound, life-threatening hypocalcemia. 
In adults, hypoparathyroidism most commonly results 
from inadvertent damage to all four glands during thy-
roid or parathyroid gland surgery. Hypoparathyroidism is 
a cardinal feature of autoimmune endocrinopathies; rarely, 
it may be associated with infiltrative diseases such as sar-
coidosis. Impaired PTH secretion may be secondary to 
magnesium deficiency or to activating mutations in the 
CaSR, which suppress PTH, leading to effects that are 
opposite to those that occur in FHH.
Vitamin D deficiency, impaired 1,25(OH)2D pro-
duction (primarily secondary to renal insufficiency), or 
vitamin D resistance also cause hypocalcemia. However, 
the degree of hypocalcemia in these disorders is gen-
erally not as severe as that seen with hypoparathyroid-
ism because the parathyroids are capable of mounting a 
compensatory increase in PTH secretion. Hypocalcemia 
may also occur in conditions associated with severe tis-
sue injury such as burns, rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis, or 
pancreatitis. The cause of hypocalcemia in these settings 
may include a combination of low albumin, hyperphos-
phatemia, tissue deposition of calcium, and impaired 
PTH secretion.
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with hypocalcemia may be asymptomatic if 
the decreases in serum calcium are relatively mild and 
chronic, or they may present with life-threatening com-
plications. Moderate to severe hypocalcemia is associated 
with paresthesias, usually of the fingers, toes, and cir-
cumoral regions, and is caused by increased neuromus-
cular irritability. On physical examination, a Chvostek’s 
sign (twitching of the circumoral muscles in response 
to gentle tapping of the facial nerve just anterior to the 
ear) may be elicited, although it is also present in ∼10% 
of normal individuals. Carpal spasm may be induced by 
inflation of a blood pressure cuff to 20 mmHg above the 
patient’s systolic blood pressure for 3 min (Trousseau’s 
sign). Severe hypocalcemia can induce seizures, carpo-
pedal spasm, bronchospasm, laryngospasm, and prolon-
gation of the QT interval.
Diagnostic Approach
In addition to measuring serum calcium, it is useful 
to determine albumin, phosphorus, and magnesium 
levels. As for the evaluation of hypercalcemia, deter-
mining the PTH level is central to the evaluation of 
hypocalcemia. A suppressed (or “inappropriately low”) 
PTH level in the setting of hypocalcemia establishes 
absent or reduced PTH secretion (hypoparathyroidism) 
as the cause of the hypocalcemia. Further history will 
often elicit the underlying cause (i.e., parathyroid agen-
esis vs. destruction). By contrast, an elevated PTH level 
(secondary hyperparathyroidism) should direct atten-
tion to the vitamin D axis as the cause of the hypocal-
cemia. Nutritional vitamin D deficiency is best assessed 
by obtaining serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, 
which reflect vitamin D stores. In the setting of renal 
insufficiency or suspected vitamin D resistance, serum 
1,25(OH)2D levels are informative.
Treatment	
Hypocalcemia
The approach to treatment depends on the severity of 
the hypocalcemia, the rapidity with which it develops, 
and the accompanying complications (e.g., seizures, 
laryngospasm). Acute, symptomatic hypocalcemia is 
initially managed with calcium gluconate, 10 mL 10% 
wt/vol (90 mg or 2.2 mmol) intravenously, diluted in  
50 mL of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride, given 
intravenously over 5 min. Continuing hypocalcemia 
often requires a constant intravenous infusion (typically 
10 ampuls of calcium gluconate or 900 mg of calcium 
in 1 L of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride admin-
istered over 24 h). Accompanying hypomagnesemia, if 
present, should be treated with appropriate magnesium 
supplementation.
Chronic hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism 
is treated with calcium supplements (1000–1500 mg/d  
elemental calcium in divided doses) and either vita-
min D2 or D3 (25,000–100,000 U daily) or calcitriol 
[1,25(OH)2D, 0.25–2 μg/d]. Other vitamin D metabolites 
(dihydrotachysterol, alfacalcidiol) are now used less  
frequently. Vitamin D deficiency, however, is best 
treated using vitamin D supplementation, with the 
dose depending on the severity of the deficit and the 
underlying cause. Thus, nutritional vitamin D deficiency 
generally responds to relatively low doses of vitamin D  
(50,000 U, 2–3 times per week for several months), 
while vitamin D deficiency due to malabsorption may 
require much higher doses (100,000 U/d or more). The 
treatment goal is to bring serum calcium into the low 
normal range and to avoid hypercalciuria, which may 
lead to nephrolithiasis.
 Christopher M. Burns  I   Robert L. Wortmann 
I   H. Ralph Schumacher  I   Lan X. Chen 
85
 Purines (adenine and guanine) and pyrimidines (cyto-
sine, thymine, uracil) serve fundamental roles in the 
replication of genetic material, gene transcription, pro-
tein synthesis, and cellular metabolism. Disorders that 
involve abnormalities of nucleotide metabolism range 
from relatively common diseases such as hyperurice-
mia and gout, in which there is increased production 
or impaired excretion of a metabolic end product of 
purine metabolism (uric acid), to rare enzyme defi cien-
cies that affect purine and pyrimidine synthesis or deg-
radation. Understanding these biochemical pathways has 
led, in some instances, to the development of specifi c 
forms of treatment, such as the use of allopurinol, to 
reduce uric acid production. 
 URIC ACID MEtABoLISM 
 Uric acid is the fi nal breakdown product of purine deg-
radation in humans. It is a weak acid with p K a s of 5.75 
and 10.3. Urates, the ionized forms of uric acid, pre-
dominate in plasma extracellular fl uid and synovial fl uid, 
with ~98% existing as monosodium urate at pH 7.4. 
 Plasma is saturated with monosodium urate at a 
concentration of 405 μmol/L (6.8 mg/dL) at 37°C. 
At higher concentrations, plasma is therefore super-
saturated, creating the potential for urate crystal pre-
cipitation. However, plasma urate concentrations can 
reach 4800 μmol/L (80 mg/dL) without precipita-
tion, perhaps because of the presence of solubilizing 
substances. 
 The pH of urine greatly infl uences the solubility of 
uric acid. At pH 5.0, urine is saturated with uric acid 
at concentrations ranging from 360 to 900 μmol/L 
(6–15 mg/dL). At pH 7, saturation is reached at con-
centrations between 9480 and 12,000 μmol/L (158 
and 200 mg/dL). Ionized forms of uric acid in urine 
include mono- and disodium, potassium, ammonium, 
and calcium urates. 
 Although purine nucleotides are synthesized and 
degraded in all tissues, urate is produced only in tissues 
that contain xanthine oxidase, primarily the liver and 
small intestine. Urate production varies with the purine 
content of the diet and the rates of purine biosynthe-
sis, degradation, and salvage  ( Fig. 8-1 ) . Normally, 
two-thirds to three-fourths of urate is excreted by the 
kidneys, and most of the remainder is eliminated 
through the intestines. 
 HYPERURICEMIA AND GOUT 
 CHAPtER 8 
Nucleotides
Nucleosides
Bases
Urate
Urine
Intestine
Tophi
Diet
Nucleic acids
pathways
De novo biosynthesis
Salvage
 FigurE 8-1 
 The total-body urate pool is the net result between urate 
production and excretion. Urate production is infl uenced by 
dietary intake of purines and the rates of de novo biosynthe-
sis of purines from nonpurine precursors, nucleic acid turn-
over, and salvage by phosphoribosyltransferase activities. 
The formed urate is normally excreted by urinary and intesti-
nal routes. Hyperuricemia can result from increased produc-
tion, decreased excretion, or a combination of both mecha-
nisms. When hyperuricemia exists, urate can precipitate and 
deposit in tissues as tophi. 
86
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
The kidneys clear urate from the plasma and main-
tain physiologic balance by utilizing specific organic 
anion transporters (OATs), including urate transporter 1 
(URAT1) and human uric acid transporter (hUAT) 
(Fig. 8-2). URAT1 and other OATs carry urate into 
the tubular cells from the apical side of the lumen. Once 
inside the cell, urate must pass to the basolateral side of the 
lumen in a process controlled by the voltage-dependent 
carrier hUAT. Until recently, a four-component model 
has been used to describe the renal handling of urate/uric 
acid: (1) glomerular filtration, (2) tubular reabsorption, 
(3) secretion, and (4) postsecretory reabsorption. 
Although these processes have been considered sequen-
tial, it is now apparent that they are carried out in paral-
lel by these transporters. URAT1 is a novel transporter 
expressed at the apical brush border of the proximal 
nephron. Uricosuric compounds (Table 8-1) directly 
inhibit URAT1 on the apical side of the tubular cell 
(so-called cis-inhibition). In contrast, antiuricosuric com-
pounds (those that promote hyperuricemia), such as nic-
otinate, pyrazinoate, lactate, and other aromatic organic 
acids, serve as the exchange anion inside the cell, thereby 
stimulating anion exchange and urate reabsorption (trans-
stimulation). The activities of URAT1, other OATs, and 
sodium anion transporter result in 8–12% of the filtered 
urate being excreted as uric acid.
Most children have serum urate concentrations of 
180–240 μmol/L (3–4 mg/dL). Levels begin to rise in 
males during puberty but remain low in females until 
menopause. Mean serum urate values of adult men and 
premenopausal women are 415 and 360 μmol/L (6.8 
and 6 mg/dL), respectively. After menopause, values for 
Basolateral membrane
to circulation
Uric acid
?
Uric acid
Glucose
Fructose
Na+
Dicarboxylates
OAT1
OAT3
SLC2A9v1
(GLUT9)
SLC13A3
Uric acid
Na+
Uric acid
Uric acid
Glucose
Fructose
Organic anions
monocarboxylates
Monocarboxylates
Dicarboxylates
Apical membrane
Tubal lumen
SLC2A9v2
(GLUT9∆N)
SLC5A8
SLC5A12
URAT1
OAT4
TABLE 8-1
Medications With Uricosuric Activity
Acetohexamide
Glyceryl guaiacolate
ACTH
Glycopyrrolate
Ascorbic acid
Halofenate
Azauridine
Losartan
Benzbromarone
Meclofenamate
Calcitonin
Phenolsulfonphthalein
Chlorprothixene
Phenylbutazone
Citrate
Probenecid
Dicumarol
Radiographic contrast agents
Diflunisal
Salicylates (>2 g/d)
Estrogens
Sulfinpyrazone
Fenofibrate
Tetracycline that is outdated
Glucocorticoids
Zoxazolamine
Figure 8-2
Schematic for handling of uric acid by the kidney. A complex 
interplay of transporters on both the apical and basolateral 
aspects of the renal tubule epithelial cell is involved in the 
reabsorption of uric acid. Please see text for details. Most 
uricosuric compounds inhibit URAT1 on the apical side, as 
well as OAT1, OAT3, and GLUT9 on the basolateral side.
87
 
CHAPTER 8
Hyperuricemia and Gout
women increase to approximate those of men. In adult-
hood, concentrations rise steadily over time and vary 
with height, body weight, blood pressure, renal func-
tion, and alcohol intake.
HYPERURICEMIA
Hyperuricemia can result from increased production or 
decreased excretion of uric acid or from a combination 
of the two processes. Sustained hyperuricemia predis-
poses some individuals to develop clinical manifestations 
including gouty arthritis, urolithiasis, and renal dysfunc-
tion (see below).
Hyperuricemia is defined as a plasma (or serum) 
urate concentration >405 μmol/L (6.8 mg/dL). The 
risk of developing gouty arthritis or urolithiasis increases 
with higher urate levels and escalates in proportion to 
the degree of elevation. Hyperuricemia is present in 
between 2 and 13.2% of ambulatory adults and is even 
more frequent in hospitalized individuals.
CAUSES OF HYPERURICEMIA
Hyperuricemia may be classified as primary or secondary 
depending on whether the cause is innate or is the result 
of an acquired disorder. However, it is more useful to 
classify hyperuricemia in relation to the underlying 
pathophysiology, i.e., whether it results from increased 
production, decreased excretion, or a combination of 
the two (Fig. 8-1, Table 8-2).
Increased urate production
Diet contributes to the serum urate in proportion to 
its purine content. Strict restriction of purine intake 
reduces the mean serum urate level by about 60 μmol/L 
(1 mg/dL) and urinary uric acid excretion by 
~1.2 mmol/d (200 mg/d). Foods high in nucleic acid 
content include liver, “sweetbreads” (i.e., thymus and 
pancreas), kidney, and anchovy.
Endogenous sources of purine production also influ-
ence the serum urate level (Fig. 8-3). De novo purine 
biosynthesis is an 11-step process that forms inosine 
monophosphate (IMP). The rates of purine biosynthe-
sis and urate production are determined, for the most 
part, by amidophosphoribosyltransferase (amidoPRT), 
which combines phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) 
and glutamine. A secondary regulatory pathway is the 
salvage of purine bases by hypoxanthine phosphoribo-
syltransferase (HPRT). HPRT catalyzes the combina-
tion of the purine bases hypoxanthine and guanine with 
PRPP to form the respective ribonucleotides IMP and 
guanosine monophosphate (GMP).
Serum urate levels are closely coupled to the rates of 
de novo purine biosynthesis, which is driven in part  by 
the level of PRPP, as evidenced by two X-linked 
inborn errors of purine metabolism. Both increased 
PRPP synthetase activity and HPRT deficiency are 
associated with overproduction of purines, hyperuri-
cemia, and hyperuricaciduria (see below for clinical 
descriptions).
Accelerated purine nucleotide degradation can also 
cause hyperuricemia, i.e., with conditions of rapid cell 
turnover, proliferation, or cell death, as in leukemic blast 
crises, cytotoxic therapy for malignancy, hemolysis, or 
rhabdomyolysis. Hyperuricemia can result from exces-
sive degradation of skeletal muscle ATP after strenuous 
physical exercise or status epilepticus and in glycogen 
storage diseases types III, V, and VII. The hyperuricemia 
of myocardial infarction, smoke inhalation, and acute 
respiratory failure may also be related to accelerated 
breakdown of ATP.
Decreased uric acid excretion
More than 90% of individuals with sustained hyperuri-
cemia have a defect in the renal handling of uric acid. 
TABLE 8-2
Classification of Hyperuricemia by 
Pathophysiology
Urate Overproduction
Primary idiopathic
HPRT deficiency
PRPP synthetase 
overactivity
Hemolytic  
processes
Lymphoproliferative 
diseases
Myeloproliferative 
diseases
Polycythemia vera
Psoriasis
Paget’s disease
Glycogenosis III, V, 
and VII
Rhabdomyolysis
Exercise
Alcohol
Obesity
Purine-rich diet
Decreased Uric Acid Excretion
Primary idiopathic
Renal  
insufficiency
Polycystic kidney 
disease
Diabetes insipidus
Hypertension
Acidosis
Lactic acidosis
Diabetic  
etoacidosis
Starvation ketosis
Berylliosis
Sarcoidosis
Lead intoxication
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Toxemia of pregnancy
Bartter’s syndrome
Down syndrome
Drug ingestion
Salicylates  
(>2 g/d)
Diuretics
Alcohol
Levodopa
Ethambutol
Pyrazinamide
Nicotinic acid
Cyclosporine
Combined Mechanism
Glucose-6- 
phosphatase  
deficiency
Fructose-1- 
phosphate aldolase 
deficiency
Alcohol
Shock
Abbreviations: HPRT, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase; 
PRPP, phosphoribosylpyrophosphate.
88
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Gouty individuals excrete ~40% less uric acid than 
nongouty individuals for any given plasma urate con-
centration. Uric acid excretion increases in gouty and 
nongouty individuals when plasma urate levels are raised 
by purine ingestion or infusion, but in those with gout, 
plasma urate concentrations must be 60–120 μmol/L 
(1–2 mg/dL) higher than normal to achieve equivalent 
uric acid excretion rates.
Altered uric acid excretion could theoretically result 
from decreased glomerular filtration, decreased tubular 
secretion, or enhanced tubular reabsorption. Decreased 
urate filtration does not appear to cause primary hyper-
uricemia but does contribute to the hyperuricemia of 
renal insufficiency. Although hyperuricemia is invariably 
present in chronic renal disease, the correlation between 
serum creatinine, urea nitrogen, and urate concentra-
tion is poor. Uric acid excretion per unit of glomerular 
filtration rate increases progressively with chronic renal 
insufficiency, but tubular secretory capacity tends to be 
preserved, tubular reabsorptive capacity is reduced, and 
extrarenal clearance of uric acid increases as renal dam-
age becomes more severe.
Many agents that cause hyperuricemia exert their 
effects by stimulating reabsorption rather than inhibit-
ing secretion. This appears to occur through a process of 
“priming” renal urate reabsorption through the sodium-
dependent loading of proximal tubular epithelial cells 
with anions capable of trans-stimulating urate reabsorp-
tion. The sodium-coupled monocarboxyl transporters 
SMCT1 and 2 (SLC5A8, SLC5A12) in the brush border 
of the proximal tubular cells mediate sodium-dependent 
loading of these cells with monocarboxylates. A simi-
lar transporter, SLC13A3, mediates sodium-dependent 
influx of dicarboxylates into the epithelial cell from 
the basolateral membrane. Some of these carboxyl-
ates are well known to cause hyperuricemia, including 
pyrazinoate (from pyrazinamide treatment), nicotin-
ate (from niacin therapy), and the organic acids lactate, 
β-hydroxybutyrate, and acetoacetate. The mono- and 
divalent anions then become substrates for URAT1 and 
organic anion transporter (OAT4), respectively, and 
are exchanged for uric acid from the proximal tubule. 
Increased blood levels of these anions result in their 
increased glomerular filtration and greater reabsorption 
by proximal tubular cells. The increased intraepithelial 
cell concentrations lead to increased uric acid reabsorp-
tion by promoting URAT1- and OAT4-dependent 
anion exchange. Low doses of salicylates also promote 
hyperuricemia by this mechanism. Sodium loading of 
proximal tubular cells also provokes urate retention by 
reducing extracellular fluid volume and increasing angio-
tensin II, insulin, and parathyroid hormone release. 
Additional organic anion transporters OAT1 and OAT3 
are involved in the movement of uric acid through the 
basolateral membrane, although the detailed mechanisms 
are still being elucidated.
Glucose transporter 9 (GLUT9, SLC2A9) is an 
electrogenic hexose transporter with splicing vari-
ants that mediate co-reabsorption of uric acid along 
with glucose and fructose at the apical membrane 
(GLUT9&DELTA;N/SLC2A9v2), as well as through 
the basolateral membrane, and thus into the circula-
tion (SLC2A9v1). This might be a mechanism for the 
observed association of the consumption of fructose-
sweetened soft drinks with an increased risk of hyper-
uricemia and gout. Genomewide association scanning 
(GWAS) suggests that polymorphisms in SLC2A9 may 
play an important role in susceptibility to gout in the 
white population. The presence of one predisposing 
variant allele increases the relative risk of developing 
gout by 30–70%, most likely by increasing expression 
of the shorter isoform, SLC2A9v2 (GLUT9ΔN). Nota-
bly, these polymorphisms explain <5% of the variation 
in serum uric acid levels in whites.
Alcohol promotes hyperuricemia because of increased 
urate production and decreased uric acid excretion. 
PRA
SAICAR
Guanosine
Xanthine
Urate
IMP
PRPP
AICAR
Adenine
Inosine
2,8 Dihydroxyadenine
NH3
Purine
nucleotide
cycle
De novo biosynthesis
PRPP
Glutamine
Ribose-5-P
ATP
Feedback
inhibition
Feedback
inhibition
1
2
3
3
4
6
5
5
7
7
8
9
5
10
10
10
GMP
AMP
Adenosine
Hypoxanthine
Guanine
PRPP
Figure 8-3
Abbreviated scheme of purine metabolism. (1) Phosphori-
bosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) synthetase, (2) amidophospho-
ribosyltransferase (amidoPRT), (3) adenylosuccinate lyase, 
(4) (myo-)adenylate (AMP) deaminase, (5) 5′-nucleotidase, 
(6) adenosine deaminase, (7) purine nucleoside phosphory-
lase, (8) hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT), 
(9) adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT), and (10) xan-
thine oxidase. AICAR, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide; 
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; GMP, guanylate; IMP, inosine 
monophosphate; PRA, phosphoribosylamine; SAICAR, suc-
cinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide.
89
 
CHAPTER 8
Hyperuricemia and Gout
Excessive alcohol consumption accelerates hepatic 
breakdown of ATP to increase urate production. Alco-
hol consumption can also induce hyperlacticacidemia, 
which blocks uric acid secretion. The higher purine 
content in some alcoholic beverages such as beer may 
also be a factor.
EVALUATION
Hyperuricemia does not necessarily represent a disease, 
nor is it a specific indication for therapy. The decision 
to treat depends on the cause and the potential conse-
quences of the hyperuricemia in each individual.
Quantification of uric acid excretion can be used to 
determine whether hyperuricemia is caused by overpro-
duction or decreased excretion. On a purine-free diet, 
men with normal renal function excrete <3.6 mmol/d 
(600 mg/d). Thus, the hyperuricemia of individuals who 
excrete uric acid above this level while on a purine-
free diet is due to purine overproduction; for those 
who excrete lower amounts on the purine-free diet, it 
is due to decreased excretion. If the assessment is per-
formed while the patient is on a regular diet, the level of 
4.2 mmol/d (800 mg/d) can be used as the discriminat-
ing value.
Gout
The use of polarizing light microscopy during synovial 
fluid analysis in 1961 by McCarty and Hollander and the 
subsequent application of other crystallographic tech-
niques, such as electron microscopy, energy-dispersive 
elemental analysis, and x-ray diffraction, have allowed 
investigators to identify the roles of different micro-
crystals, including monosodium urate (MSU), calcium 
pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD), calcium apatite (apa-
tite), and calcium oxalate (CaOx), in inducing acute or 
chronic arthritis or periarthritis. The clinical events that 
result from deposition of MSU, CPPD, apatite, and 
CaOx have many similarities but also have important 
differences. Before the use of crystallographic techniques 
in rheumatology, much of what was considered to be 
gouty arthritis in fact was not. Because of often simi-
lar clinical presentations, the need to perform synovial 
fluid analysis to distinguish the type of crystal involved 
must be emphasized. Polarized light microscopy alone 
can identify most typical crystals; apatite, however, is 
an exception. Aspiration and analysis of effusions are 
also important to assess the possibility of infection. 
Apart from the identification of specific microcrystalline 
materials or organisms, synovial fluid characteristics in 
crystal-associated diseases are nonspecific, and synovial 
fluid can be inflammatory or noninflammatory. A list of 
possible musculoskeletal manifestations of crystal-associated 
arthritis is shown in Table 8-3.
Gout is a metabolic disease that most often affects 
middle-aged to elderly men and postmenopausal 
women. It results from an increased body pool of urate 
with hyperuricemia. It typically is characterized by epi-
sodic acute and chronic arthritis caused by deposition 
of MSU crystals in joints and connective tissue tophi 
and the risk for deposition in kidney interstitium or 
uric acid nephrolithiasis.
ACUTE AND CHRONIC ARTHRITIS
Acute arthritis is the most common early clinical mani-
festation of gout. Usually, only one joint is affected 
initially, but polyarticular acute gout can occur in sub-
sequent episodes. The metatarsophalangeal joint of the 
first toe often is involved, but tarsal joints, ankles, and 
knees also are affected commonly. Especially in elderly 
patients or in advanced disease, finger joints may be 
involved. Inflamed Heberden’s or Bouchard’s nodes 
may be a first manifestation of gouty arthritis. The 
first episode of acute gouty arthritis frequently begins 
at night with dramatic joint pain and swelling. Joints 
rapidly become warm, red, and tender, with a clini-
cal appearance that often mimics that of cellulitis. Early 
attacks tend to subside spontaneously within 3–10 days, 
and most patients have intervals of varying length with 
no residual symptoms until the next episode. Several 
events may precipitate acute gouty arthritis: dietary 
excess, trauma, surgery, excessive ethanol ingestion, 
hypouricemic therapy, and serious medical illnesses such 
as myocardial infarction and stroke.
After many acute mono- or oligoarticular attacks, a 
proportion of gouty patients may present with a chronic 
nonsymmetric synovitis, causing potential confusion 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Less commonly, chronic 
gouty arthritis will be the only manifestation, and, 
more rarely, the disease will manifest only as periar-
ticular tophaceous deposits in the absence of synovitis. 
Women represent only 5–20% of all patients with gout. 
Premenopausal gout is rare; it is seen mostly in individ-
uals with a strong family history of gout. Kindreds of 
TABLE 8-3
Musculoskeletal Manifestations of 
Crystal-Induced Arthritis
Acute mono- or polyarthritis
Destructive arthropathies
Bursitis
Pseudo-rheumatoid 
arthritis
Tendinitis
Pseudo-ankylosing  
spondylitis
Enthesitis
Spinal stenosis
Tophaceous deposits
Crowned dens syndrome
Peculiar type of osteoarthritis
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Synovial osteochondromatosis
Tendon rupture
90
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
precocious gout in young females caused by decreased 
renal urate clearance and renal insufficiency have been 
described. Most women with gouty arthritis are post-
menopausal and elderly, have osteoarthritis and arterial 
hypertension that cause mild renal insufficiency, and 
usually are receiving diuretics.
Laboratory diagnosis
Even if the clinical appearance strongly suggests gout, 
the presumptive diagnosis ideally should be confirmed 
by needle aspiration of acutely or chronically involved 
joints or tophaceous deposits. Acute septic arthritis, sev-
eral of the other crystalline-associated arthropathies, pal-
indromic rheumatism, and psoriatic arthritis may present 
with similar clinical features. During acute gouty attacks, 
needle-shaped MSU crystals typically are seen both intra-
cellularly and extracellularly (Fig. 8-4). With compen-
sated polarized light these crystals are brightly birefringent 
with negative elongation. Synovial fluid leukocyte counts 
are elevated from 2000 to 60,000/μL. Effusions appear 
cloudy due to the increased numbers of leukocytes. Large 
amounts of crystals occasionally produce a thick pasty or 
chalky joint fluid. Bacterial infection can coexist with 
urate crystals in synovial fluid; if there is any suspicion of 
septic arthritis, joint fluid must be cultured.
MSU crystals also can often be demonstrated in the 
first metatarsophalangeal joint and in knees not acutely 
involved with gout. Arthrocentesis of these joints is 
a useful technique to establish the diagnosis of gout 
between attacks.
Serum uric acid levels can be normal or low at the 
time of an acute attack, as inflammatory cytokines can 
be uricosuric and effective initiation of hypouricemic 
therapy can precipitate attacks. This limits the value of 
serum uric acid determinations for the diagnosis of gout. 
Nevertheless, serum urate levels are almost always ele-
vated at some time and are important to use to follow 
the course of hypouricemic therapy. A 24-h urine col-
lection for uric acid can, in some cases, be useful in 
assessing the risk of stones, elucidating overproduction 
or underexcretion of uric acid, and deciding whether it 
may be appropriate to use a uricosuric therapy. Excre-
tion of >800 mg of uric acid per 24 h on a regular diet 
suggests that causes of overproduction of purine should 
be considered. Urinalysis, serum creatinine, hemoglo-
bin, white blood cell (WBC) count, liver function tests, 
and serum lipids should be obtained because of possible 
pathologic sequelae of gout and other associated diseases 
requiring treatment and as baselines because of possible 
adverse effects of gout treatment.
Radiographic features
Early in the disease radiographic studies may only con-
firm clinically evident swelling. Cystic changes, well-
defined erosions with sclerotic margins (often with 
overhanging bony edges), and soft tissue masses are 
characteristic features of advanced chronic tophaceous 
gout. Ultrasound, CT, and MRI are being studied and 
are likely to become more sensitive for early changes.
Treatment	
Gout
ACUTE GOUTY ARTHRITIS  The mainstay of 
treatment during an acute attack is the administra-
tion of anti-inflammatory drugs such as nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), colchicine, or gluco-
corticoids. NSAIDs are used most often in individuals  
without complicating comorbid conditions. Both colchi-
cine and NSAIDs may be poorly tolerated and dangerous 
in the elderly and in the presence of renal insufficiency 
and gastrointestinal disorders. This was repeated later. 
Ice pack applications and rest of the involved joints can 
be helpful. Colchicine given orally is a traditional and 
effective treatment if used early in an attack. One useful 
regimen is one 0.6-mg tablet given every 8 h with sub-
sequent tapering. This is generally better tolerated than 
the formerly advised hourly regimen. The drug must be 
stopped promptly at the first sign of loose stools, and 
symptomatic treatment must be given for the diarrhea. 
Intravenous colchicine has been taken off the market. 
NSAIDs given in full anti-inflammatory doses are effec-
tive in ~90% of patients, and the resolution of signs and 
symptoms usually occurs in 5–8 days. The most effective 
drugs are any of those with a short half-life and include 
indomethacin, 25–50 mg tid; naproxen, 500 mg bid; 
ibuprofen, 800 mg tid; and diclofenac, 50 mg tid. Glu-
cocorticoids given IM or orally, for example, prednisone,  
30–50 mg/d as the initial dose and gradually 
Figure 8-4
Extracellular and intracellular monosodium urate crystals, as 
seen in a fresh preparation of synovial fluid, illustrate needle- 
and rod-shaped crystals. These crystals are strongly nega-
tive birefringent crystals under compensated polarized light 
microscopy; 400×.
91
 
CHAPTER 8
Hyperuricemia and Gout
tapered with the resolution of the attack, can be effec-
tive in polyarticular gout. For a single joint or a few 
involved joints intraarticular triamcinolone acetonide, 
20–40 mg, or methylprednisolone, 25–50 mg, have been 
effective and well tolerated. Based on recent evidence 
on the essential role of the inflammasome and interleu-
kin 1 β (IL-1β) in acute gout, anakinra has been used and 
other inhibitors of IL-1β are under investigation.
HYPOURICEMIC THERAPY  Ultimate control of 
gout requires correction of the basic underlying defect: 
the hyperuricemia. Attempts to normalize serum uric 
acid to <300–360 μmol/L (5.0–6.0 mg/dL) to prevent 
recurrent gouty attacks and eliminate tophaceous 
deposits entail a commitment to long-term hypouri-
cemic regimens and medications that generally are 
required for life. Hypouricemic therapy should be con-
sidered when, as in most patients, the hyperuricemia 
cannot be corrected by simple means (control of body 
weight, low-purine diet, increase in liquid intake, limita-
tion of ethanol use, decreased use of fructose-containing  
foods and beverages, and avoidance of diuretics). The 
decision to initiate hypouricemic therapy usually is 
made taking into consideration the number of acute 
attacks (urate lowering may be cost-effective after two 
attacks), serum uric acid levels [progression is more 
rapid in patients with serum uric acid >535 μmol/L 
(>9.0 mg/dL)], the patient’s willingness to commit to 
lifelong therapy, or the presence of uric acid stones. 
Urate-lowering therapy should be initiated in any 
patient who already has tophi or chronic gouty arthri-
tis. Uricosuric agents such as probenecid can be used 
in patients with good renal function who underexcrete 
uric acid, with <600 mg in a 24-h urine sample. Urine 
volume must be maintained by ingestion of 1500 mL  
of water every day. Probenecid can be started at a dose 
of 250 mg twice daily and increased gradually as needed 
up to 3 g per day to maintain a serum uric acid level  
<360 μmol/L (6 mg/dL). Probenecid is generally not effec-
tive in patients with serum creatinine levels >177 μmol/L 
(2 mg/dL). These patients may require allopurinol or benz­
bromarone (not available in the United States). Benzbro-
marone is another uricosuric drug that is more effective 
in patients with renal failure. Some agents used to treat 
common comorbidities, including losartan, fenofibrate, 
and amlodipine, have some mild uricosuric effects.
The xanthine oxidase inhibitor allopurinol is by far 
the most commonly used hypouricemic agent and is 
the best drug to lower serum urate in overproducers, 
urate stone formers, and patients with renal disease. It 
can be given in a single morning dose, 100–300 mg ini-
tially and increasing up to 800 mg if needed. In patients 
with chronic renal disease, the initial allopurinol dose 
should be lower and adjusted depending on the serum 
creatinine concentration; for example, with a creatinine 
clearance of 10 mL/min, one generally would use  
100 mg every other day. Doses can be increased gradu-
ally to reach the target urate level of 6 mg/dL; however, 
more studies are needed to provide exact guidance. 
Toxicity of allopurinol has been recognized increasingly 
in patients who use thiazide diuretics and patients aller-
gic to penicillin and ampicillin. The most serious side 
effects include life-threatening toxic epidermal necrolysis,  
systemic vasculitis, bone marrow suppression, granu-
lomatous hepatitis, and renal failure. Patients with mild 
cutaneous reactions to allopurinol can reconsider the use 
of a uricosuric agent, undergo an attempt at desensitiza-
tion to allopurinol, or take febuxostat, a new, chemically 
unrelated specific xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxo-
stat is approved at 40 or 80 mg once a day and does not 
require dose adjustment in mild to moderate renal dis-
ease. Patients can also pay increased attention to diet and 
should be aware of new alternative agents (see below). 
Urate-lowering drugs are generally not initiated during 
acute attacks but after the patient is stable and low-dose 
colchicine has been initiated to decrease the risk of the 
flares that often occur with urate lowering. Colchicine 
anti-inflammatory prophylaxis in doses of 0.6 mg one to 
two times daily should be given along with the hypo­
uricemic therapy until the patient is normouricemic and 
without gouty attacks for 6 months or as long as tophi are 
present. Colchicine should not be used in dialysis patients 
and is given in lower doses in patients with renal disease 
or with P glycoprotein or CYP3A4 inhibitors such as clar-
ithromycin that can increase toxicity of colchicine. Peglot-
icase is a new urate-lowering biologic agent that can be 
effective in patients allergic to or failing xanthine oxidase 
inhibitors. New uricosurics are undergoing investigation.
COMPLICATIONS
The most recognized complication of hyperuricemia is 
gouty arthritis. In the general population, the prevalence 
of hyperuricemia ranges between 2.0 and 13.2%, and the 
prevalence of gout is between 1.3 and 3.7%. The higher 
the serum urate level, the more likely an individual is to 
develop gout. In one study, the incidence of gout was 
4.9% for individuals with serum urate concentrations 
>540 μmol/L (9.0 mg/dL) compared with 0.5% for 
those with values between 415 and 535 μmol/L (7.0 and 
8.9 mg/dL). The complications of gout correlate with 
both the duration and severity of hyperuricemia.
Hyperuricemia also causes several renal problems: 
(1) nephrolithiasis; (2) urate nephropathy, a rare cause of 
renal insufficiency attributed to monosodium urate crys-
tal deposition in the renal interstitium; and (3) uric acid 
nephropathy, a reversible cause of acute renal failure 
resulting from deposition of large amounts of uric acid 
crystals in the renal collecting ducts, pelvis, and ureters.
92
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
NEPHROLITHIASIS
Uric acid nephrolithiasis occurs most commonly, but 
not exclusively, in individuals with gout. In gout, the 
prevalence of nephrolithiasis correlates with the serum 
and urinary uric acid levels, reaching ~50% with serum 
urate levels of 770 μmol/L (13 mg/dL) or urinary uric 
acid excretion >6.5 mmol/d (1100 mg/d).
Uric acid stones can develop in individuals with no 
evidence of arthritis, only 20% of whom are hyperuri-
cemic. Uric acid can also play a role in other types of 
kidney stones. Some nongouty individuals with calcium 
oxalate or calcium phosphate stones have hyperuricemia 
or hyperuricaciduria. Uric acid may act as a nidus on 
which calcium oxalate can precipitate or lower the for-
mation product for calcium oxalate crystallization.
Urate nephropathy
Urate nephropathy, sometimes referred to as urate nephro-
sis, is a late manifestation of severe gout and is charac-
terized histologically by deposits of monosodium urate 
crystals surrounded by a giant cell inflammatory reaction 
in the medullary interstitium and pyramids. The disor-
der is now rare and cannot be diagnosed in the absence 
of gouty arthritis. The lesions may be clinically silent or 
cause proteinuria, hypertension, and renal insufficiency.
Uric acid nephropathy
This reversible cause of acute renal failure is due to pre-
cipitation of uric acid in renal tubules and collecting ducts 
that causes obstruction to urine flow. Uric acid nephrop-
athy develops following sudden urate overproduction and 
marked hyperuricaciduria. Factors that favor uric acid 
crystal formation include dehydration and acidosis. This 
form of acute renal failure occurs most often during an 
aggressive “blastic” phase of leukemia or lymphoma prior 
to or coincident with cytolytic therapy but has also been 
observed in individuals with other neoplasms, follow-
ing epileptic seizures, and after vigorous exercise with 
heat stress. Autopsy studies have demonstrated intralu-
minal precipitates of uric acid, dilated proximal tubules, 
and normal glomeruli. The initial pathogenic events are 
believed to include obstruction of collecting ducts with 
uric acid and obstruction of distal renal vasculature.
If recognized, uric acid nephropathy is potentially 
reversible. Appropriate therapy has reduced the mortal-
ity from about 50% to practically nil. Serum levels can-
not be relied on for diagnosis because this condition has 
developed in the presence of urate concentrations vary-
ing from 720 to 4800 μmol/L (12–80 mg/dL). The dis-
tinctive feature is the urinary uric acid concentration. In 
most forms of acute renal failure with decreased urine 
output, urinary uric acid content is either normal or 
reduced, and the ratio of uric acid to creatinine is <1. 
In acute uric acid nephropathy the ratio of uric acid to 
creatinine in a random urine sample or 24-h specimen is 
>1, and a value that high is essentially diagnostic.
HYPERURICEMIA AND METABOLIC 
SYNDROME
Metabolic syndrome is characterized by abdominal 
obesity with visceral adiposity, impaired glucose toler-
ance due to insulin resistance with hyperinsulinemia, 
hypertriglyceridemia, increased low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, decreased high-density lipoprotein choles-
terol, and hyperuricemia. Hyperinsulinemia reduces the 
renal excretion of uric acid and sodium. Not surpris-
ingly, hyperuricemia resulting from euglycemic hyper-
insulinemia may precede the onset of type 2 diabetes, 
hypertension, coronary artery disease, and gout in indi-
viduals with metabolic syndrome.
Treatment	
Hyperuricemia
ASYMPTOMATIC HYPERURICEMIA  Hyperuri-
cemia is present in ~5% of the population and in up to 
25% of hospitalized individuals. The vast majority are at 
no clinical risk. In the past, the association of hyperuri-
cemia with cardiovascular disease and renal failure led 
to the use of urate-lowering agents for patients with 
asymptomatic hyperuricemia. This practice is no longer 
recommended except for individuals receiving cytolytic  
therapy for neoplastic disease, in which treatment is 
given in an effort to prevent uric acid nephropathy. 
Because hyperuricemia can be a component of the met-
abolic syndrome, its presence is an indication to screen 
for and aggressively treat any accompanying obesity, 
hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, or hypertension.
Hyperuricemic individuals are at risk to develop gouty 
arthritis, especially those with higher serum urate levels. 
However, most hyperuricemic persons never develop 
gout, and prophylactic treatment is not indicated. Fur-
thermore, neither structural kidney damage nor tophi are 
identifiable before the first attack. Reduced renal function 
cannot be attributed to asymptomatic hyperuricemia, 
and treatment of asymptomatic hyperuricemia does not 
alter the progression of renal dysfunction in patients with 
renal disease. Increased risk of stone formation in those 
with asymptomatic hyperuricemia is not established.
Thus, because treatment with specific antihyperuri-
cemic agents entails inconvenience, cost, and potential 
toxicity, routine treatment of asymptomatic hyperuri-
cemia cannot be justified other than for prevention 
of acute uric acid nephropathy. In addition, routine 
screening for asymptomatic hyperuricemia is not rec-
ommended. If hyperuricemia is diagnosed, however, the 
cause should be determined. Causal factors should be 
93
 
CHAPTER 8
Hyperuricemia and Gout
corrected if the condition is secondary, and associated 
problems such as hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, 
diabetes mellitus, and obesity should be treated.
SYMPTOMATIC HYPERURICEMIA
Nephrolithiasis  Antihyperuricemic 
therapy 
is 
recommended for the individual who has both gouty 
arthritis and either uric acid– or calcium-containing 
stones, both of which may occur in association with 
hyperuricaciduria. Regardless of the nature of the cal-
culi, fluid ingestion should be sufficient to produce a 
daily urine volume >2 L. Alkalinization of the urine with 
sodium bicarbonate or acetazolamide may be justified 
to increase the solubility of uric acid. Specific treatment 
of uric acid calculi requires reducing the urine uric acid 
concentration with a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, such 
as allopurinol or febuxostat. These agents decrease the 
serum urate concentration and the urinary excretion 
of uric acid in the first 24 h, with a maximum reduc-
tion occurring within 2 weeks. The average effective 
dose of allopurinol is 300–400 mg/d. Allopurinol can be 
given once a day because of the long half-life (18 h) of 
its active metabolite, oxypurinol. The drug is effective in 
patients with renal insufficiency, but the dose should be 
reduced. Allopurinol is also useful in reducing the recur-
rence of calcium oxalate stones in gouty patients and 
in nongouty individuals with hyperuricemia or hyper-
uricaciduria. Febuxostat (40–80 mg/d) is also taken 
once daily, and doses do not need to be adjusted in the 
presence of mild to moderate renal dysfunction. Potas-
sium citrate (30–80 mmol/d orally in divided doses) is 
an alternative therapy for patients with uric acid stones 
alone or mixed calcium/uric acid stones. A xanthine 
oxidase inhibitor is also indicated for the treatment of 
2,8-dihydroxyadenine kidney stones.
Uric Acid Nephropathy  Uric acid nephropathy is 
often preventable, and immediate, appropriate therapy 
has greatly reduced the mortality rate. Vigorous IV hydra-
tion and diuresis with furosemide dilute the uric acid in 
the tubules and promote urine flow to ≥100 mL/h. The 
administration of acetazolamide, 240–500 mg every 
6–8 h, and sodium bicarbonate, 89 mmol/L, IV enhances 
urine alkalinity and thereby solubilizes more uric acid. 
It is important to ensure that the urine pH remains >7.0 
and to watch for circulatory overload. In addition, antihy-
peruricemic therapy in the form of allopurinol in a single 
dose of 8 mg/kg is administered to reduce the amount 
of urate that reaches the kidney. If renal insufficiency 
persists, subsequent daily doses should be reduced to 
100–200 mg because oxypurinol, the active metabo-
lite of allopurinol, accumulates in renal failure. Despite 
these measures, hemodialysis may be required. Urate 
oxidase (Rasburicase) can also be administered IV to 
prevent or to treat tumor lysis syndrome.
HYPOURICEMIA
Hypouricemia, defined as a serum urate concentration 
<120 μmol/L (2.0 mg/dL) can result from decreased 
production of urate, increased excretion of uric acid, 
or a combination of both mechanisms. It occurs in 
<0.2% of the general population and <0.8% of hospital-
ized individuals. Hypouricemia causes no symptoms or 
pathology and therefore requires no therapy.
Most hypouricemia results from increased renal uric 
acid excretion. The finding of normal amounts of uric 
acid in a 24-h urine collection in an individual with 
hypouricemia is evidence for a renal cause. Medications 
with uricosuric properties (Table 8-1) include aspirin 
(at doses >2.0 g/d), losartan, fenofibrate, x-ray con-
trast materials, and glyceryl guaiacolate. Total parenteral 
hyperalimentation can also cause hypouricemia, possibly 
a result of the high glycine content of the infusion for-
mula. Other causes of increased urate clearance include 
conditions such as neoplastic disease, hepatic cirrhosis, 
diabetes mellitus, and inappropriate secretion of vaso-
pressin; defects in renal tubular transport such as pri-
mary Fanconi syndrome and Fanconi syndromes caused 
by Wilson’s disease, cystinosis, multiple myeloma, and 
heavy metal toxicity; and isolated congenital defects 
in the bidirectional transport of uric acid. Hypourice-
mia can be familial, generally inherited in an autoso-
mal recessive manner. Most cases are caused by a loss of 
function mutation in SLC12A12, the gene that encodes 
URAT-1, resulting in increased renal urate clearance. 
Individuals with normal SLC12A12 most likely have 
a defect in other urate transporters. Although usually 
asymptomatic, some patients suffer from urate nephroli-
thiasis or exercise-induced renal failure.
SELECTED INBORN ERRORS OF 
PURINE METABOLISM
(Table 8-4; see also Fig. 8-3.) More than 30 defects in 
human purine and pyrimidine metabolic pathways have 
been identified thus far. Many are benign, but about 
half are associated with clinical manifestations, some 
causing major morbidity and mortality. Advances in 
genetics, as well as high-performance liquid chromatog-
raphy and tandem mass spectrometry, have allowed for 
better diagnosis.
PURINE DISORDERS
HPRT DEFICIENCY
The HPRT gene is located on the X chromosome. 
Affected males are hemizygous for the mutant gene; 
carrier females are asymptomatic. A complete deficiency 
of HPRT, the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, is characterized 
94
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
by hyperuricemia, self-mutilative behavior, choreoath-
etosis, spasticity, and mental retardation. A partial defi-
ciency of HPRT, the Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome, is 
associated with hyperuricemia but no central nervous 
system manifestations. In both disorders, the hyperuri-
cemia results from urate overproduction and can cause 
uric acid crystalluria, nephrolithiasis, obstructive uropa-
thy, and gouty arthritis. Early diagnosis and appropriate 
therapy with allopurinol can prevent or eliminate all 
the problems attributable to hyperuricemia but have no 
effect on the behavioral or neurologic abnormalities.
INCREASED PRPP SYNTHETASE ACTIVITY
Like the HPRT deficiency states, PRPP synthetase 
overactivity is X-linked and results in gouty arthritis and 
uric acid nephrolithiasis. Nerve deafness occurs in some 
families.
ADENINE PHOSPHORIBOSYLTRANSFERASE 
(APRT) DEFICIENCY
APRT deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive 
trait. Affected individuals develop kidney stones com-
posed of 2,8-dihydroxyadenine. Whites with the disor-
der have a complete deficiency (type I), whereas Japanese 
subjects have some measurable enzyme activity (type II). 
Expression of the defect is similar in the two populations, 
as is the frequency of the heterozygous state (0.4–1.1 per 
100). Allopurinol treatment prevents stone formation.
HEREDITARY XANTHINURIA
A deficiency of xanthine oxidase causes all purine in the 
urine to occur in the form of hypoxanthine and xan-
thine. About two-thirds of deficient individuals are 
asymptomatic. The remainder develop kidney stones 
composed of xanthine.
MYOADENYLATE DEAMINASE DEFICIENCY
Primary (inherited) and secondary (acquired) forms 
of myoadenylate deaminase deficiency have been 
described. The primary form is inherited as an autosomal 
recessive trait. Clinically, some may have relatively mild 
myopathic symptoms with exercise or other triggers, 
but most individuals with this defect are asymptomatic. 
Therefore, another explanation for the myopathy should 
be sought in symptomatic patients with this deficiency. 
The acquired deficiency occurs in association with a 
wide variety of neuromuscular disease, including muscu-
lar dystrophies, neuropathies, inflammatory myopathies, 
and collagen vascular diseases.
ADENYLOSUCCINATE LYASE DEFICIENCY
Deficiency of this enzyme is due to an autosomal reces-
sive trait and causes profound psychomotor retardation, 
seizures, and other movement disorders. All individuals 
with this deficiency are mentally retarded, and most are 
autistic.
TABLE 8-4
Inborn Errors of Purine Metabolism
Enzyme
Activity
Inheritance
Clinical Features
Laboratory 
Features
Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl-
transferase
Complete  
deficiency
Partial  
deficiency
X-linked
X-linked
Self-mutilation, choreoathetosis, 
gout, and uric acid lithiasis
Gout and uric acid lithiasis
Hyperuricemia, 
hyperuricosuria
Hyperuricemia, 
hyperuricosuria
Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate 
synthetase
Overactivity
X-linked
Gout, uric acid lithiasis, and  
deafness
Hyperuricemia, 
hyperuricosuria
Adenine phosphoribosyl- 
transferase
Deficiency
Autosomal recessive
2,8-Dihydroxyadenine lithiasis
—
Xanthine oxidase
Deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Xanthinuria and xanthine  
lithiasis
Hypouricemia,  
hypouricosuria
Adenylosuccinate lyase
Deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Autism and psychomotor  
retardation
—
Myoadenylate deaminase
Deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Myopathy with exercise  
intolerance or asymptomatic
—
Adenosine deaminase
Deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Severe combined immuno‑ 
deficiency disease and  
chondroosseous dysplasia
—
Purine nucleoside  
phosphorylase
Deficiency
Autosomal recessive
T cell–mediated  
immunodeficiency
—
 John R. Asplin 
I  Fredric L. Coe 
I  Murray J. Favus 
95
 Kidney stones are one of the most common urologic 
problems. In the United States, ∼13% of men and 7% 
of women will develop a kidney stone during their life-
times, and the prevalence is increasing throughout the 
industrialized world. 
 types of stones 
 Calcium salts, uric acid, cystine, and struvite are the 
constituents of most kidney stones in the western hemi-
sphere ( Chap. 4 ). Calcium oxalate and calcium phos-
phate stones make up 75–85% of the total  ( Table 9-1 ) 
and those constituents may be admixed in the same 
stone. Calcium phosphate in stones is usually hydroxy-
apatite [Ca 5 (PO 4 ) 3 OH] or, less commonly, brushite 
(CaHPO 4 H 2 O), although the incidence of brushite 
stones is increasing. 
 Calcium stones are more common in men; the average 
age of onset is the third to fourth decade. Approximately 
50% of people who form a single calcium stone form 
another within the next 10 years, and some form multiple 
recurrent stones. The average rate of new stone forma-
tion in recurrent stone formers is about one stone every 
3 years.  Uric acid stones account for 5–10% of kidney stones 
and are also more common in men. Five percent of stones 
are  struvite , whereas  cystine stones are uncommon, account-
ing for ∼1% of cases in most series of nephrolithiasis. 
 Manifestations of stones 
 As stones grow on the surfaces of the renal papillae or 
within the collecting system, they do not necessarily pro-
duce symptoms. Asymptomatic stones may be discovered 
during the course of radiographic studies undertaken for 
unrelated reasons. Stones are a common cause of isolated 
hematuria. Stones become symptomatic when they enter 
the ureter or occlude the ureteropelvic junction, causing 
pain and obstruction. 
 Stone passage 
 A stone can traverse the ureter without symptoms, but 
passage usually produces pain and bleeding. The pain 
begins gradually, usually in the fl ank, but increases over 
the next 20–60 min to become so severe that narcotics 
may be needed for its control. The pain may remain in 
the fl ank or spread downward and anteriorly toward the 
ipsilateral loin, testis, or vulva. A stone in the portion 
of the ureter within the bladder wall causes frequency, 
urgency, and dysuria that may be confused with uri-
nary tract infection. The vast majority of ureteral stones 
<0.5 cm in diameter pass spontaneously. 
 Helical computed tomography (CT) scanning with-
out radiocontrast enhancement is now the standard 
radiologic procedure for diagnosis of nephrolithiasis. 
The advantages of CT include detection of uric acid 
stones in addition to the traditional radiopaque stones, 
no exposure to the risk of radiocontrast agents, and 
possible diagnosis of other causes of abdominal pain in 
a patient suspected of having renal colic from stones. 
Ultrasound is not as sensitive as CT in detecting renal 
or ureteral stones. Standard abdominal x-rays may be 
used to monitor patients for formation and growth of 
kidney stones, as they are less expensive and provide 
less radiation exposure than CT scans. Calcium, cystine, 
and struvite stones are all radiopaque on standard x-rays, 
whereas uric acid stones are radiolucent. 
 Other syndromes 
 Staghorn calculi 
 Struvite, cystine, and uric acid stones often grow too 
large to enter the ureter. They gradually fi ll the renal 
pelvis and may extend outward through the infundib-
ula to the calyces themselves. Very large staghorn stones 
can have surprisingly few symptoms and may lead to the 
eventual loss of kidney function. 
 NEPHROLITHIASIS 
 CHAPTER 9 
96
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
Table 9-1
Major Causes of Renal Stones
Stone Type  
and Causes
Percent 
of all 
Stonesa
Percent 
Occurrence 
of Specific 
Causesa
Ratio of 
Males to 
Females
Etiology
Diagnosis
Treatment
Calcium stones
75–85
2:1 to 3:1
Idiopathic  
hypercalciuria
50–55
2:1
? Hereditary
Normocalcemia,  
unexplained  
hypercalciuriab
Low-sodium, low-
protein diet;  
thiazide diuretics
Hyperuricosuria
20
4:1
Diet
Urine uric acid >750 mg 
per 24 h (women),  
>800 mg per 24 h 
(men)
Allopurinol or low-
purine diet
Primary hyper-
parathyroidism
3–5
3:10
Neoplasia
Hypercalcemia with 
nonsuppressed  
parathyroid hormone
Surgery
Distal renal  
tubular acidosis
Rare
1:1
Hereditary or 
acquired
Hyperchloremic acido-
sis, minimum urine  
pH >5.5
Alkali replacement
Dietary  
hyperoxaluria
10–30
1:1
High-oxalate 
diet or low-
calcium diet
Urine oxalate >40 mg 
per 24 h
Low-oxalate,  
normal-calcium  
diet
Enteric  
hyperoxaluria
∼1–2
1:1
Bowel  
surgery
Urine oxalate >75 mg 
per 24 h
Low-oxalate diet 
and oral calcium 
pills
Primary  
hyperoxaluria
Rare
1:1
Hereditary
Urine oxalate  
and glycolic or  
l-glyceric acid 
increased
Fluids, pyridoxine, 
citrate, and neutral 
phosphate
Hypocitraturia
20–40
1:1 to 2:1
? Hereditary, 
diet
Urine citrate <320 mg 
per 24 h
Alkali supplements
Idiopathic stone 
disease
20
2:1
Unknown
None of the above 
present
Oral phosphate, 
fluids
Uric acid stones
5–10
Metabolic  
syndrome
∼30
1:1
Diet
Glucose intolerance, 
obesity, hyperlipidemia
Alkali and  
allopurinol if daily 
urine uric acid 
>1000 mg
Gout
∼30
3:1 to 4:1
Hereditary
Clinical diagnosis
Alkali and allopurinol
Idiopathic
∼30
1:1
? Hereditary
Uric acid stones,  
no gout
Alkali and allopurinol 
if daily urine uric 
acid >1000 mg
Dehydration
?
1:1
Intestinal, 
habit
History, intestinal  
fluid loss
Alkali, fluids,  
reversal of cause
Lesch-Nyhan 
syndrome
Rare
Males only
Hereditary
Reduced hypoxanthine-
guanine phosphoribo-
syltransferase level
Allopurinol
Cystine stones
1
1:1
Hereditary
Stone type; elevated 
cystine excretion
Massive fluids, alkali, 
D-penicillamine if 
needed
Struvite stones
5
1:3
Infection
Stone type
Antimicrobial agents 
and judicious  
surgery
aValues are percentages of patients who form a particular type of stone and who display each specific cause of stones.
bUrine calcium >300 mg/24 h (men), 250 mg/24 h (women), or 4 mg/kg per 24 h either sex. Hyperthyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, sarcoidosis, 
malignant tumors, immobilization, vitamin D intoxication, rapidly progressive bone disease, and Paget’s disease all cause hypercalciuria and 
must be excluded in diagnosis of idiopathic hypercalciuria.
97
 
CHAPTER 9
Nephrolithiasis
Nephrocalcinosis
Calcium stones grow on the papillae. Most break loose 
and cause colic, but they may remain in place so that 
multiple papillary calcifications are found by x-ray, a 
condition termed nephrocalcinosis. Papillary nephrocalci-
nosis is common in hereditary distal renal tubular acido-
sis (RTA) and in other types of severe hypercalciuria. In 
medullary sponge kidney disease (Chap. 16), calcifica-
tion may occur in dilated distal collecting ducts.
Infection
Although urinary tract infection is not a direct conse-
quence of stone disease, it can occur after instrumen-
tation and surgery of the urinary tract, which are used 
frequently in the treatment of stone disease. Stone dis-
ease and urinary tract infection can enhance their respec-
tive seriousness and interfere with treatment. Obstruction 
of an infected kidney by a stone may lead to sepsis and 
extensive damage of renal tissue, since it converts the uri-
nary tract proximal to the obstruction into a closed space 
that can become an abscess. Stones may harbor bacteria 
in the stone matrix, leading to recurrent urinary tract 
infection, and infection due to bacteria that have the 
enzyme urease can cause stones composed of struvite.
Activity of stone disease
In active disease, new stones are forming or preformed 
stones are growing. Sequential radiographs are needed 
to document the growth or appearance of new stones 
and ensure that passed stones are actually newly formed, 
not preexistent.
Pathogenesis of Stones
Urinary stones usually arise because of the breakdown 
of a delicate balance between solubility and precipita-
tion of salts. The kidneys must conserve water, but they 
must excrete materials that have low solubility. These two 
opposing requirements must be balanced during adaptation 
to diet, climate, and activity. The problem is mitigated to 
some extent by the fact that urine contains substances such 
as pyrophosphate, citrate, and glycoproteins that inhibit 
crystallization. These protective mechanisms are less than 
perfect. When urine becomes supersaturated with insolu-
ble materials, because excretion rates are excessive and/or 
because water conservation is extreme, crystals form and 
may grow and aggregate to form a stone.
Supersaturation
A solution in equilibrium with a solid phase is said to be 
saturated with respect to that substance. If the concen-
tration of a substance in a solution is above the satura-
tion point, the solution is said to be supersaturated and 
can support the growth of crystals, and if supersaturation 
is excessive, new crystals can begin to develop sponta-
neously. Excessive supersaturation is common in stone 
formation.
Calcium, oxalate, and phosphate form many soluble 
complexes among themselves and with other substances 
in urine, such as citrate. As a result, their free ion activi-
ties are below their chemical concentrations. Reduc-
tion in ligands such as citrate can increase ion activity 
and therefore supersaturation. Urine supersaturation can 
be increased by dehydration or by overexcretion of cal-
cium, oxalate, phosphate, cystine, or uric acid. Urine pH 
is also important; phosphate and uric acid are acids that 
dissociate readily over the physiologic range of urine pH. 
Alkaline urine contains more dibasic phosphate, favor-
ing deposits of brushite and apatite. Below a urine pH 
of 5.5, uric acid crystals predominate, whereas phosphate 
crystals are rare. The solubility of calcium oxalate is not 
influenced by changes in urine pH. Measurements of 
supersaturation in a 24-h urine sample probably under-
estimate the risk of precipitation. Transient dehydration, 
variation of urine pH, and postprandial bursts of overex-
cretion may cause spikes in supersaturation.
Crystallization
When urine supersaturation is excessive, crystals begin 
to nucleate. Once formed, crystal nuclei will grow in 
size if urine is supersaturated with respect to that crys-
tal phase. Multiple crystals can then aggregate to form a 
kidney stone. For a kidney stone to form, crystals must 
be retained in the renal pelvis long enough to grow and 
aggregate to a clinically significant size. Recent studies 
have shown that common calcium oxalate kidney stones 
form as overgrowths on apatite plaques in the renal 
papillae. These plaques, called Randall’s plaques, pro-
vide an excellent surface for heterogeneous nucleation 
of calcium oxalate salts. The Randall’s plaques begin 
in the deep medulla in the basement membrane of the 
thin limb of the loop of Henle and then spread through 
the interstitium to the basement membrane of the pap-
illary urothelium. If the urothelium becomes damaged, 
the plaque is exposed to the urine, and calcium oxalate 
crystals form on the plaque, accumulating a clinically sig-
nificant mass to form a stone. Calcium phosphate stone 
formers, particularly formers of brushite, do not follow 
this pattern. Inner medullary collecting ducts are plugged 
with apatite crystals, and stones form as extensions of 
those plugs. Unlike in calcium oxalate stone formers, 
renal papillae are often fibrotic and deformed.
Evaluation and Treatment of 
Patients with Nephrolithiasis
Most patients with nephrolithiasis have remediable met-
abolic disorders that cause stones and can be detected by 
98
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
chemical analyses of serum and urine. Adults with recur-
rent kidney stones and children with even a single kid-
ney stone should be evaluated. A practical outpatient 
evaluation consists of two 24-h urine collections, with 
a corresponding blood sample; measurements of serum 
and urine calcium, uric acid, electrolytes, and creatinine, 
along with urine pH, volume, oxalate, and citrate should 
be made. Since stone risks vary with diet, activity, and 
environment, at least one urine collection should be 
made on a weekend when the patient is at home and 
another on a workday. When possible, the composition 
of kidney stones should be determined because treat-
ment depends on stone type (Table 9-1). No matter 
what disorders are found, every patient should be coun-
seled to avoid dehydration and drink copious amounts 
of water. The efficacy of high fluid intake was con-
firmed in a prospective study of first-time stone formers. 
Increasing urine volume to 2.5 L per day resulted in a 
50% reduction of stone recurrence compared with the 
control group.
Treatment	
Nephrolithiasis
The management of stones already present in the kid-
neys or urinary tract requires a combined medical and 
surgical approach. The specific treatment depends on 
the location of the stone, the extent of obstruction, the 
nature of the stone, the function of the affected and 
unaffected kidneys, the presence or absence of urinary 
tract infection, the progress of stone passage, and the 
risks of operation or anesthesia in light of the clinical 
state of the patient. Medical therapy can enhance pas-
sage of ureteral stones. Oral α1-adrenergic blockers relax 
ureteral muscle and have been shown to reduce time 
to stone passage and the need for surgical removal of 
small stones. Severe obstruction, infection, intractable 
pain, and serious bleeding are indications for removal of 
a stone.
Advances in urologic technology have rendered 
open surgery for stones a rare event. There are now 
three alternatives for stone removal. Extracorporeal litho-
tripsy causes the in situ fragmentation of stones in the 
kidney, renal pelvis, or ureter by exposing them to shock 
waves. After multiple shock waves, most stones are 
reduced to powder that moves through the ureter into 
the bladder. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy requires the 
passage of a nephroscope into the renal pelvis through 
a small incision in the flank. Stones are then disrupted 
by a small ultrasound transducer or holmium laser. The 
third method is ureteroscopy with stone disruption using 
a holmium laser. Ureteroscopy generally is used for 
stones in the ureter, but some surgeons are now using 
ureteroscopy for stones in the renal pelvis as well.
Calcium stones
Idiopathic hypercalciuria
This condition is the most common metabolic abnormal-
ity found in patients with nephrolithiasis (Table 9-1). It is 
familial and is probably a polygenic trait, although there 
are some rare monogenic causes of hypercalciuria and kid-
ney stones such as Dent’s disease, which is an X-linked 
disorder characterized by hypercalciuria, nephrocalci-
nosis, and progressive kidney failure. Idiopathic hyper-
calciuria is diagnosed by the presence of hypercalciuria 
without hypercalcemia and the absence of other systemic 
disorders known to affect mineral metabolism. Vitamin D 
overactivity through either high calcitriol levels or excess 
vitamin D receptor is a likely explanation for the hyper-
calciuria in many patients. Recent studies have shown 
that a polymorphism (Arg990Gly) of the calcium-sensing 
receptor, which leads to activation of the receptor, is more 
common in hypercalciuric subjects and probably contrib-
utes to higher urine calcium excretion. Hypercalciuria 
contributes to stone formation by raising urine saturation 
with respect to calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate.
Treatment	
Hypercalciuria
For many years the standard therapy for hypercalciuria 
was dietary calcium restriction. However, studies have 
shown that low-calcium diets increase the risk of incident 
stone formation, perhaps by reducing the amount of cal-
cium in the intestine to bind oxalate, thereby increasing 
urine oxalate levels. A 5-year prospective trial compared 
the efficacy of a low-calcium diet to a low-protein, low-
sodium, normal-calcium diet in preventing stone recur-
rence in male calcium stone formers. The group on the 
low-calcium diet had a significantly greater rate of stone 
relapse. In addition, hypercalciuric stone formers have 
reduced bone mineral density and an increased risk of 
fracture compared with the non-stone-forming popula-
tion. Low calcium intake probably contributes to the low 
bone mineral density. In sum, low-calcium diets are of 
unknown efficacy in preventing stone formation and carry 
a long-term risk of bone disease, making low-sodium and 
low-protein diets a superior treatment option. If diet ther-
apy is not sufficient to prevent stones, thiazide diuretics 
may be used. Thiazide diuretics lower urine calcium and 
are effective in preventing the formation of stones. Three 
3-year randomized trials have shown a 50% decrease in 
stone formation in the thiazide-treated groups compared 
with the placebo-treated controls. The drug effect requires 
slight contraction of the extracellular fluid volume, and 
high dietary NaCl intake reduces its therapeutic effect. 
Thiazide-induced hypokalemia should be treated aggres-
sively since hypokalemia will reduce urine citrate, an 
important inhibitor of calcium crystallization.
99
 
CHAPTER 9
Nephrolithiasis
Hyperuricosuria
About 20% of calcium oxalate stone formers are hyper-
uricosuric, primarily because of an excessive intake of 
purine from meat and fish. The mechanism of stone 
formation probably involves salting out calcium oxalate 
by urate. A low-purine diet is desirable but difficult for 
many patients to achieve. The alternative is allopurinol, 
which has been shown to be effective in a randomized, 
controlled trial.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
The diagnosis of this condition is established by docu-
menting that hypercalcemia that cannot be otherwise 
explained is accompanied by inappropriately elevated 
serum concentrations of parathyroid hormone. Hyper-
calciuria, which usually is present, raises the urine super-
saturation of calcium phosphate and/or calcium oxalate 
(Table 9-1). Calcium oxalate stones form on intersti-
tial apatite plaque, whereas calcium phosphate stones 
form on apatite crystals, obstructing collecting ducts. In 
patients who have hyperparathyroidism, the Arg990Gly 
polymorphism of the calcium-sensing receptor leads to 
higher urine calcium excretion and an increased risk of 
nephrolithiasis. Prompt diagnosis of hyperparathyroid-
ism is important because parathyroidectomy should 
be carried out before recurrent stones or renal damage 
occurs.
Distal renal tubular acidosis
(See also Chap. 16) The defect in this condition seems 
to reside in the distal nephron, which cannot establish a 
normal pH gradient between urine and blood, leading 
to hyperchloremic acidosis. The diagnosis is suggested by 
a minimum urine pH >5.5 in the presence of systemic 
acidosis. Hypercalciuria, an alkaline urine, and a low 
urine citrate level increase urine saturation with respect 
to calcium phosphate. Calcium phosphate stones form, 
nephrocalcinosis is common, and osteomalacia or rick-
ets may occur. Apatite deposits form in inner medullary 
collecting ducts and cause extensive medullary tubular 
interstitial nephropathy, which can lead to reduced kid-
ney function. Renal tubular acidosis may be genetic, 
secondary to a systemic disease, or caused by a medica-
tion. Topiramate, a drug commonly used for seizures 
and migraines, inhibits the enzyme carbonic anhydrase 
and may cause calcium nephrolithiasis.
Treatment with supplemental alkali reduces hyper-
calciuria and limits the production of new stones. The 
preferred form of alkali is potassium citrate, which is 
given at a dose of 0.5–2.0 meq/kg body weight in two 
to three divided doses per day. In incomplete distal renal 
tubular acidosis, systemic acidosis is absent, but urine pH 
cannot be lowered below 5.5 after an exogenous acid 
load. Incomplete RTA may develop in some patients 
who form calcium oxalate stones because of idiopathic 
hypercalciuria; the importance of RTA in producing 
stones in this situation is uncertain, and thiazide treat-
ment is a reasonable alternative. Alkali also can be used 
in incomplete RTA. In treating patients with alkali, it 
is prudent to monitor changes in urine citrate and pH. 
If urine pH increases without an increase in citrate, cal-
cium phosphate supersaturation will increase and stone 
disease may worsen.
Hyperoxaluria
Oxalate is a metabolic end product in humans. Urine 
oxalate comes from diet and endogenous metabolic pro-
duction, with ∼40–50% originating from dietary sources. 
The upper limit of normal for oxalate excretion is gen-
erally considered to be 40–50 mg per day. Mild hyp-
eroxaluria (50–80 mg/d) usually is caused by excessive 
intake of high-oxalate foods such as spinach, nuts, and 
chocolate. In addition, low-calcium diets may promote 
hyperoxaluria as there is less calcium available to bind 
oxalate in the intestine. Enteric hyperoxaluria is a con-
sequence of small-bowel disease, resulting in fat malab-
sorption. Oxalate excretion is often >100 mg per day. 
Enteric hyperoxaluria may be caused by jejunoileal 
bypass for obesity, pancreatic insufficiency, or exten-
sive small-intestine involvement from Crohn’s disease. 
With fat malabsorption, calcium in the bowel lumen 
is bound by fatty acids instead of oxalate, which is left 
free for absorption in the colon. Delivery of unabsorbed 
fatty acids and bile salts to the colon injures the colonic 
mucosa and enhances oxalate absorption. Recent stud-
ies have shown that modern bariatric surgery for obe-
sity that involves bypassing intestinal segments, such as 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and biliopancreatic diversions, 
may lead to hyperoxaluria that can cause kidney failure 
as well as kidney stones. The mechanism of hyperoxal-
uria has not been well studied.
Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare autosomal recessive 
disease that causes severe hyperoxaluria. Patients usu-
ally present with recurrent calcium oxalate stones dur-
ing childhood. Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 is due to a 
deficiency in the peroxisomal enzyme alanine:glyoxylate 
aminotransferase. Type 2 is due to a deficiency of 
D-glyceric dehydrogenase. Severe hyperoxaluria from 
any cause can lead to stone formation and produce 
tubulointerstitial nephropathy (Chap. 17).
Treatment	
Hyperoxaluria
Patients with mild to moderate hyperoxaluria should 
be treated with a diet low in oxalate and with a normal 
intake of calcium and magnesium to reduce oxalate 
absorption. Enteric hyperoxaluria can be treated with 
a low-fat, low-oxalate diet and calcium supplements, 
given with meals, to bind oxalate in the gut lumen. 
The oxalate-binding resin cholestyramine provides an 
100
Alterations of Renal Function and Electrolytes
Section II
additional form of therapy. Treatment for primary hyper-
oxaluria includes a high fluid intake, neutral phosphate, 
potassium citrate, and pyridoxine (25–200 mg/d). Even 
with aggressive therapy, irreversible renal failure may 
occur. Liver transplantation to correct the enzyme defect, 
combined with kidney transplantation, has been suc-
cessfully utilized in patients with primary hyperoxaluria.
Hypocitraturia
Urine citrate prevents calcium stone formation by 
creating a soluble complex with calcium, effectively 
reducing free urine calcium. Hypocitraturia is found in 
20–40% of stone formers either as a single disorder or 
in combination with other metabolic abnormalities. It 
can be secondary to systemic disorders such as RTA, 
chronic diarrheal illness, and hypokalemia, or it may be 
a primary disorder, in which case it is called idiopathic 
hypocitraturia.
Treatment	
Hypocitraturia
Treatment is with alkali, which increases urine citrate 
excretion; generally, bicarbonate or citrate salts are 
used. Potassium salts are preferred as sodium loading 
increases urinary excretion of calcium, reducing the 
effectiveness of treatment. Two randomized, placebo-
controlled trials have demonstrated the effectiveness 
of citrate supplements in calcium oxalate stone formers. 
Lemonade and other citrate-rich beverages have been 
used to treat hypocitraturia, although the increase in 
urine citrate is not as great as that seen with pharmaco-
logic dosing of citrate salts.
Idiopathic calcium lithiasis
Some patients have no metabolic cause for stones despite 
a thorough metabolic evaluation (Table 9-1). The best 
treatment appears to be high fluid intake so that the 
urine specific gravity remains at ≤1.005 throughout the 
day and night. Thiazide diuretics and citrate therapy 
may help reduce crystallization of calcium salts, but there 
have been no prospective trials in this patient popula-
tion. Oral phosphate at a dose of 2 g phosphorus daily 
may lower urine calcium and increase urine pyrophos-
phate, thereby reducing the rate of recurrence. Ortho-
phosphate causes mild nausea and diarrhea, but tolerance 
may improve with continued intake.
Uric acid stones
Persistently acidic urine is the major risk factor for uric 
acid stone formation. When urine pH is low, the pro-
tonated form of uric acid predominates and is soluble in 
urine at concentrations of 100 mg/L. Concentrations 
above this level represent supersaturation that causes 
crystals and stones to form. Common causes of acidic 
urine and uric acid stones include metabolic syndrome, 
chronic diarrheal states, gout, and idiopathic uric acid 
lithiasis. As the prevalence of obesity increases, metabolic 
syndrome is becoming an increasingly important cause of 
uric acid stone formation, as insulin resistance leads to a 
decrease in ammoniagenesis, requiring that the metabolic 
acid load be excreted as titratable acid. Hyperuricosuria, 
when present, increases supersaturation, but urine of low 
pH can be supersaturated with uric acid even though 
the daily excretion rate is normal. Myeloproliferative 
syndromes, chemotherapy for malignant tumors, and 
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome cause such massive production 
of uric acid and consequent hyperuricosuria that stones 
and uric acid sludge form even at a normal urine pH. 
Obstruction of the renal tubules by uric acid crystals can 
cause acute renal failure.
Treatment	
Uric Acid Lithiasis
The two goals of treatment are to raise urine pH and 
lower excessive urine uric acid excretion to <1 g/d. Sup-
plemental alkali, 1–3 meq/kg of body weight per day, 
should be given in three or four divided doses, one of 
which should be given at bedtime. The goal of treatment 
should be a urine pH between 6 and 6.5 in a 24-h urine 
collection. Increasing urine pH above 6.5 will not provide 
additional benefit in preventing uric acid crystallization 
but increases the risk of calcium phosphate stone forma-
tion. The form of the alkali may be important. Potassium 
citrate may reduce the risk of calcium salts crystallizing 
when urine pH is increased, whereas sodium alkali salts 
may increase the risk. A low-purine diet should be insti-
tuted in uric acid stone formers with hyperuricosuria. 
Patients who continue to form uric acid stones despite 
treatment with fluids, alkali, and a low-purine diet should 
have allopurinol added to their regimen.
Cystinuria and cystine stones
In this inherited disorder, proximal tubular and jejunal 
transport of the dibasic amino acids cystine, lysine, argi-
nine, and ornithine is defective, and excessive amounts 
are lost in the urine. Clinical disease is due solely to the 
insolubility of cystine. Cystine crystals plug terminal col-
lecting ducts, and stones may grow as an extension of 
those plugs. Damage to the papillae and medulla from 
crystal obstruction is the probable reason why kidney 
function is reduced in cystinuria compared with routine 
stone disease.
Pathogenesis
Cystinuria occurs because of defective transport of 
dibasic amino acids by the brush borders of renal tubule 
and intestinal epithelial cells. Disease-causing mutations 
101
 
CHAPTER 9
Nephrolithiasis
have been identified in both the heavy and light chains 
of a heteromeric amino acid transporter found in the 
proximal tubule of the kidney. Cystinuria is classified 
into two main types, based on the urinary excretion of 
cystine in obligate heterozygotes. In type I cystinuria, 
heterozygotes have normal urine cystine excretion; 
thus, type I has an autosomal recessive pattern of inher-
itance. A gene on chromosome 2 that has been desig-
nated SLC3A1 encodes the heavy chain of the trans-
porter and has been found to be abnormal in type I. In 
non-type I cystinuria, heterozygotes have moderately 
elevated urine cystine excretion, with homozygotes 
having a much higher urine cystine excretion. Non-
type I is inherited as a dominant trait with incomplete 
penetrance. Non-type I is due to mutations in the 
SLC7A9 gene on chromosome 19, which encodes the 
light chain of the heteromeric transporter. In rare cases, 
mutations of the SLC7A9 gene can lead to a type I 
phenotype.
Diagnosis
Cystine stones are formed only by patients with cys-
tinuria, but 10% of stones in cystinuric patients do not 
contain cystine; therefore, every stone former should 
be screened for the disease. The sediment from a first 
morning urine specimen in many patients with homo-
zygous cystinuria reveals typical hexagonal, platelike 
cystine crystals. Cystinuria can also be detected by using 
the urine sodium nitroprusside test. Because the test is 
sensitive, it is positive for cystinuria in many asymptom-
atic heterozygotes. A positive nitroprusside test or the 
finding of cystine crystals in the urine sediment should 
be evaluated by measurement of daily cystine excretion. 
Cystine stones seldom form in adults unless urine excre-
tion is at least 300 mg/d.
Treatment	
Cystinuria and Cystine Stones
High fluid intake, even at night, is the cornerstone of 
therapy. Daily urine volume should exceed 3 L. Rais-
ing urine pH with alkali is helpful provided that the 
urine pH exceeds 7.5. A low-salt diet (100 mmol/d) can 
reduce cystine excretion up to 40%. Because side effects 
are common, drugs such as penicillamine and tiopro-
nin, which form mixed soluble disulfide cysteine-drug 
complexes, should be used only when fluid loading, 
salt reduction, and alkali therapy are ineffective. Low- 
methionine diets have not proved to be practical for 
clinical use, but patients should avoid protein gluttony.
Struvite stones
These stones are a result of urinary infection with bac-
teria, usually Proteus species, which possess urease, an 
enzyme that degrades urea to NH3 and CO2. The NH3 
hydrolyzes to NH4
+ and raises urine pH to 8 or 9. The 
NH4
+ precipitates PO4
3− and Mg2+ to form MgNH4PO4 
(struvite). Struvite does not form in urine in the absence 
of infection, because NH4
+ concentration is low in 
urine that is alkaline in response to physiologic stimuli. 
Chronic Proteus infection can occur because of impaired 
urinary drainage, or urologic instrumentation or surgery, 
and especially with chronic antibiotic treatment, which 
can favor the dominance of Proteus in the urinary tract. 
The presence of struvite crystals in urine, rectangular 
prisms that resemble coffin lids, indicates infection with 
urease-producing organisms.
Treatment	
Struvite Stones
Complete removal of the stone with subsequent steril-
ization of the urinary tract is the treatment of choice for 
patients who can tolerate the procedures. Percutaneous 
nephrolithotomy is the preferred surgical approach for 
most patients. At times, extracorporeal lithotripsy may 
be used in combination with a percutaneous approach. 
Open surgery is rarely required. Irrigation of the renal pel-
vis and calyces with hemiacidrin, a solution that dissolves 
struvite, can reduce recurrence after surgery. Stone-free 
rates of 50–90% have been reported after surgical inter-
vention. Antimicrobial treatment is best reserved for 
dealing with acute infection and for maintenance of a 
sterile urine after surgery. Urine cultures and culture of 
stone fragments removed at surgery should guide the 
choice of antibiotic. For patients who are not candidates 
for surgical removal of a stone, acetohydroxamic acid, an 
inhibitor of urease, can be used. Unfortunately, acetohy-
droxamic acid has many side effects, such as headache, 
tremor, and thrombophlebitis, that limit its use.
This page intentionally left blank 
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury 
and Chronic Renal 
Failure
 Sushrut S. Waikar 
I  joseph V. Bonventre 
104
 Acute kidney injury (AKI), previously known as acute 
renal failure, is characterized by the sudden impair-
ment of kidney function resulting in the retention of 
nitrogenous and other waste products normally cleared 
by the kidneys. AKI is not a single disease but, rather, 
a designation for a heterogeneous group of conditions 
that share common diagnostic features: specifi cally, an 
increase in the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concen-
tration and/or an increase in the plasma or serum cre-
atinine (SCr) concentration, often associated with a 
reduction in urine volume. AKI can range in severity 
from asymptomatic and transient changes in laboratory 
parameters of glomerular fi ltration rate (GFR) to over-
whelming and rapidly fatal derangements in effective 
circulating volume regulation and electrolyte and acid-
base composition of the plasma. 
 Changing the name of a syndrome as well known 
as “acute renal failure” does not occur frequently. We 
will summarize some of the reasons why the name was 
changed to “acute kidney injury.” The term  failure
refl ects only part of the spectrum of damage to the kid-
ney that occurs clinically. In most cases of damage, the 
reduction in kidney function is modest. Nevertheless, 
this modest change has been documented to be associ-
ated with negative effects on outcome, albeit not nearly 
as ominous as those seen with large decreases in kidney 
function associated with frank kidney failure that often 
requires acute dialysis therapies. Furthermore, the term 
renal is not well understood in the general population and 
this makes communication with patients and family more 
challenging; hence “kidney” has replaced “renal.” 
 EpiDEmiologY 
 AKI complicates 5–7% of acute care hospital admis-
sions and up to 30% of admissions to the intensive care 
unit. AKI is also a major medical complication in the 
developing world, particularly in the setting of diarrheal 
illnesses, infectious diseases like malaria and leptospirosis, 
and natural disasters such as earthquakes. The incidence 
of AKI has grown by more than fourfold in the United 
States since 1988 and is estimated to have a yearly inci-
dence of 500 per 100,000 population, higher than the 
yearly incidence of stroke. AKI is associated with a 
markedly increased risk of death in hospitalized indi-
viduals, particularly in those admitted to the ICU where 
in-hospital mortality rates may exceed 50%. 
 AKi in the developinG WoRld 
The epidemiology of AKI differs tremendously 
between developed and developing countries, 
owing to differences in demographics, economics, 
geography, and comorbid disease burden. While certain 
features of AKI are common to both—particularly since 
urban centers of some developing countries increasingly 
resemble those in the developed world—many etiologies 
for AKI are region specifi c such as envenomations from 
snakes, spiders, caterpillars, and bees; infectious causes 
such as malaria and leptospirosis; and crush injuries and 
resultant rhabdomyolysis from earthquakes. 
 EtiologY anD patHopHYsiologY 
 The causes of AKI have traditionally been divided into 
three broad categories: prerenal azotemia, intrinsic renal 
parenchymal disease, and postrenal obstruction ( Fig. 10-1 ). 
 pReRenAl AZoteMiA 
 Prerenal azotemia (from “azo,” meaning nitrogen, and 
“-emia”) is the most common form of AKI. It is the des-
ignation for a rise in SCr or BUN concentration due to 
inadequate renal plasma fl ow and intraglomerular hydro-
static pressure to support normal glomerular fi ltration. 
The most common clinical conditions associated with 
 ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY 
 cHaptEr 10 
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
105
prerenal azotemia are hypovolemia, decreased cardiac 
output, and medications that interfere with renal auto-
regulatory responses such as nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drugs (NSAIDs) and inhibitors of angiotensin II 
(Fig. 10-2). Prerenal azotemia may coexist with other 
forms of intrinsic AKI. Prolonged periods of prerenal 
azotemia may lead to ischemic injury, often termed acute 
tubular necrosis, or ATN. By definition, prerenal azote-
mia involves no parenchymal damage to the kidney and 
is rapidly reversible once intraglomerular hemodynamics 
are restored.
Normal GFR is maintained in part by the relative 
resistances of the afferent and efferent renal arterioles, 
which determine the glomerular plasma flow and the 
transcapillary hydraulic pressure gradient that drive glo-
merular ultrafiltration. Mild degrees of hypovolemia and 
reductions in cardiac output elicit compensatory renal 
physiologic changes. Because renal blood flow accounts 
for 20% of the cardiac output, renal vasoconstriction 
and salt and water reabsorption occur as a homeostatic 
response to decreased effective circulating volume or 
cardiac output in order to maintain blood pressure and 
increase intravascular volume to sustain perfusion to the 
cerebral and coronary vessels. Mediators of this response 
include angiotensin II, norepinephrine, and vasopressin 
(also termed antidiuretic hormone). Glomerular filtration 
can be maintained despite reduced renal blood flow by 
angiotensin II–mediated renal efferent vasoconstriction, 
which maintains glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure 
closer to normal and thereby prevents marked reductions 
in GFR if renal blood flow reduction is not excessive.
In addition, a myogenic reflex within the afferent 
arteriole leads to dilation in the setting of low perfusion 
pressure, thereby maintaining glomerular perfusion. 
Intrarenal biosynthesis of vasodilator prostaglandins 
(prostacyclin, prostaglandin E2), kallikrein and kinins, 
and possibly nitric oxide (NO) also increase in response 
to low renal perfusion pressure. Autoregulation is also 
accomplished by tubuloglomerular feedback, in which 
decreases in solute delivery to the macula densa (special-
ized cells within the distal tubule) elicit dilation of the 
juxtaposed afferent arteriole in order to maintain glomer-
ular perfusion, a mechanism mediated, in part, by NO. 
There is a limit, however, to the ability of these coun-
terregulatory mechanisms to maintain GFR in the face 
of systemic hypotension. Even in healthy adults, renal 
autoregulation usually fails once the systolic blood pres-
sure falls below 80 mmHg.
A number of factors determine the robustness of 
the autoregulatory response and, thereby, the risk 
of prerenal azotemia. Atherosclerosis, long-standing 
hypertension, and older age can lead to hyalinosis and 
myointimal hyperplasia, causing structural narrowing 
of the intrarenal arterioles and impaired capacity for 
renal afferent vasodilation. In chronic kidney disease, 
renal afferent vasodilation may be operating at maxi-
mal capacity in order to maximize GFR in response 
to reduced functional renal mass. Drugs can affect 
the compensatory changes evoked to maintain GFR. 
NSAIDs inhibit renal prostaglandin production, limiting 
renal afferent vasodilation. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) 
limit renal efferent vasoconstriction; this effect is particularly 
pronounced in patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis or 
unilateral renal artery stenosis (in the case of a solitary func-
tioning kidney) because renal efferent vasoconstriction is 
   Nephrotoxins
Exogenous: Iodinated
contrast, aminoglycosides,
cisplatin, amphotericin B
Endogenous: Hemolysis,
rhabdomyolysis,
myeloma, intratubular
crystals
Acute kidney injury
Prerenal
Postrenal
Intrinsic
Glomerular
• Acute
 glomerulo-
 nephritis
Ischemia
Tubules and
interstitium
Sepsis/
Infection
Vascular
• Vasculitis
• Malignant
 hypertension
• TTP-HUS
Hypovolemia
Decreased cardiac output
Decreased effective circulating
volume
 • Congestive heart failure
 • Liver failure
Impaired renal autoregulation
 • NSAIDs
 • ACE-I/ARB
 • Cyclosporine
Bladder outlet obstruction
Bilateral pelvoureteral
obstruction (or unilateral
obstruction of a solitary
functioning kidney)
Figure 10-1
Classification of the major causes of acute kidney injury. 
ACE-1, angiotensin-converting enzyme 1; ARB, angiotensin 
receptor blocker; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs; TTP-HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura–
hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
106
needed to maintain GFR due to low renal perfusion. The 
combined use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents 
with ACE inhibitors or ARBs poses a particularly high risk 
for developing prerenal azotemia.
Many individuals with advanced cirrhosis exhibit a 
unique hemodynamic profile that resembles prerenal 
azotemia despite total body volume overload. Systemic 
vascular resistance is markedly reduced due to primary 
arterial vasodilation in the splanchnic circulation, result-
ing ultimately in activation of vasoconstrictor responses 
similar to those seen in hypovolemia. AKI is a common 
complication in this setting, and it can be triggered by 
volume depletion and spontaneous bacterial peritoni-
tis. A particularly poor prognosis is seen in the case of 
Glomerulus
Tubule
Afferent
arteriole
Arteriolar resistances
Efferent
arteriole
Increased
vasodilatory
prostaglandins
Increased
angiotensin II
A
Normal perfusion pressure
B
Decreased perfusion pressure
Normal GFR
Normal GFR maintained
Slightly increased
vasodilatory
prostaglandins
Decreased
angiotensin II
D
Decreased perfusion pressure in the presence of ACE-I or ARB
Low GFR
Decreased
vasodilatory
prostaglandins
Increased
angiotensin II
C
Decreased perfusion pressure in the presence of NSAIDs
Low GFR
Figure 10-2
Intrarenal mechanisms for autoregulation of the glo-
merular filtration rate (GFR) under decreased perfusion 
pressure and reduction of the GFR by drugs. Panel A 
shows normal conditions and a normal GFR. Panel B shows 
reduced perfusion pressure within the autoregulatory range. 
Normal glomerular capillary pressure is maintained by affer-
ent vasodilatation and efferent vasoconstriction. Panel C 
shows reduced perfusion pressure with a nonsteroidal anti- 
inflammatory drug (NSAID). Loss of vasodilatory prostaglandins 
increases afferent resistance; this causes the glomerular cap-
illary pressure to drop below normal values and the GFR 
to decrease. Panel D shows reduced perfusion pressure 
with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE-I) inhibitor 
or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB). Loss of angio-
tensin II action reduces efferent resistance; this causes the 
glomerular capillary pressure to drop below normal values 
and the GFR to decrease. (From JG Abuelo: N Engl J Med 
2007;357:797-805; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
107
type 1 hepatorenal syndrome, in which AKI without an 
alternate cause (e.g., infection, shock, nephrotoxic drugs) 
persists despite volume administration and withholding 
of diuretics. Type 2 hepatorenal syndrome is a less severe 
form characterized mainly by refractory ascites.
Intrinsic AKI
The most common causes of intrinsic AKI are sepsis, 
ischemia, and nephrotoxins, both endogenous and exog-
enous (Fig. 10-3). In many cases, prerenal azotemia 
advances to tubular injury. Although classically termed 
“acute tubular necrosis,” human biopsy confirmation of 
tubular necrosis is, in general, lacking in cases of sepsis 
and ischemia; indeed, processes such as inflammation, 
apoptosis, and altered regional perfusion may be more 
relevant pathophysiologically. Other causes of intrinsic 
AKI are less common and can be conceptualized ana-
tomically according to the major site of renal parenchy-
mal damage: glomeruli, tubulointerstitium, and vessels.
Sepsis-associated AKI
In the United States, more than 700,000 cases of sep-
sis occur each year. AKI complicates more than 50% 
of cases of severe sepsis, and greatly increases the risk 
of death. Sepsis is also a very important cause of AKI 
in the developing world. Decreases in GFR with sepsis 
Cortex
Medulla
Outer
Inner
Loop of
Henle
Loop of
Henle
Collecting
duct
Thin
descending
limb
Thick
ascending
limb
Thick ascending
limb
Pars recta
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Pars recta
Cortical
glomerulus
Juxtamedullary
glomerulus
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Small vessels
• Glomerulonephritis
• Vasculitis
• TTP/HUS
• DIC
• Atheroemboli
• Malignant HTN
• Calcineurin
inhibitors
• Sepsis
Intratubular
• Endogenous
    • Myeloma proteins
    • Uric acid (tumor
     lysis syndrome)
    • Cellular debris
• Exogenous
    • Acyclovir,
 
methotrexate
    
Large vessels
• Renal artery embolus,
 dissection, vasculitis
• Renal vein thrombosis
• Abdominal compartment
 syndrome
Interstitium
• Allergic (PCN,
rifampin, etc.)
• Infection (severe
pyelonephritis,
 Legionella, sepsis)
• Infiltration
(lymphoma. leukemia)
• Inflammatory
(Sjögren’s, tubulointerstitial
nephritis uveitis), sepsis
Tubules
• Toxic ATN
    • Endogenous
  
(rhabdomyolysis,
  
 hemolysis)
    • Exogenous (contrast,
    cisplatin, gentamicin)
• Ischemic ATN
• Sepsis
Intrinsic Renal Failure
Figure 10-3
Major causes of intrinsic acute kidney injury. ATN, acute 
tubular necrosis; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagula-
tion; HTN, hypertensive nephropathy; MTX, methotrexate; 
PCN, penicillin; TINU, tubulointerstitial nephritis-uveitis; TTP/
HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic uremic 
syndrome.
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
108
can occur even in the absence of overt hypotension, 
although most cases of severe AKI typically occur in 
the setting of hemodynamic collapse requiring vasopres-
sor support. While there is clearly tubular injury associ-
ated with AKI in sepsis as manifest by the presence of 
tubular debris and casts in the urine, postmortem exam-
inations of kidneys from individuals with severe sepsis 
suggest that other factors, perhaps related to inflamma-
tion and interstitial edema, must be considered in the 
pathophysiology of sepsis-induced AKI.
The hemodynamic effects of sepsis—arising from gen-
eralized arterial vasodilation, mediated in part by cyto-
kines that upregulate the expression of inducible NO 
synthase in the vasculature—can lead to a reduction in 
GFR. The operative mechanisms may be excessive effer-
ent arteriole vasodilation, particularly early in the course 
of sepsis, or renal vasoconstriction from activation of 
the sympathetic nervous system, the renin-angiotensin- 
aldosterone system, vasopressin, and endothelin. Sepsis 
may lead to endothelial damage, which results in micro-
vascular thrombosis, activation of reactive oxygen spe-
cies, and leukocyte adhesion and migration, all of which 
may injure renal tubular cells.
Ischemia-Associated AKI
Healthy kidneys receive 20% of the cardiac output 
and account for 10% of resting oxygen consump-
tion, despite constituting only 0.5% of the human body 
mass. The kidneys are also the site of one of the most 
hypoxic regions in the body, the renal medulla. The 
outer medulla is particularly vulnerable to ischemic dam-
age because of the architecture of the blood vessels that 
supply oxygen and nutrients to the tubules. Enhanced 
leukocyte-endothelial interactions in the small vessels 
lead to inflammation and reduced local blood flow to 
the metabolically very active S3 segment of the proxi-
mal tubule, which depends on oxidative metabolism for 
survival. Ischemia alone in a normal kidney is usually 
not sufficient to cause severe AKI, as evidenced by the 
relatively low risk of severe AKI even after total inter-
ruption of renal blood flow during suprarenal aortic 
clamping or cardiac arrest. Clinically, AKI more com-
monly develops when ischemia occurs in the context 
of limited renal reserve (e.g., chronic kidney disease or 
older age) or coexisting insults such as sepsis, vasoactive 
or nephrotoxic drugs, rhabdomyolysis, and the systemic 
inflammatory states associated with burns and pancre-
atitis. Prerenal azotemia and ischemia-associated AKI 
represent a continuum of the manifestations of renal 
hypoperfusion. Persistent preglomerular vasoconstriction 
may be a common underlying cause of the reduction in 
GFR seen in AKI; implicated factors for vasoconstriction 
include activation of tubuloglomerular feedback from 
enhanced delivery of solute to the macula densa follow-
ing proximal tubule injury, increased basal vascular tone 
and reactivity to vasoconstrictive agents, and decreased 
vasodilator responsiveness. Other contributors to low 
GFR include backleak of filtrate across ischemic and 
denuded tubular epithelium and mechanical obstruction 
of tubules from necrotic debris (Fig. 10-4).
Postoperative AKI
Ischemia-associated AKI is a serious complication in the 
postoperative period, especially after major operations 
Vasoconstriction in response to:
endothelin, adenosine, angiotensin II,
thromboxane A2, leukotrienes,
sympathetic nerve activity
MICROVASCULAR
Pathophysiology of Ischemic Acute Renal Failure
O2
TUBULAR
Vasodilation in response to:
nitric oxide, PGE2, acetylcholine,  
bradykinin 
Endothelial and vascular smooth
muscle cell structural damage
Leukocyte-endothelial adhesion,
vascular obstruction, leukocyte
activation, and inflammation
Cytoskeletal breakdown
Inflammatory and
vasoactive mediators
Loss of polarity
Apoptosis and necrosis
Desquamation of viable
and necrotic cells
Tubular obstruction
Backleak
Glomerular
Medullary
Figure 10-4
Interacting microvascular and tubular events contributing 
to the pathophysiology of ischemic acute kidney injury.
PGE2, prostaglandin E2. (From JV Bonventre, JM Weinberg: 
J Am Soc Nephrol 14:2199, 2003.)
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
109
involving significant blood loss and intraoperative hypo-
tension. The procedures most commonly associated 
with AKI are cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary 
bypass (particularly for combined valve and bypass pro-
cedures), vascular procedures with aortic cross clamping, 
and intraperitoneal procedures. Severe AKI requiring 
dialysis occurs in approximately 1% of cardiac and vascu-
lar surgery procedures. The risk of severe AKI has been 
less well studied for major intraperitoneal procedures, 
but appears to be of comparable magnitude. Common 
risk factors for postoperative AKI include underly-
ing chronic kidney disease, older age, diabetes mellitus, 
congestive heart failure, and emergency procedures. 
The pathophysiology of AKI following cardiac surgery 
is multifactorial. Major AKI risk factors are common in 
the population undergoing cardiac surgery. The use of 
nephrotoxic agents including iodinated contrast for car-
diac imaging prior to surgery may increase the risk of 
AKI. Cardiopulmonary bypass is a unique hemodynamic 
state characterized by nonpulsatile flow and exposure of 
the circulation to extracorporeal circuits. Longer dura-
tion of cardiopulmonary bypass is a risk factor for AKI. 
In addition to ischemic injury from sustained hypoper-
fusion, cardiopulmonary bypass may cause AKI through 
a number of mechanisms including extracorporeal cir-
cuit activation of leukocytes and inflammatory processes, 
hemolysis with resultant pigment nephropathy (see later 
in the chapter), and aortic injury with resultant athero-
emboli. AKI from atheroembolic disease, which can also 
occur following percutaneous catheterization of the aorta, 
or spontaneously, is due to cholesterol crystal emboliza-
tion resulting in partial or total occlusion of multiple 
small arteries within the kidney. Over time, a foreign 
body reaction can result in intimal proliferation, giant cell 
formation, and further narrowing of the vascular lumen, 
accounting for the generally subacute (over a period of 
weeks rather than days) decline in renal function.
Burns and acute pancreatitis
Extensive fluid losses into the extravascular compart-
ments of the body frequently accompany severe burns 
and acute pancreatitis. AKI is an ominous complica-
tion of burns, affecting 25% of individuals with more 
than 10% total body surface area involvement. In addi-
tion to severe hypovolemia resulting in decreased car-
diac output and increased neurohormonal activation, 
burns and acute pancreatitis both lead to dysregulated 
inflammation and an increased risk of sepsis and acute 
lung injury, all of which may facilitate the development 
and progression of AKI. Individuals undergoing mas-
sive fluid resuscitation for trauma, burns, and acute pan-
creatitis can also develop the abdominal compartment 
syndrome, where markedly elevated intraabdominal 
pressures, usually higher than 20 mmHg, lead to renal 
vein compression and reduced GFR.
Diseases of the microvasculature leading  
to ischemia
Microvascular causes of AKI include the thrombotic 
microangiopathies [antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 
radiation nephritis, malignant nephrosclerosis, and throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura–hemolytic uremic syn-
drome (TTP-HUS)], scleroderma, and atheroembolic 
disease. Large vessel diseases associated with AKI include 
renal artery dissection, thromboembolism, thrombosis, 
and renal vein compression or thrombosis.
Nephrotoxin-Associated AKI
The kidney has very high susceptibility to nephrotox-
icity due to extremely high blood perfusion and con-
centration of circulating substances along the nephron 
where water is reabsorbed and in the medullary inter-
stitium; this results in high-concentration exposure 
of toxins to tubular, interstitial, and endothelial cells. 
Nephrotoxic injury occurs in response to a number 
of pharmacologic compounds with diverse structures, 
endogenous substances, and environmental exposures. 
All structures of the kidney are vulnerable to toxic 
injury, including the tubules, interstitium, vasculature, 
and collecting system. As with other forms of AKI, risk 
factors for nephrotoxicity include older age, chronic 
kidney disease (CKD), and prerenal azotemia. Hypo-
albuminemia may increase the risk of some forms of 
nephrotoxin-associated AKI due to increased free- 
circulating drug concentrations.
Contrast agents
Iodinated contrast agents used for cardiovascular and CT 
imaging are a leading cause of AKI. The risk of AKI, 
or “contrast nephropathy,” is negligible in those with 
normal renal function but increases markedly in the 
setting of chronic kidney disease, particularly diabetic 
nephropathy. The most common clinical course of con-
trast nephropathy is characterized by a rise in SCr begin-
ning 24–48 hours following exposure, peaking within 
3–5 days, and resolving within 1 week. More severe, 
dialysis-requiring AKI is uncommon except in the set-
ting of significant preexisting chronic kidney disease, 
often in association with congestive heart failure or other 
coexisting causes for ischemia-associated AKI. Patients 
with multiple myeloma and renal disease are particularly 
susceptible. Low fractional excretion of sodium and rela-
tively benign urinary sediment without features of tubular 
necrosis (see later in the chapter) are common findings. 
Contrast nephropathy is thought to occur from a combi-
nation of factors, including (1) hypoxia in the renal outer 
medulla due to perturbations in renal microcirculation 
and occlusion of small vessels; (2) cytotoxic damage to the 
tubules directly or via the generation of oxygen free radicals, 
especially since the concentration of the agent within 
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
110
the tubule is markedly increased; and (3) transient tubule 
obstruction with precipitated contrast material. Other 
diagnostic agents implicated as a cause of AKI are high-
dose gadolinium used for MRI and oral sodium phos-
phate solutions used as bowel purgatives.
Antibiotics
Several antimicrobial agents are commonly associ-
ated with AKI. Aminoglycosides and amphotericin B both 
cause tubular necrosis. Nonoliguric AKI (i.e., with-
out a significant reduction in urine volume) accompa-
nies 10–30% of courses of aminoglycoside antibiotics, 
even when plasma levels are in the therapeutic range. 
Aminoglycosides are freely filtered across the glomeru-
lus and then accumulate within the renal cortex, where 
concentrations can greatly exceed those of the plasma. 
AKI typically manifests after 5–7 days of therapy and 
can present even after the drug has been discontinued. 
Hypomagnesemia is a common finding.
Amphotericin B causes renal vasoconstriction from 
an increase in tubuloglomerular feedback as well as 
direct tubular toxicity mediated by reactive oxygen spe-
cies. Nephrotoxicity from amphotericin B is dose and 
duration dependent. This drug binds to tubular mem-
brane cholesterol and introduces pores. Clinical features 
of amphotericin B nephrotoxicity include polyuria, 
hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, and nongap metabolic 
acidosis.
Vancomycin may be associated with AKI, particularly 
when trough levels are high, but a causal relationship 
with AKI has not been definitively established. Acyclovir 
can precipitate in tubules and cause AKI by tubular 
obstruction, particularly when given as an intravenous 
bolus at high doses (500 mg/m2) or in the setting of 
hypovolemia. Foscarnet, pentamidine, and cidofovir (less 
commonly prescribed antimicrobials) are also frequently 
associated with AKI due to tubular toxicity. AKI sec-
ondary to acute interstitial nephritis can occur as a con-
sequence of a number of antibiotics, including penicillins, 
cephalosporins, quinolones, sulfonamides, and rifampin.
Chemotherapeutic agents
Cisplatin and carboplatin are accumulated by proximal 
tubular cells and cause necrosis and apoptosis. Inten-
sive hydration regimens have reduced the incidence of 
cisplatin nephrotoxicity, but it remains a dose-limiting 
toxicity. Ifosfamide may cause hemorrhagic cystitis and 
tubular toxicity, manifested as Type II renal tubular aci-
dosis (Fanconi’s syndrome), polyuria, hypokalemia, and 
a modest decline in GFR. Antiangiogenesis agents such 
as bevacizumab, can cause proteinuria and hypertension 
via injury to the glomerular microvasculature (throm-
botic microangiopathy). Other antineoplastic agents such 
as mitomycin C and gemcitabine may cause thrombotic 
microangiopathy with resultant AKI.
Toxic ingestions
Ethylene glycol, present in automobile antifreeze, is 
metabolized to oxalic acid, glycolaldehyde, and glyoxyl-
ate, which may cause AKI through direct tubular injury. 
Diethylene glycol is an industrial agent that has been 
the cause of outbreaks of severe AKI around the world 
due to adulteration of pharmaceutical preparations. 
The metabolite 2-hydroxyethoxyacetic acid (HEAA) is 
thought to be responsible for tubular injury. Melamine 
contamination of foodstuffs has led to nephrolithiasis 
and AKI, either through intratubular obstruction or pos-
sibly direct tubular toxicity. Aristolochic acid was found 
to be the cause of “Chinese herb nephropathy” and 
“Balkan nephropathy” due to contamination of medici-
nal herbs or farming. The list of environmental toxins 
is likely to grow and contribute to a better understand-
ing of previously catalogued “idiopathic” chronic tubu-
lar interstitial disease, a common diagnosis in both the 
developed and developing world.
Endogenous toxins
AKI may be caused by a number of endogenous com-
pounds, including myoglobin, hemoglobin, uric acid, 
and myeloma light chains. Myoglobin can be released by 
injured muscle cells, and hemoglobin can be released 
during massive hemolysis leading to pigment nephropa-
thy. Rhabdomyolysis may result from traumatic crush 
injuries, muscle ischemia during vascular or orthope-
dic surgery, compression during coma or immobiliza-
tion, prolonged seizure activity, excessive exercise, heat 
stroke or malignant hyperthermia, infections, metabolic 
disorders (e.g., hypophosphatemia, severe hypothy-
roidism), and myopathies (drug induced, metabolic, 
or inflammatory). Pathogenic factors for AKI include 
intrarenal vasoconstriction, direct proximal tubular tox-
icity, and mechanical obstruction of the distal nephron 
lumen when myoglobin or hemoglobin precipitates 
with Tamm-Horsfall protein (uromodulin, the most 
common protein in urine and produced in the thick 
ascending limb of the loop of Henle), a process favored 
by acidic urine. Tumor lysis syndrome may follow ini-
tiation of cytotoxic therapy in patients with high-grade 
lymphomas and acute lymphoblastic leukemia; massive 
release of uric acid (with serum levels often exceed-
ing 15 mg/dL) leads to precipitation of uric acid in the 
renal tubules and AKI. Other features of tumor lysis 
syndrome include hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia. 
The tumor lysis syndrome can also occasionally occur 
spontaneously or with treatment for solid tumors or 
multiple myeloma. Myeloma light chains can also cause 
AKI by direct tubular toxicity and by binding to Tamm- 
Horsfall protein to form obstructing intratubular casts. 
Hypercalcemia, which can also be seen in multiple myeloma, 
may cause AKI by intense renal vasoconstriction and vol-
ume depletion.
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
111
Allergic acute tubulointerstitial disease and 
other causes of intrinsic AKI
While many of the ischemic and toxic causes of AKI 
previously described result in tubulointerstitial disease, 
many drugs are also associated with the development of 
an allergic response characterized by an inflammatory 
infiltrate and often peripheral and urinary eosinophilia. 
AKI may be caused by severe infections and infiltrative 
diseases. Diseases of the glomeruli or vasculature can 
lead to AKI by compromising blood flow within the 
renal circulation. Glomerulonephritis or vasculitis are 
relatively uncommon but potentially severe causes of 
AKI that may necessitate timely treatment with immu-
nosuppressive agents or therapeutic plasma exchange.
Postrenal Acute Kidney Injury
(See also Chap. 21) Postrenal AKI occurs when the nor-
mally unidirectional flow of urine is acutely blocked 
either partially or totally, leading to increased retrograde 
hydrostatic pressure and interference with glomerular fil-
tration. Obstruction to urinary flow may be caused by 
functional or structural derangements anywhere from the 
renal pelvis to the tip of the urethra (Fig. 10-5). Normal 
urinary flow rate does not rule out the presence of par-
tial obstruction, since the GFR is normally two orders of 
magnitude higher than the urinary flow rate. For AKI to 
occur in healthy individuals, obstruction must affect both 
kidneys unless only one kidney is functional, in which 
case unilateral obstruction can cause AKI. Unilateral 
obstruction may cause AKI in the setting of significant 
underlying CKD or in rare cases from reflex vasospasm 
of the contralateral kidney. Bladder neck obstruction 
is a common cause of postrenal AKI and can be due to 
prostate disease (benign prostatic hypertrophy or pros-
tate cancer), neurogenic bladder, or therapy with anti-
cholinergic drugs. Obstructed Foley catheters can cause 
postrenal AKI if not recognized and relieved. Other 
causes of lower tract obstruction are blood clots, calculi, 
and urethral strictures. Ureteric obstruction can occur 
from intraluminal obstruction (e.g., calculi, blood clots, 
sloughed renal papillae), infiltration of the ureteric wall 
(e.g., neoplasia), or external compression (e.g., retroperi-
toneal fibrosis, neoplasia, abscess, or inadvertent surgical 
damage). The pathophysiology of postrenal AKI involves 
hemodynamic alterations triggered by an abrupt increase 
in intratubular pressures. An initial period of hyperemia 
from afferent arteriolar dilation is followed by intrare-
nal vasoconstriction from the generation of angiotensin 
II, thromboxane A2, and vasopressin, and a reduction in 
NO production. Reduced GFR is due to underperfu-
sion of glomeruli and, possibly, changes in the glomeru-
lar ultrafiltration coefficient.
Diagnostic Evaluation (Table 10-1)
The presence of AKI is usually inferred by an elevation in 
the SCr concentration. AKI is currently defined by a rise 
of at least 0.3 mg/dL or 50% higher than baseline within 
a 24- to 48-hour period or a reduction in urine output to 
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra
Sphincter
Stones, blood clots,
external compression,
tumor, retroperitoneal
fibrosis
Prostatic enlargement,
blood clots, cancer
Strictures
Obstructed Foley
catheter
Postrenal
Figure 10-5
Anatomic sites and causes of obstruction leading to postrenal acute kidney injury.
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
112
Table 10-1
Major Causes, Clinical Features, and Diagnostic Studies for Acute Kidney Injury
Etiology
Clinical Features
Laboratory Features
Comments
Prerenal azotemia
History of poor fluid intake or 
fluid loss (hemorrhage, diar-
rhea, vomiting, sequestration 
into extravascular space); 
NSAID/ACE-I/ARB; heart 
failure; evidence of volume 
depletion (tachycardia, abso-
lute or postural hypotension, 
low jugular venous pressure, 
dry mucous membranes), 
decreased effective circulatory 
volume (cirrhosis, heart failure)
BUN/creatinine ratio above 20, 
FeNa <1%, hyaline casts in 
urine sediment, urine specific 
gravity >1.018, urine osmolality 
>500 mosmol/kg.
Low FeNa, high specific  
gravity and osmolality may not 
be seen in the setting of CKD, 
diuretic use; BUN elevation out 
of proportion to creatinine may 
alternatively indicate upper GI 
bleed or increased catabolism. 
Response to restoration of 
hemodynamics is most  
diagnostic.
Sepsis-
associated AKI
Sepsis, sepsis syndrome, or 
septic shock. Overt hypoten-
sion not always seen in mild to 
moderate AKI
Positive culture from normally 
sterile body fluid; urine sediment 
often contains granular casts, 
renal tubular epithelial cell casts.
FeNa may be low (<1%), partic-
ularly early in the course, but 
is usually >1% and osmolality 
<500 mosmol/kg.
Ischemia-
associated AKI
Systemic hypotension,  
often superimposed upon  
sepsis and/or reasons for lim-
ited renal reserve such as older 
age, CKD
Urine sediment often contains 
granular casts, renal tubular epi-
thelial cell casts. FeNa typically 
>1%.
Nephrotoxin-Associated AKI: Endogenous
Rhabdomyolysis
Traumatic crush injuries, sei-
zures, immobilization
Elevated myoglobin, creatine 
kinase; urinalysis heme positive 
with few red blood cells.
FeNa may be low (<1%).
Hemolysis
Recent blood transfusion with 
transfusion reaction
Anemia, elevated LDH, low  
haptoglobin.
FeNa may be low (<1%); evalu-
ation for transfusion reaction.
Tumor lysis
Recent chemotherapy
Hyperphosphatemia, hypocalce-
mia, hyperuricemia.
Multiple myeloma
Age >60 years, constitutional 
symptoms, bone pain
Monoclonal spike in urine or 
serum electrophoresis; low 
anion gap.
Bone marrow or renal biopsy 
can be diagnostic.
Nephrotoxin-Associated AKI: Exogenous
Contrast 
nephropathy
Exposure to iodinated contrast
Characteristic course is rise in 
SCr within 1–2 d, peak within 
3–5 d, recovery within 7 d.
FeNa may be low (<1%).
Tubular injury
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, cis-
platin, tenofovir, zoledronate
Urine sediment often contains 
granular casts, renal tubular  
epithelial cell casts. FeNa  
typically >1%.
Interstitial nephritis
Recent medication exposure; 
can have fever, rash arthralgias
Eosinophilia, sterile pyuria; often 
nonoliguric.
Urine eosinophils have limited 
diagnostic accuracy; systemic 
signs of drug reaction often 
absent; kidney biopsy may be 
helpful.
Other Causes of Intrinsic AKI
Glomerulonephritis/
vasculitis
Variable (Chap. 15) features 
include skin rash, arthralgias, 
sinusitis (AGBM disease), lung 
hemorrhage (AGBM, ANCA, 
lupus), recent skin infection or 
pharyngitis (poststreptococcal)
ANA, ANCA, AGBM antibody, 
hepatitis serologies, cryoglobu-
lins, blood culture, decreased 
complement levels, ASO titer 
(abnormalities of these tests 
depending on etiology).
Kidney biopsy may be  
necessary.
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
113
0.5 mL/kg per hour for longer than 6 hours. It is impor-
tant to recognize that given this definition, some patients 
with AKI will not have tubular or glomerular damage 
(e.g., prerenal azotemia). The distinction between AKI 
and chronic kidney disease is important for proper diag-
nosis and treatment. The distinction is straightforward 
when a recent baseline SCr concentration is available, 
but more difficult in the many instances in which the 
baseline is unknown. In such cases, clues suggestive of 
chronic kidney disease can come from radiologic studies 
(e.g., small, shrunken kidneys with cortical thinning on 
renal ultrasound, or evidence of renal osteodystrophy) or 
laboratory tests such as normocytic anemia or secondary 
hyperparathyroidism with hyperphosphatemia and hypo-
calcemia, consistent with CKD. No set of tests, however, 
can rule out AKI superimposed on CKD since AKI is a 
frequent complication in patients with CKD, further 
complicating the distinction. Serial blood tests showing 
continued substantial rise of SCr is clear evidence of AKI. 
Once the diagnosis of AKI is established, its cause needs 
to be determined.
History and physical examination
The clinical context, careful history taking, and physical 
examination often narrow the differential diagnosis for 
the cause of AKI. Prerenal azotemia should be suspected 
in the setting of vomiting, diarrhea, glycosuria causing 
polyuria, and several medications including diuretics, 
NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs. Physical signs of 
orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, reduced jugular 
venous pressure, decreased skin turgor, and dry mucous 
membranes are often present in prerenal azotemia. 
A history of prostatic disease, nephrolithiasis, or pelvic 
or paraaortic malignancy would suggest the possibility 
of postrenal AKI. Whether or not symptoms are pres-
ent early during obstruction of the urinary tract depends 
on the location of obstruction. Colicky flank pain radi-
ating to the groin suggests acute ureteric obstruction. 
Nocturia and urinary frequency or hesitancy can be 
seen in prostatic disease. Abdominal fullness and supra-
pubic pain can accompany massive bladder enlargement. 
Definitive diagnosis of obstruction requires radiologic 
investigations.
A careful review of all medications is imperative in 
the evaluation of an individual with AKI. Not only 
are medications frequently a cause of AKI, but doses of 
administered medications must be adjusted for estimated 
GFR. Idiosyncratic reactions to a wide variety of medi-
cations can lead to allergic interstitial nephritis, which 
may be accompanied by fever, arthralgias, and a pruritic 
erythematous rash. The absence of systemic features of 
hypersensitivity, however, does not exclude the diagno-
sis of interstitial nephritis.
AKI accompanied by palpable purpura, pulmonary 
hemorrhage, or sinusitis raises the possibility of systemic 
vasculitis with glomerulonephritis. Atheroembolic dis-
ease can be associated with livedo reticularis and other 
signs of emboli to the legs. A tense abdomen should 
prompt consideration of acute abdominal compartment 
Table 10-1
Major Causes, Clinical Features, and Diagnostic Studies for Acute Kidney Injury (continued)
Etiology
Clinical Features
Laboratory Features
Comments
Interstitial nephritis
Nondrug-related causes include 
tubulointerstitial nephritis-uve-
itis (TINU) syndrome, Legionella 
infection
Eosinophilia, sterile pyuria; often 
nonoliguric.
Urine eosinophils have limited 
diagnostic accuracy; kidney 
biopsy may be necessary.
TTP-HUS
Recent GI infection or use of  
calcineurin inhibitors
Schistocytes on peripheral blood 
smear, elevated LDH, anemia, 
thrombocytopenia.
Kidney biopsy may be  
necessary.
Atheroembolic 
disease
Recent manipulation of the aorta 
or other large vessels; may 
occur spontaneously or after 
anticoagulation; retinal plaques, 
palpable purpura, livedo reticu-
laris, GI bleed
Hypocomplementemia, eosin-
ophiluria (variable), variable 
amounts of proteinuria.
Skin or kidney biopsy can be 
diagnostic.
Postrenal AKI
History of kidney stones, pros-
tate disease, obstructed blad-
der catheter, retroperitoneal or 
pelvic neoplasm
No specific findings other  
than AKI; may have pyuria or 
hematuria.
Imaging with computed tomog-
raphy or ultrasound.
Abbreviations: ACE-1, angiotensin-converting enzyme-1; AGBM, antiglomerular basement membrane; AKI, acute kidney injury; ANA, antinu-
clear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASO, antistreptolysin O; BUN, blood urea nitro-
gen; CKD, chronic kidney disease; FeNa, fractional excretion of sodium; GI, gastrointestinal; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NSAID, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drug. TTP-HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura–hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
114
Urinary sediment in AKI
Normal or few RBC or
WBC or hyaline casts
Prerenal
Postrenal
Arterial thrombosis
  or embolism
Preglomerular
  vasculitis
HUS or TTP
Scleroderma crisis
RBCs
RBC casts
GN
Vasculitis
Malignant
  hypertension
Thrombotic
  microangiopathy
Interstitial
  nephritis
GN
Pyelonephritis
Allograft
  rejection
Malignant
  infiltration of the
  kidney
ATN
Tubulointerstitial
  nephritis
Acute cellular
  allograft rejection
Myoglobinuria
Hemoglobinuria
ATN
GN
Vasculitis
Tubulo-
  interstitial
  nephritis
Allergic
  interstitial
  nephritis
Atheroembolic
  disease
Acute uric acid
  nephropathy
Calcium oxalate
  (ethylene glycol
  intoxication)
Drugs or toxins
(acyclovir,
indinavir,
sulfadiazine,
amoxicillin)
Abnormal
WBCs
 WBC casts
RTE cells
RTE casts
Pigmented casts
Granular casts
Eosinophiluria
Crystalluria
syndrome, which requires measurement of bladder 
pressure. Signs of limb ischemia may be clues to the 
diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis.
Urine findings
Complete anuria early in the course of AKI is uncom-
mon except in the following situations: complete 
urinary tract obstruction, renal artery occlusion, over-
whelming septic shock, severe ischemia (often with 
cortical necrosis), or severe proliferative glomeru-
lonephritis or vasculitis. A reduction in urine output 
(oliguria, defined as <400 mL/24 h) usually denotes 
more significant AKI (i.e., lower GFR) than when 
urine output is preserved. Oliguria is associated with 
worse clinical outcomes. Preserved urine output can 
be seen in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus characteristic 
of long-standing urinary tract obstruction, tubuloint-
erstitial disease, or nephrotoxicity from cisplatin or 
aminoglycosides, among other causes. Red or brown 
urine may be seen with or without gross hematuria; 
if the color persists in the supernatant after centrifuga-
tion, then pigment nephropathy from rhabdomyolysis 
or hemolysis should be suspected.
The urinalysis and urine sediment examination are 
invaluable tools, but they require clinical correlation 
because of generally limited sensitivity and specific-
ity (Fig. 10-6) (Chap. 4). In the absence of preex-
isting proteinuria from CKD, AKI from ischemia 
or nephrotoxins leads to mild proteinuria (<1 g/d). 
Greater proteinuria in AKI suggests damage to the 
glomerular ultrafiltration barrier or excretion of 
myeloma light chains; the latter are not detected with 
conventional urine dipsticks (which detect albumin) 
and require the sulfosalicylic acid test or immuno-
electrophoresis. Atheroemboli can cause a variable 
degree of proteinuria. Extremely heavy proteinuria 
(“nephrotic range,” >3.5 g/d) can occasionally be seen 
in glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, or interstitial nephritis 
(particularly from NSAIDs). AKI can also compli-
cate cases of minimal-change disease, a cause of the 
nephrotic syndrome (Chap. 1). If the dipstick is posi-
tive for hemoglobin but few red blood cells are evident 
in the urine sediment, then rhabdomyolysis or hemoly-
sis should be suspected.
Prerenal azotemia may present with hyaline casts or 
an unremarkable urine sediment exam. Postrenal AKI 
may also lead to an unremarkable sediment, but hema-
turia and pyuria may be seen depending on the cause 
of obstruction. AKI from ATN due to ischemic injury, 
sepsis, or certain nephrotoxins has characteristic urine 
sediment findings: pigmented “muddy brown” granu-
lar casts and tubular epithelial cell casts. These findings 
may be absent in more than 20% of cases, however. 
Glomerulonephritis may lead to dysmorphic red blood 
cells or red blood cell casts. Interstitial nephritis may 
lead to white blood cell casts. The urine sediment find-
ings overlap somewhat in glomerulonephritis and inter-
stitial nephritis, and a diagnosis is not always possible on 
the basis of the urine sediment alone. Urine eosinophils 
Figure 10-6
Interpretation of urinary sediment findings in acute 
kidney injury. ATN, acute tubular necrosis; GN, glomeru-
lonephritis; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; RTE, renal 
tubular epithelial; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura. (Adapted from L Yang, JV Bonventre: Diagnosis and 
clinical evaluation of acute kidney injury. In Comprehensive 
Nephrology, 4th ed. J Floege et al [eds]. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 
2010.)
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
115
have a limited role in differential diagnosis; they can be 
seen in interstitial nephritis, pyelonephritis, cystitis, ath-
eroembolic disease, or glomerulonephritis. Crystalluria 
may be important diagnostically. The finding of oxalate 
crystals in AKI should prompt an evaluation for ethyl-
ene glycol toxicity. Abundant uric acid crystals may be 
seen in the tumor lysis syndrome.
Blood laboratory findings
Certain forms of AKI are associated with character-
istic patterns in the rise and fall of SCr. Prerenal azo-
temia typically leads to modest rises in SCr that return 
to baseline with improvement in hemodynamic status. 
Contrast nephropathy leads to a rise in SCr within 
24–48 hours, peak within 3–5 days, and resolution 
within 5–7 days. In comparison, atheroembolic dis-
ease usually manifests with more subacute rises in SCr, 
although severe AKI with rapid increases in SCr can 
occur in this setting. With many of the epithelial cell 
toxins such as aminoglycoside antibiotics and cisplatin, 
the rise in SCr is characteristically delayed for 4–5 days 
to 2 weeks after initial exposure.
A complete blood count may provide diagnostic 
clues. Anemia is common in AKI and is usually mul-
tifactorial in origin. It is not related to an effect of AKI 
solely on production of red blood cells since this effect 
in isolation takes longer to manifest. Severe anemia in 
the absence of bleeding may reflect hemolysis, mul-
tiple myeloma, or thrombotic microangiopathy (e.g., 
HUS or TTP). Other laboratory findings of throm-
botic microangiopathy include thrombocytopenia, 
schistocytes on peripheral blood smear, elevated lac-
tate dehydrogenase level, and low haptoglobin con-
tent. Peripheral eosinophilia can accompany interstitial 
nephritis, atheroembolic disease, polyarteritis nodosa, 
and Churg-Strauss vasculitis.
AKI often leads to hyperkalemia, hyperphosphate-
mia, and hypocalcemia. Marked hyperphosphatemia 
with accompanying hypocalcemia, however, suggests 
rhabdomyolysis or the tumor lysis syndrome. Creatinine 
phosphokinase levels and serum uric acid are elevated 
in rhabdomyolysis, while tumor lysis syndrome shows 
normal or marginally elevated creatine kinase and mark-
edly elevated serum uric acid. The anion gap may be 
increased with any cause of uremia due to retention 
of anions such as phosphate, hippurate, sulfate, and 
urate. The co-occurrence of an increased anion gap 
and an osmolal gap may suggest ethylene glycol poi-
soning, which may also cause oxalate crystalluria. Low 
anion gap may provide a clue to the diagnosis of mul-
tiple myeloma due to the presence of unmeasured cat-
ionic proteins. Laboratory blood tests helpful for the 
diagnosis of glomerulonephritis and vasculitis include 
depressed complement levels and high titers of antinu­
clear antibodies (ANAs), antineutrophilic cytoplasmic 
antibodies (ANCAs), antiglomerular basement mem-
brane (AGBM) antibodies, and cryoglobulins.
Radiologic evaluation
Postrenal AKI should always be considered in the differ-
ential diagnosis of AKI because treatment is usually suc-
cessful if instituted early. Simple bladder catheterization 
can rule out urethral obstruction. Imaging of the uri-
nary tract with renal ultrasound or CT should be under-
taken to investigate obstruction in individuals with 
AKI unless an alternate diagnosis is apparent. Findings 
of obstruction include dilation of the collecting system 
and hydroureteronephrosis. Obstruction can be pres-
ent without radiologic abnormalities in the setting of 
volume depletion, retroperitoneal fibrosis, encasement 
with tumor, and also early in the course of obstruction. 
If a high clinical index of suspicion for obstruction per-
sists despite normal imaging, antegrade or retrograde 
pyelography should be performed. Imaging may also 
provide additional helpful information about kidney 
size and echogenicity to assist in the distinction between 
acute versus CKD. Large kidneys observed in these 
studies suggest the possibility of diabetic nephropathy, 
HIV-associated nephropathy, infiltrative diseases, or 
occasionally acute interstitial nephritis. Vascular imag-
ing may be useful if venous or arterial obstruction is sus-
pected, but the risks of contrast administration should 
be kept in mind. MRI with gadolinium-based contrast 
agents should be avoided if possible in severe AKI due 
to the possibility of inducing nephrogenic system fibro-
sis, a rare but serious complication seen most commonly 
in patients with end-stage renal disease.
Renal failure indices
Several indices have been used to help differentiate pre-
renal azotemia from intrinsic AKI when the tubules are 
malfunctioning. The low tubular flow rate and increased 
recycling of urea seen in prerenal azotemia may cause 
a disproportionate elevation of the BUN compared 
to creatinine. Other causes of disproportionate BUN 
elevation need to be kept in mind, however, includ-
ing upper gastrointestinal bleeding, hyperalimentation, 
increased tissue catabolism, and glucocorticoid use.
The fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa) is the 
fraction of the filtered sodium load that is reabsorbed by 
the tubules and is a measure of both the kidney’s ability 
to reabsorb sodium as well as endogenously and exoge-
nously administered factors that affect tubular reabsorp-
tion. As such, it depends on sodium intake, effective 
intravascular volume, GFR, and intact tubular reabsorp-
tive mechanisms. With prerenal azotemia, the FeNa 
may be below 1%, suggesting avid tubular sodium reab-
sorption. In patients with CKD, a FeNa significantly 
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
116
above 1% can still be present despite a prerenal state. 
The FeNa may also be above 1% despite hypovolemia 
due to treatment with diuretics. Low FeNa is often 
seen in glomerulonephritis (and other disorders), and, 
hence, should not be taken as prima facie evidence of 
prerenal azotemia. Low FeNa is therefore suggestive 
but not synonymous with effective intravascular volume 
depletion, and should not be used as the sole guide for 
volume management. The response of urine output to 
crystalloid or colloid fluid administration may be both 
diagnostic and therapeutic in prerenal azotemia. In isch-
emic AKI, the FeNa is frequently above 1% because of 
tubular injury and resultant inability to reabsorb sodium. 
Several causes of ischemia-associated and nephrotoxin-
associated AKI can present with FeNa below 1%, 
however, including sepsis (often early in the course), 
rhabdomyolysis, and contrast nephropathy.
The ability of the kidneys to produce a concen-
trated urine is dependent upon many factors and reli-
ant on good tubular function in multiple regions of 
the kidney. In the patient not taking diuretics and 
with good baseline kidney function, urine osmolality 
may be above 500 mosmol/kg in prerenal azotemia, 
consistent with an intact medullary gradient and elevated 
serum vasopressin levels causing water reabsorption, 
resulting in concentrated urine. In elderly patients 
and those with CKD, however, baseline concentrat-
ing defects may exist, making urinary osmolality unre-
liable in many instances. Loss of concentrating ability 
is common in septic or ischemic AKI, resulting in urine 
osmolality below 350 mosmol/kg, but the finding is 
not specific.
Kidney biopsy
If the cause of AKI is not apparent based on the clini-
cal context, physical examination, and laboratory stud-
ies, kidney biopsy should be considered. The results of 
kidney biopsy can provide definitive diagnostic and 
prognostic information about acute and CKDs. The 
procedure is most often used in AKI when prerenal 
azotemia, postrenal AKI, and ischemic or nephrotoxic 
AKI have been deemed unlikely, and other possible 
diagnoses are being considered such as glomerulone-
phritis, vasculitis, interstitial nephritis, myeloma kidney, 
HUS and TTP, and allograft dysfunction. Kidney 
biopsy is associated with a risk of bleeding, which can 
be severe and organ or life threatening in patients with 
thrombocytopenia or coagulopathy.
Novel Biomarkers
BUN and creatinine are functional biomarkers of glo-
merular filtration rather than tissue injury biomarkers 
and therefore may be suboptimal for the diagnosis of 
actual parenchymal kidney damage. BUN and creati-
nine are also relatively slow to rise after kidney injury. 
Several novel kidney injury biomarkers have been 
investigated and show great promise for the early and 
accurate diagnosis of AKI. Kidney injury molecule-1 
(KIM-1) is a type 1 transmembrane protein that is abun-
dantly expressed in proximal tubular cells injured by 
ischemia or nephrotoxins such as cisplatin. KIM-1 is 
not expressed in appreciable quantities in the absence 
of tubular injury or in extrarenal tissues. KIM-1’s 
functional role may be to confer phagocytic proper-
ties to tubular cells, enabling them to clear debris from 
the tubular lumen after kidney injury. KIM-1 can be 
detected shortly after ischemic or nephrotoxic injury 
in the urine and therefore may be an easily tested bio-
marker in the clinical setting. Neutrophil gelatinase associ-
ated lipocalin (NGAL, also known as lipocalin-2 or sid-
erocalin) is another leading novel biomarker of AKI. 
NGAL was first discovered as a protein in granules 
of human neutrophils. NGAL can bind to iron sid-
erophore complexes and may have tissue-protective 
effects in the proximal tubule. NGAL is highly upreg-
ulated after inflammation and kidney injury and can 
be detected in the plasma and urine within 2 hours of 
cardiopulmonary bypass–associated AKI. Other injury 
markers that are being studied in an attempt to increase 
the early recognition of injury and predict the outcome 
in AKI are listed in Table 10-2.
Complications
The kidney plays a central role in homeostatic control 
of volume status, blood pressure, plasma electrolyte 
composition, and acid-base balance, and for excretion 
of nitrogenous and other waste products. Complications 
associated with AKI are therefore protean and depend 
on the severity of AKI and other associated conditions. 
Mild to moderate AKI may be entirely asymptomatic, 
particularly early in the course.
Uremia
Buildup of nitrogenous waste products, manifested as 
an elevated BUN concentration, is a hallmark of AKI. 
BUN itself poses little direct toxicity at levels below 
100 mg/dL. At higher concentrations, mental status 
changes and bleeding complications can arise. Other 
toxins normally cleared by the kidney may be responsi-
ble for the symptom complex known as uremia. Few of 
the many possible uremic toxins have been definitively 
identified. The correlation of BUN and SCr concentra-
tions with uremic symptoms is extremely variable, due 
in part to differences in urea and creatinine generation 
rates across individuals.
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
117
Table 10-2 
Biomarkers of Acute Kidney Injury
Biomarker
Comments
Detection
Species
Alanine  
aminopeptidase 
(AAP)
1. Proximal tubule brush border enzyme
2. Instability may limit clinical utility
Colorimetry
Rat, dog, 
human
Alkaline  
phosphatase (AP)
1. Proximal tubule brush border enzyme. Human intestinal alkaline 
phosphatase is specific for proximal tubular S3 segment; human 
tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase is specific for S1 and S2 
segments
2. Levels may not correlate with extent of functional injury
3. Instability may limit clinical utility
Colorimetry
Rat, human
α-Glutathione-
S-transferase 
(α-GST)
1. Proximal tubule cytosolic enzyme
2. Requires stabilization buffer for specimen storage and process-
ing
3. Upregulated in AKI and renal cell carcinoma
ELISA
Mouse, rat, 
human
γ-Glutamyl 
transpeptidase 
(γ GT)
1. Proximal tubule brush border enzyme
2. Instability requires samples to be analyzed quickly after collec-
tion, limiting clinical utility
Colorimetry
Rat, human
N-Acetyl-β-(D) 
glucosaminidase 
(NAG)
1. Proximal tubule lysosomal enzyme
2. More stable than other urinary enzymes
3. Extensive preclinical and clinical data in a variety of conditions 
(nephrotoxicant exposure, cardiopulmonary bypass, delayed 
renal allograft function, etc.)
4. Endogenous urea may inhibit activity
Colorimetry
Mouse, rat, 
human
β2-Microglobulin
1. Light chain of the MHC I molecule expressed on the cell surface 
of all nucleated cells
2. Monomeric form is filtered by the glomerulus and reabsorbed by 
the proximal tubule cells
3. Early marker of tubular dysfunction in a variety of conditions
4. Instability in acidic urine limits clinical utility
ELISA  
Nephelometry
Mouse, rat, 
human
α1-Microglobulin
1. Synthesized by the liver
2. Filtered by the glomerulus and reabsorbed by proximal tubule 
cells
3. Early marker of tubular dysfunction; high levels may predict 
poorer outcome
4. Stable across physiologic urinary pH
ELISA  
Nephelometry
Mouse, rat, 
human
Retinol-binding  
protein
1. Synthesized by liver, involved in vitamin A transport
2. Filtered by glomerulus and reabsorbed by proximal tubule cells
3. Early marker of tubular dysfunction
4. Increased stability in acidic urine when compared to  
β2-microglobulin
ELISA  
Nephelometry
Mouse, rat, 
human
Cystatin C
1. Important extracellular inhibitor of cysteine proteases
2. Filtered by the glomerulus and reabsorbed by proximal tubule 
cells
3. Elevated urinary levels reflect tubular dysfunction; high levels 
may predict poorer outcome
ELISA  
Nephelometry
Mouse, rat, 
human
Microalbumin
1. Established marker for monitoring progression of chronic kidney 
disease
2. Elevated urinary levels may be indicative of proximal tubular 
damage
3. Lack of specificity for AKI may limit its utility
ELISA  
Immunoturbi-
dimetry
Mouse, rat, 
dog, monkey, 
human
Kidney injury  
molecule-1 (KIM-1)
1. Type-1 cell membrane glycoprotein upregulated in dedifferenti-
ated proximal tubule epithelial cells
2. Ectodomain is shed and can be quantitated in urine following 
AKI in preclinical and clinical studies
3. Elevated urinary levels are highly sensitive and specific for AKI
4. Upregulated following various models of preclinical and clinical 
AKI, fibrosis, renal cell carcinoma, and polycystic kidney disease
ELISA, 
Luminex®-
based assay
Zebrafish, 
mouse, rat, 
dog, monkey, 
human
(continued)
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
118
Table 10-2 
Biomarkers of Acute Kidney Injury (Continued)
Biomarker
Comments
Detection
Species
Clusterin
1. Expressed on dedifferentiated proximal tubular epithelial  
cells
2. Elevated kidney and urinary levels are very sensitive for AKI in 
preclinical models
3. Upregulated in various rodent models of AKI, fibrosis, renal cell 
carcinoma, and polycystic kidney disease
4. No clinical study demonstrating its use
ELISA
Mouse, rat, 
dog, monkey, 
human
Neutrophil gelatinase 
associated lipocalin 
(NGAL)
1. Initially identified bound to gelatinase in specific granules of the 
neutrophils, but also may be induced in epithelial cells in the 
setting of inflammation or malignancy
2. Expression upregulated in kidney proximal tubule cells and urine 
following ischemic or cisplatin induced renal injury
3. Found to be an early indicator of AKI following cardiopulmonary 
bypass
4. Specificity for AKI in setting of sepsis and pyuria need to be  
further established
ELISA
Luminex®-
based assay
Mouse, rat, 
human
Interleukin-18 (IL-18)
1. Cytokine with broad immunomodulatory properties, particularly 
in setting of ischemic injury
2. Constitutively expressed in distal tubules; strong immunoreactiv-
ity in proximal tubules with transplant rejection
3. Elevated urinary levels found to be early marker of AKI and inde-
pendent predictor of mortality in critically ill patients
ELISA
Luminex®-
based assay
Mouse, rat, 
human
Cysteine-rich  
protein (CYR-61)
1. Induced in proximal straight tubules of kidney and secreted in 
the urine within 3–6 h following ischemic kidney injury
2. Urinary levels decrease rapidly in spite of progression of injury 
indicating stability issue
3. No clinical study demonstrating its use
4. No quantitative method established
Western blot
Mouse, rat, 
human
Osteopontin
1. Upregulated in various rodent models of AKI
2. The induction correlates with inflammation and tubulointerstitial 
fibrosis
3. No clinical study demonstrating its use
ELISA
Mouse, rat, 
monkey, 
human
Liver fatty acid– 
binding protein 
(L-FABP)
1. Expressed in proximal tubule epithelial cells
2. Current evidence suggests clinical utility as a biomarker in CKD 
and diabetic nephropathy
3. Additional studies necessary to determine utility in setting of pre-
clinical and clinical AKI
ELISA
Mouse, rat, 
human
Sodium/hydrogen 
exchanger isoform 
(NHE3)
1. Most abundant sodium transporter in the renal tubule
2. Urinary levels found to discriminate between prerenal azotemia 
and AKI in ICU patients
3. Samples require considerable processing, limiting assay  
throughput
Immunoblotting Mouse, rat, 
human
Exosomal fetuin-A
1. Acute phase protein synthesized in the liver and secreted into  
the circulation
2. Levels in proximal tubule cell cytoplasm correspond to degree of 
injury
3. Urinary levels found to be much higher in ICU patients with AKI 
compared to ICU patients without AKI and healthy volunteers
4. Samples require considerable processing, limiting assay  
throughput
5. Additional studies necessary to determine utility in setting of  
preclinical and clinical AKI
Immunoblotting Rat, human
Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; ICU, intensive care unit; RCC, renal cell carcinoma.
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
119
Hypervolemia and hypovolemia
Expansion of extracellular fluid volume is a major com-
plication of oliguric and anuric AKI, due to impaired 
salt and water excretion. The result can be weight gain, 
dependent edema, increased jugular venous pressure, 
and pulmonary edema; the latter can be life threaten-
ing. Pulmonary edema can also occur from volume 
overload and hemorrhage in pulmonary renal syn-
dromes. AKI may also induce or exacerbate acute lung 
injury characterized by increased vascular permeability 
and inflammatory cell infiltration in lung parenchyma. 
Recovery from AKI can sometimes be accompanied by 
polyuria, which, if untreated, can lead to significant vol-
ume depletion. The polyuric phase of recovery may be 
due to an osmotic diuresis from retained urea and other 
waste products, as well as delayed recovery of tubular 
reabsorptive functions.
Hyponatremia
Administration of excessive hypotonic crystalloid or 
isotonic dextrose solutions can result in hypoosmolality 
and hyponatremia, which, if severe, can cause neuro-
logic abnormalities, including seizures.
Hyperkalemia
Abnormalities in plasma electrolyte composition can 
be mild or life threatening. Frequently the most con-
cerning complication of AKI is hyperkalemia. Marked 
hyperkalemia is particularly common in rhabdomyoly-
sis, hemolysis, and tumor lysis syndrome due to release 
of intracellular potassium from damaged cells. Potas-
sium affects the cellular membrane potential of cardiac 
and neuromuscular tissues. Muscle weakness may be a 
symptom of hyperkalemia. The more serious complica-
tion of hyperkalemia is due to effects on cardiac con-
duction, leading to potentially fatal arrhythmias.
Acidosis
Metabolic acidosis, usually accompanied by an elevation 
in the anion gap, is common in AKI, and can further 
complicate acid-base and potassium balance in individu-
als with other causes of acidosis, including sepsis, dia-
betic ketoacidosis, or respiratory acidosis.
Hyperphosphatemia and 
hypocalcemia
AKI can lead to hyperphosphatemia, particularly in 
highly catabolic patients or those with AKI from 
rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, and tumor lysis syn-
drome. Metastatic deposition of calcium phosphate 
can lead to hypocalcemia. AKI-associated hypocalce-
mia may also arise from derangements in the vitamin 
D–parathyroid axis. Hypocalcemia is often asymp-
tomatic but can lead to perioral paresthesias, muscle 
cramps, seizures, carpopedal spasms, and prolongation 
of the QT interval on electrocardiography. Calcium 
levels should be corrected for the degree of hypoalbu-
minemia, if present, or ionized calcium levels should 
be followed. Mild, asymptomatic hypocalcemia does 
not require treatment.
Bleeding
Hematologic complications of AKI include anemia 
and bleeding, both of which are exacerbated by coex-
isting disease processes such as sepsis, liver disease, and 
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Direct hemato-
logic effects from AKI-related uremia include decreased 
erythropoiesis and platelet dysfunction.
Infections
Infections are a common precipitant of AKI and also a 
dreaded complication of AKI. Impaired host immunity 
has been described in end-stage renal disease and may 
be operative in severe AKI.
Cardiac complications
The major cardiac complications of AKI are arrhythmias, 
pericarditis, and pericardial effusion.
Malnutrition
AKI is often a severely hypercatabolic state, and therefore 
malnutrition is a major complication.
Treatment	
 Acute Kidney Injury
Prevention and Treatment  The man-
agement of individuals with and at risk for AKI varies 
according to the underlying cause (Table 10-3). Com-
mon to all are several principles. Optimization of hemo-
dynamics, correction of fluid and electrolyte imbalances, 
discontinuation of nephrotoxic medications, and dose 
adjustment of administered medications are all criti-
cal. Common causes of AKI such as sepsis and ischemic 
ATN, do not yet have specific therapies once injury is 
established, but meticulous clinical attention is needed 
to support the patient until (if) AKI resolves. The kidney 
possesses a remarkable capacity to repair itself after even 
severe, dialysis-requiring AKI. However, some patients 
with AKI do not recover fully and may remain dialysis 
dependent.
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
120
Table 10-3 
Management of Ischemia- and Nephrotoxin-
Associated AKI
General Issues
1. Optimization of systemic and renal hemodynamics 
through volume resuscitation and judicious use of 
vasopressors
2. Elimination of nephrotoxic agents (e.g., ACE inhibitors, 
ARBs, NSAIDs, aminoglycosides) if possible
3. Initiation of renal replacement therapy when indicated
Specific Issues
1. Nephrotoxin specific
a. Rhabdomyolysis: consider forced alkaline diuresis
b. Tumor lysis syndrome: allopurinol or rasburicase
2. Volume overload
a. Salt and water restriction
b. Diuretics
c. Ultrafiltration
3. Hyponatremia
a. Restriction of enteral free water intake, minimization 
of hypotonic intravenous solutions including those 
containing dextrose
4. Hyperkalemia
a. Restriction of dietary potassium intake
b. Discontinuation of potassium-sparing diuretics, ACE 
inhibitors, ARBs, NSAIDs
c. Loop diuretics to promote urinary potassium loss
d. Potassium-binding ion-exchange resin (sodium poly-
styrene sulfonate)
e. Insulin (10 units regular) and glucose (50 mL of 50% 
dextrose) to promote entry of potassium intracellularly
f. Inhaled beta-agonist therapy to promote entry of 
potassium intracellularly
g. Calcium gluconate or calcium chloride (1 g) to stabi-
lize the myocardium
5. Metabolic acidosis
a. Sodium bicarbonate (if pH <7.2 to keep serum bicar-
bonate >15 mmol/L)
b. Administration of other bases, e.g., THAM
c. Renal replacement therapy
6. Hyperphosphatemia
a. Restriction of dietary phosphate intake
b. Phosphate binding agents (calcium acetate, 
sevelamer hydrochloride, aluminum hydroxide—
taken with meals)
7. Hypocalcemia
a. Calcium carbonate or calcium gluconate if symptomatic
8. Hypermagnesemia
a. Discontinue Mg2+-containing antacids
9. Hyperuricemia
a. Acute treatment is usually not required except in the set-
ting of tumor lysis syndrome (see earlier in the chapter)
10. Nutrition
a. Sufficient protein and calorie intake to avoid negative 
nitrogen balance
11. Drug dosing
a. Careful attention to dosages and frequency of adminis-
tration of drugs, adjustment for degree of renal failure
Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARBs, angio-
tensin receptor blockers; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs; TRAM, tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane.
Prerenal Azotemia  Prevention and treatment of 
prerenal azotemia requires optimization of renal perfu-
sion. The composition of replacement fluids should be 
targeted to the type of fluid lost. Severe acute blood 
loss should be treated with packed red blood cells. Iso-
tonic crystalloid and/or colloid should be used for less 
severe acute hemorrhage or plasma loss in the case of 
burns and pancreatitis. Crystalloid solutions are less 
expensive and probably equally as efficacious as colloid 
solutions. Crystalloid has been reported to be prefer-
able to albumin in the setting of traumatic brain injury. 
Isotonic crystalloid (e.g., 0.9% saline) or colloid should 
be used for volume resuscitation in severe hypovole-
mia, whereas hypotonic crystalloids (e.g., 0.45% saline) 
suffice for less severe hypovolemia. Excessive chloride 
administration from 0.9% saline may lead to hyperchlo-
remic metabolic acidosis. Use of bicarbonate-containing 
solutions (e.g., dextrose water with 150 meq sodium 
bicarbonate) should be used if metabolic acidosis is a 
concern.
Optimization of cardiac function in the cardiorenal 
syndrome (i.e., renal hypoperfusion from poor cardiac 
output) may require use of inotropic agents, preload- 
and afterload-reducing agents, antiarrhythmic drugs, 
and mechanical aids such as an intraaortic balloon 
pump. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring to guide ther-
apy may be necessary.
Cirrhosis and Hepatorenal Syndrome  Fluid 
management in individuals with cirrhosis, ascites, and 
AKI is challenging because of the frequent difficulty in 
ascertaining intravascular volume status. Administra-
tion of intravenous fluids as a volume challenge may 
be required diagnostically as well as therapeutically. 
Excessive volume administration may, however, result 
in worsening ascites and pulmonary compromise in the 
setting of hepatorenal syndrome or AKI due to super-
imposed spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Peritonitis 
should be ruled out by culture of ascitic fluid. Albumin 
may prevent AKI in those treated with antibiotics for 
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. The definitive treat-
ment of the hepatorenal syndrome is orthotopic liver 
transplantation. Bridge therapies that have shown 
promise include terlipressin (a vasopressin analog), 
combination therapy with octreotide (a somatostatin 
analog) and midodrine (an α1-adrenergic agonist), and 
norepinephrine, all in combination with intravenous 
albumin (25–50 mg per day, maximum 100 g/d).
Intrinsic AKI  Several agents have been tested and 
have failed to show benefit in the treatment of isch-
emic acute tubular injury. These include atrial natriuretic 
peptide, low-dose dopamine, endothelin antagonists, 
loop diuretics, calcium channel blockers, α-adrenergic 
receptor blockers, prostaglandin analogs, antioxidants, 
antibodies against leukocyte adhesion molecules, and 
 
CHAPTER 10
Acute Kidney Injury
121
insulin-like growth factor and many others. Most studies 
have enrolled patients with severe and well-established 
AKI, and treatment may have been initiated too late. 
Novel kidney injury biomarkers may provide an oppor-
tunity to test agents earlier in the course of AKI.
AKI due to acute glomerulonephritis or vasculitis may 
respond to immunosuppressive agents and/or plasma-
pheresis (Chap. 1). Allergic interstitial nephritis due to 
medications requires discontinuation of the offending 
agent. Glucocorticoids have been used, but not tested 
in randomized trials, in cases where AKI persists or wors-
ens despite discontinuation of the suspected medica-
tion. AKI due to scleroderma (scleroderma renal crisis) 
should be treated with ACE inhibitors.
Early and aggressive volume repletion is manda-
tory in patients with rhabdomyolysis, who may require  
10 L of fluid per day. Alkaline fluids (e.g., 75 mmol sodium 
bicarbonate added to 0.45% saline) may be beneficial in 
preventing tubular injury and cast formation, but carry 
the risk of worsening hypocalcemia. Diuretics may be 
used if fluid repletion is adequate but unsuccessful in 
achieving urinary flow rates of 200–300 mL/h. There is no 
specific therapy for established AKI in rhabdomyolysis, 
other than dialysis in severe cases or general supportive 
care to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance and tissue 
perfusion. Careful attention must be focused on calcium 
and phosphate status because of precipitation in dam-
aged tissue and released when the tissue heals.
Postrenal AKI  Prompt recognition and relief of uri-
nary tract obstruction can forestall the development of 
permanent structural damage induced by urinary stasis. 
The site of obstruction defines the treatment approach. 
Transurethral or suprapubic bladder catheterization 
may be all that is needed initially for urethral strictures 
or functional bladder impairment. Ureteric obstruc-
tion may be treated by percutaneous nephrostomy 
tube placement or ureteral stent placement. Relief of 
obstruction is usually followed by an appropriate diure-
sis for several days. In rare cases, severe polyuria persists 
due to tubular dysfunction and may require continued 
administration of intravenous fluids and electrolytes for 
a period of time.
Supportive Measures
Volume Management  Hypervolemia in oliguric 
or anuric AKI may be life threatening due to acute pul-
monary edema, especially since many patients have 
coexisting pulmonary disease, and AKI likely increases 
pulmonary vascular permeability. Fluid and sodium 
should be restricted, and diuretics may be used to 
increase the urinary flow rate. There is no evidence that 
increasing urine output itself improves the natural his-
tory of AKI, but diuretics may help to avoid the need 
for dialysis in some cases. In severe cases of volume 
overload, furosemide may be given as a bolus (200 mg) 
followed by an intravenous drip (10–40 mg/h), with or 
without a thiazide diuretic. Diuretic therapy should be 
stopped if there is no response. Dopamine in low doses 
may transiently increase salt and water excretion by the 
kidney in prerenal states, but clinical trials have failed to 
show any benefit in patients with intrinsic AKI. Because 
of the risk of arrhythmias and potential bowel ischemia, 
it has been argued that the risks of dopamine may out-
weigh the benefits in the treatment or prevention of AKI.
Electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities 
The treatment of dysnatremias and hyperkalemia is 
described in Chap. 6. Metabolic acidosis is not treated 
unless severe (pH <7.20 and serum bicarbonate  
<15 mmol/L). Acidosis can be treated with oral or intra-
venous sodium bicarbonate (Chap. 5), but overcorrec-
tion should be avoided because of the possibility of 
metabolic alkalosis, hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, and 
volume overload. Hyperphosphatemia is common 
in AKI and can usually be treated by limiting intesti-
nal absorption of phosphate using phosphate binders  
(calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, sevelamer, or alu-
minum hydroxide). Hypocalcemia does not usually 
require therapy unless symptoms are present.
Malnutrition  Protein energy wasting is common in 
AKI, particularly in the setting of multisystem organ fail-
ure. Inadequate nutrition may lead to starvation keto-
acidosis and protein catabolism. Excessive nutrition 
may increase the generation of nitrogenous waste and 
lead to worsening azotemia. Total parenteral nutrition 
requires large volumes of fluid administration and may 
complicate efforts at volume control.
Anemia  The anemia seen in AKI is usually multifactorial
and is not improved by erythropoiesis-stimulating 
agents, due to their delayed onset of action and the 
presence of bone marrow resistance in critically ill 
patients. Uremic bleeding may respond to desmopres-
sin or estrogens, but may require dialysis in the case of 
long-standing or severe uremia. Gastrointestinal pro-
phylaxis with proton pump inhibitors or histamine (H2) 
receptor blockers is required. Venous thromboembolism 
prophylaxis is important and should be tailored to the 
clinical setting; low-molecular-weight heparins and fac-
tor Xa inhibitors have unpredictable pharmacokinetics 
in severe AKI and should be avoided.
Dialysis Indications and Modalities  (See also 
Chap. 12) Dialysis is indicated when medical manage-
ment fails to control volume overload, in hyperkalemia, 
in acidosis, in some toxic ingestions, and when there are 
severe complications of uremia (asterixis, pericardial rub 
or effusion, encephalopathy, uremic bleeding). The tim-
ing of dialysis is still a matter of debate. Late initiation of 
dialysis carries the risk of avoidable volume, electrolyte, 
and metabolic complications of AKI. On the other hand, 
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
122
initiating dialysis too early may unnecessarily expose 
individuals to intravenous lines and invasive procedures, 
with the attendant risks of infection, bleeding, proce-
dural complications, and hypotension. The initiation 
of dialysis should not await the development of a life-
threatening complication of renal failure. Many nephrol-
ogists initiate dialysis for AKI empirically when the BUN 
exceeds 100 mg/dL in patients without clinical signs of 
recovery of kidney function.
The available modes for renal replacement therapy 
in AKI require either access to the peritoneal cavity 
(for peritoneal dialysis) or the large blood vessels (for 
hemodialysis, hemofiltration, and other hybrid proce-
dures). Small solutes are removed across a semiperme-
able membrane down their concentration gradient 
(“diffusive” clearance) and/or along with the movement 
of plasma water (“convective” clearance). The choice of 
modality is often dictated by the immediate availability 
of technology and the expertise of medical staff. Peri-
toneal dialysis is performed through a temporary intra-
peritoneal catheter. It is rarely used in the United States 
for AKI in adults but has enjoyed widespread use inter-
nationally, particularly when hemodialysis technology 
is not available. Dialysate solution is instilled into and 
removed from the peritoneal cavity at regular intervals 
in order to achieve diffusive and convective clearance of 
solutes across the peritoneal membrane; ultrafiltration 
of water is achieved by the presence of an osmotic gra-
dient across the peritoneal membrane, typically due to 
high concentrations of dextrose in the dialysate. Being 
a continuous procedure, it is often better tolerated than 
intermittent procedures like hemodialysis in hypoten-
sive patients. Peritoneal dialysis may not be sufficient for 
hypercatabolic patients due to inherent limitations in 
dialysis efficacy.
Hemodialysis can be employed intermittently or con-
tinuously, and can be done through convective clear-
ance, diffusive clearance, or a combination of the two. 
Vascular access is through the femoral, internal jugular, 
or subclavian veins. Hemodialysis is an intermittent pro-
cedure that removes solutes through diffusive and con-
vective clearance. Hemodialysis is performed 3–4 h per d, 
three to four times per week, and is the most common 
form of renal replacement therapy for AKI. One of the 
major complications of hemodialysis is hypotension, par-
ticularly in the critically ill.
Continuous intravascular procedures were developed 
in the early 1980s to treat hemodynamically unstable 
patients without inducing the rapid shifts of volume, 
osmolarity, and electrolytes characteristic of intermit-
tent hemodialysis. Continuous renal replacement ther-
apy (CRRT) can be performed by convective clearance 
[continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH)], in 
which large volumes of plasma water (and accompany-
ing solutes) are forced across the semipermeable mem-
brane by means of hydrostatic pressure; the plasma 
water is then replaced by a physiologic crystalloid solu-
tion. CRRT can also be performed by diffusive clearance 
[continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD)], a tech-
nology similar to hemodialysis except at lower blood 
flow and dialysate flow rates. A hybrid therapy combines 
both diffusive and convective clearance [continuous 
venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF)]. To achieve 
some of the advantages of CRRT without the need for 
24-h staffing of the procedure, a newer form of therapy 
has been introduced, termed slow low-efficiency dialysis 
(SLED) or extended daily dialysis (EDD). In this therapy, 
blood flow and dialysate flow are higher than in CVVHD, 
but the treatment time is reduced to 12 h.
The optimal dose of dialysis for AKI is not clear. Daily 
intermittent hemodialysis and high-dose CRRT do 
not confer a demonstrable survival or renal recovery 
advantage, but care should be taken to avoid under-
treatment. Studies have failed to show that continuous 
therapies are superior to intermittent therapies. If avail-
able, CRRT is often preferred in patients with severe 
hemodynamic instability, cerebral edema, or significant 
volume overload.
Outcome and Prognosis
The development of AKI is associated with a sig-
nificantly increased risk of in-hospital and long-term 
mortality, longer length of stay, and increased costs. 
Prerenal azotemia, with the exception of the car-
diorenal and hepatorenal syndromes, and postrenal 
azotemia carry a better prognosis than most cases of 
intrinsic AKI. The kidneys may recover even after 
severe, dialysis-requiring AKI. Survivors of an epi-
sode of AKI requiring temporary dialysis, however, 
are at extremely high risk for progressive CKD, and 
up to 10% may develop end-stage renal disease. Post-
discharge care under the supervision of a nephrologist 
for aggressive secondary prevention of kidney disease 
is prudent. Patients with AKI are more likely to die 
prematurely after they leave the hospital even if their 
kidney function has recovered.
 Joanne M. Bargman 
I  Karl Skorecki 
123
 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) encompasses a spectrum 
of different pathophysiologic processes associated with 
abnormal kidney function and a progressive decline in 
glomerular fi ltration rate (GFR).  Table 11-1 provides 
a widely accepted classifi cation, based on guidelines of 
the National Kidney Foundation [Kidney Dialysis Out-
comes Quality Initiative (KDOQI)], in which stages of 
CKD are defi ned according to the estimated GFR. 
 The term  chronic renal failure applies to the process of 
continuing signifi cant irreversible reduction in nephron 
number and typically corresponds to CKD stages 3–5. 
The pathophysiologic processes and adaptations associ-
ated with chronic renal failure will be the focus of this 
chapter. The dispiriting term  end-stage renal disease repre-
sents a stage of CKD where the accumulation of toxins, 
fl uid, and electrolytes normally excreted by the kidneys 
results in the  uremic syndrome . This syndrome leads to 
death unless the toxins are removed by renal replace-
ment therapy using dialysis or kidney transplantation. 
These latter interventions are discussed in  Chaps. 12 
and  13 .  End-stage renal disease will be supplanted in this 
chapter by the term  stage 5 CKD . 
 PathoPhySioLogy of ChRoniC 
Kidney diSeaSe 
 The pathophysiology of CKD involves two broad sets 
of mechanisms of damage: (1) initiating mechanisms 
specifi c to the underlying etiology (e.g., genetically 
determined abnormalities in kidney development or 
integrity, immune complex deposition and infl amma-
tion in certain types of glomerulonephritis, or toxin 
exposure in certain diseases of the renal tubules and 
interstitium) and (2) a set of progressive mechanisms, 
involving hyperfi ltration and hypertrophy of the 
remaining viable nephrons, that are a common conse-
quence following long-term reduction of renal mass, 
irrespective of underlying etiology ( Chap. 2 ). The 
responses to reduction in nephron number are medi-
ated by vasoactive hormones, cytokines, and growth 
factors. Eventually, these short-term adaptations of 
hypertrophy and hyperfi ltration become maladaptive as 
the increased pressure and fl ow predisposes to distor-
tion of glomerular architecture, associated with sclerosis 
and dropout of the remaining nephrons  ( Fig. 11-1 ) . 
Increased intrarenal activity of the renin-angiotensin 
axis appears to contribute both to the initial adap-
tive hyperfi ltration and to the subsequent maladaptive 
hypertrophy and sclerosis, the latter, in part, owing to 
the stimulation of transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). 
This process explains why a reduction in renal mass 
from an isolated insult may lead to a progressive decline 
in renal function over many years ( Fig. 11-2 ). 
 identifiCation of RiSK faCtoRS and 
Staging of CKd 
 It is important to identify factors that increase the risk 
for CKD, even in individuals with normal GFR. Risk 
factors include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, autoim-
mune disease, older age, African ancestry, a family his-
tory of renal disease, a previous episode of acute kidney 
 CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
 ChaPter 11 
Table 11-1
CLaSSifiCation of ChRoniC Kidney diSeaSe (CKd)
Stage
gfR, mL/min PeR 1.73 m 2 
0
1
2
3
4
5
>90  a  
≥90  b  
60–89
30–59
15–29
<15
  a  With risk factors for CKD (see text).
  b  With demonstrated kidney damage (e.g., persistent proteinuria, 
abnormal urine sediment, abnormal blood and urine chemistry, abnor-
mal imaging studies).
 Abbreviation: GFR, glomerular fi ltration rate.
 Source: Modifi ed from National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI Clinical 
Practice Guidelines for Chronic Kidney Disease: Evaluation, classifi -
cation and stratifi cation. Am J Kidney Dis 39:suppl 1, 2002.
124
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
injury, and the presence of proteinuria, abnormal urinary 
sediment, or structural abnormalities of the urinary tract.
Recent research in the genetics of predisposition to 
common complex diseases has revealed DNA sequence 
variants at a number of genetic loci that are associated 
with common forms of CKD. A striking example is the 
finding of allelic versions of the APOL1 gene, of West 
African population ancestry, which contributes to the 
several-fold higher frequency of certain common etiol-
ogies of CKD (e.g., focal segmental glomerulosclerosis) 
observed among African and Hispanic Americans. The 
prevalence in West African populations seems to have 
an evolutionary basis, since these same variants offer 
protection from tropical pathogens.
In order to stage CKD, it is necessary to estimate the 
GFR. Two equations commonly used to estimate GFR 
are shown in Table 11-2 and incorporate the measured 
plasma creatinine concentration, age, sex, and ethnic ori-
gin. Many laboratories now report an estimated GFR, or 
“eGFR,” using one of these equations.
The normal annual mean decline in GFR with age 
from the peak GFR (∼120 mL/min per 1.73 m2) attained 
during the third decade of life is ∼1 mL/min per year 
per 1.73 m2, reaching a mean value of 70 mL/min per 
1.73 m2 at age 70. The mean GFR is lower in women 
than in men. For example, a woman in her 80s with a 
normal serum creatinine may have a GFR of just 50 mL/
min per 1.73 m2. Thus, even a mild elevation in serum 
creatinine concentration [e.g., 130 μmol/L (1.5 mg/dL)] 
Distal
tubule 
Afferent
arteriole
Efferent
arteriole
Normal
endothelium
Basement
membrane
Podocytes
Enlarged
arteriole
Damaged
endothelium
Sclerosis
Normal Glomerulus
Hyperfiltering Glomerulus
Figure 11-1
Left: Schema of the normal glomerular architecture. 
Right: Secondary glomerular changes associated with a 
reduction in nephron number, including enlargement of capil-
lary lumens and focal adhesions, which are thought to occur 
consequent to compensatory hyperfiltration and hypertrophy 
in the remaining nephrons. (Modified from JR Ingelfinger: 
N Engl J Med 348:99, 2003.)
Figure 11-2
Left: Low-power photomicrograph of a normal kidney 
showing normal glomeruli and healthy tubulointerstitium with-
out fibrosis. Right: Low-power photomicrograph of chronic 
kidney disease with sclerosis of many glomeruli and severe 
tubulointerstitial fibrosis (Masson trichrome, ×40 magnification. 
Slides courtesy of the late Dr. Andrew Herzenberg.)
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
125
often signifies a substantial reduction in GFR in most 
individuals.
Measurement of albuminuria is also helpful for moni-
toring nephron injury and the response to therapy in 
many forms of CKD, especially chronic glomerular dis-
eases. While an accurate 24-h urine collection is the cri­
terion standard for measurement of albuminuria, the 
mea­surement of protein-to-creatinine ratio in a spot first-
morning urine sample is often more practical to obtain 
and correlates well, but not perfectly, with 24-h urine 
collections. Persistence in the urine of >17 mg of albu-
min per gram of creatinine in adult males and 25 mg 
albumin per gram of creatinine in adult females usually 
signifies chronic renal damage. Microalbuminuria refers to 
the excretion of amounts of albumin too small to detect 
by urinary dipstick or conventional measures of urine 
pro­tein. It is a good screening test for early detection 
of renal disease, and may be a marker for the presence of 
micro-vascular disease in general. If a patient has a large 
amount of excreted albumin, there is no reason to test 
for microalbuminuria.
Stages 1 and 2 CKD are usually not associated with 
any symptoms arising from the decrement in GFR. 
However, there may be symptoms from the underly-
ing renal disease itself, such as edema in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome or signs of hypertension second-
ary to the renal parenchymal disease in patients with 
polycystic kidney disease, some forms of glomerulo-
nephritis, and many other parenchymal and vascu-
lar renal diseases, even with well-preserved GFR. If the 
decline in GFR progresses to stages 3 and 4, clinical 
and laboratory complications of CKD become more 
prominent. Virtually all organ systems are affected, but the 
most evident complications include anemia and associ-
ated easy fatigability; decreasing appetite with progressive 
Table 11-3
Leading Categories of Etiologies of CKDa
Diabetic glomerular disease
Glomerulonephritis
Hypertensive nephropathy
•  Primary glomerulopathy with hypertension
•  Vascular and ischemic renal disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Other cystic and tubulointerstitial nephropathy
aRelative contribution of each category varies with geographic region.
Table 11-2
Recommended Equations for Estimation 
of Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) Using 
Serum Creatinine Concentration (PCr), Age, 
Sex, Race, and Body Weight
1. Equation from the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease 
studya
  Estimated GFR (mL/min per 1.73 m2) = 
1.86 × (PCr)−1.154 × (age)−0.203
  Multiply by 0.742 for women
  Multiply by 1.21 for African Americans
2. Cockcroft-Gault equation
 
Estimated creatinine clearance (mL/min) =
(140
72
–
dy weight 
/
age
bo
kg
P
mg dL
Cr
)
(
)
(
)
×
×
  Multiply by 0.85 for women
aEquation is available in hand-held calculators and in tabular form.
Source: Adapted from AS Levey et al: Am J Kidney Dis 39: S1, 
2002, with permission.
malnutrition; abnormalities in calcium, phosphorus, and 
mineral-regulating hormones, such as 1,25(OH)2D3 
(calcitriol), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and fibroblast 
growth factor 23 (FGF-23); and abnormalities in sodium, 
potassium, water, and acid-base homeostasis. Many 
patients, especially the elderly, will have eGFR values 
compatible with stage 2 or 3 CKD. However, the major-
ity of these patients will show no further deterioration of 
renal function. The primary care physician is advised to 
recheck kidney function, and if it is stable and not associ-
ated with proteinuria, the patient can usually be managed 
in this setting. However, if there is evidence of decline 
of GFR and uncontrolled hypertension or proteinuria, 
referral to a nephrologist is appropriate. If the patient 
progresses to stage 5 CKD, toxins accumulate such that 
patients usually experience a marked disturbance in their 
activities of daily living, well-being, nutritional status, 
and water and electrolyte homeostasis, eventuating in the 
uremic syndrome. As noted, this state will culminate in 
death unless renal replacement therapy (dialysis or trans-
plantation) is instituted.
Etiology and Epidemiology
It has been estimated from population survey data that 
at least 6% of the adult population in the United States 
has CKD at stages 1 and 2. An unknown subset of this 
group will progress to more advanced stages of CKD. 
An additional 4.5% of the U.S. population is estimated 
to have stages 3 and 4 CKD. Table 11-3 lists the five 
most frequent categories of causes of CKD, cumula-
tively accounting for greater than 90% of the CKD dis-
ease burden worldwide. The relative contribution of 
each category varies among different geographic regions. 
The most frequent cause of CKD in North America and 
Europe is diabetic nephropathy, most often secondary to 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Patients with newly diagnosed 
CKD often also present with hypertension. When no 
overt evidence for a primary glomerular or tubulointersti-
tial kidney disease process is present, CKD is often attrib-
uted to hypertension. However, it is now appreciated 
that such individuals can be considered in two catego-
ries. The first includes patients with a silent primary glo-
merulopathy, such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, 
126
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
without the overt nephrotic or nephritic manifestations 
of glomerular disease (Chap. 15). The second includes 
patients in whom progressive nephrosclerosis and hyper-
tension is the renal correlate of a systemic vascular disease, 
often also involving large- and small-vessel cardiac and 
cerebral pathology. This latter combination is especially 
common in the elderly, in whom chronic renal ischemia 
as a cause of CKD may be underdiagnosed. The increas-
ing incidence of CKD in the elderly has been ascribed, 
in part, to decreased mortality rate from the cardiac and 
cerebral complications of atherosclerotic vascular disease, 
enabling a greater segment of the population to manifest 
the renal component of generalized vascular disease. Nev-
ertheless, it should be appreciated that the vast majority of 
such patients with early stages of CKD will succumb to 
the cardiovascular and cerebrovascular consequences of 
the vascular disease before they can progress to the most 
advanced stages of CKD. Indeed, even a minor decre-
ment in GFR or the presence of albuminuria is now rec-
ognized as a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
Pathophysiology and Biochemistry 
of Uremia
Although serum urea and creatinine concentrations are 
used to measure the excretory capacity of the kidneys, 
accumulation of these two molecules themselves do not 
account for the many symptoms and signs that charac-
terize the uremic syndrome in advanced renal failure. 
Hundreds of toxins that accumulate in renal failure have 
been implicated in the uremic syndrome. These include 
water-soluble, hydrophobic, protein-bound, charged, 
and uncharged compounds. Additional categories of 
nitrogenous excretory products include guanidino com-
pounds, urates and hippurates, products of nucleic acid 
metabolism, polyamines, myoinositol, phenols, benzo-
ates, and indoles. Compounds with a molecular mass 
between 500 and 1500 Da, the so-called middle mol-
ecules, are also retained and contribute to morbidity and 
mortality. It is thus evident that the serum concentra-
tions of urea and creatinine should be viewed as being 
readily measured, but incomplete, surrogate markers for 
these compounds, and monitoring the levels of urea and 
creatinine in the patient with impaired kidney function 
represents a vast oversimplification of the uremic state.
The uremic syndrome and the disease state associ-
ated with advanced renal impairment involve more than 
renal excretory failure. A host of metabolic and endo-
crine functions normally performed by the kidneys is 
also impaired or suppressed, and this results in anemia, 
malnutrition, and abnormal metabolism of carbohy-
drates, fats, and proteins. Furthermore, plasma levels of 
many hormones, including PTH, FGF-23, insulin, glu-
cagon, steroid hormones including vitamin D and sex 
hormones, and prolactin, change with renal failure as 
a result of urinary retention, decreased degradation, or 
abnormal regulation. Finally, progressive renal impair-
ment is associated with worsening systemic inflamma-
tion. Elevated levels of C-reactive protein are detected 
along with other acute-phase reactants, while levels of 
so-called negative acute-phase reactants, such as albu-
min and fetuin, decline with progressive renal impair-
ment, even in nonproteinuric kidney disease. Thus, the 
inflammation associated with renal impairment is impor-
tant in the malnutrition-inflammation-atherosclerosis/
calcification syndrome, which contributes in turn to 
the acceleration of vascular disease and comorbidity rate 
associated with advanced kidney disease.
In summary, the pathophysiology of the uremic 
syndrome can be divided into manifestations in three 
spheres of dysfunction: (1) those consequent to the 
accumulation of toxins that normally undergo renal 
excretion, including products of protein metabolism; 
(2) those consequent to the loss of other renal functions, 
such as fluid and electrolyte homeostasis and hormone 
regulation; and (3) progressive systemic inflammation 
and its vascular and nutritional consequences.
Clinical and Laboratory 
Manifestations of Chronic Kidney 
Disease and Uremia
Uremia leads to disturbances in the function of virtu-
ally every organ system. Chronic dialysis can reduce 
the incidence and severity of many of these distur-
bances, so that the overt and florid manifestations of 
uremia have largely disappeared in the modern health 
setting. However, as indicated in Table 11-4, even 
optimal dialysis therapy is not completely effective as 
renal replacement therapy, because some disturbances 
resulting from impaired renal function fail to respond 
to dialysis.
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base 
Disorders
Sodium and water homeostasis
In most patients with stable CKD, the total-body con-
tent of sodium and water is modestly increased, although 
this may not be apparent on clinical examination. Nor-
mal renal function guarantees that the tubular reabsorp-
tion of filtered sodium and water is adjusted so that 
urinary excretion matches intake. Many forms of renal 
disease (e.g., glomerulonephritis) disrupt this glomeru-
lotubular balance such that dietary intake of sodium 
exceeds its urinary excretion, leading to sodium reten-
tion and attendant extracellular fluid volume (ECFV) 
expansion. This expansion may contribute to hyper-
tension, which itself can accelerate the nephron injury. 
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
127
As long as water intake does not exceed the capacity for 
water clearance, the ECFV expansion will be isotonic 
and the patient will have a normal plasma sodium con-
centration and effective osmolality (Chap. 2). Hypo-
natremia is not commonly seen in CKD patients but, 
when present, can respond to water restriction. If the 
patient has evidence of ECFV expansion (peripheral 
edema, sometimes hypertension poorly responsive to 
therapy), he or she should be counseled regarding salt 
restriction. Thiazide diuretics have limited utility in 
stages 3–5 CKD, such that administration of loop diuret-
ics, including furosemide, bumetanide, or torsemide, 
may also be needed. Resistance to loop diuretics in renal 
failure often mandates use of higher doses than those 
used in patients with near-normal kidney function. The 
combination of loop diuretics with metolazone, which 
inhibits the sodium chloride co-transporter of the distal 
convoluted tubule, can help effect renal salt excretion. 
Ongoing diuretic resistance with intractable edema and 
hypertension in advanced CKD may serve as an indica-
tion to initiate dialysis.
In addition to problems with salt and water excre-
tion, some patients with CKD may instead have 
impaired renal conservation of sodium and water. 
When an extrarenal cause for fluid loss, such as gas-
trointestinal (GI) loss, is present, these patients may be 
prone to ECFV depletion because of the inability of 
the failing kidney to reclaim filtered sodium adequately. 
Furthermore, depletion of ECFV, whether due to GI 
losses or overzealous diuretic therapy, can further com-
promise kidney function through underperfusion, or a 
“prerenal” basis, leading to acute-on-chronic kidney 
failure. In this setting, cautious volume repletion with 
normal saline may return the ECFV to normal and 
restore renal function to baseline without having to 
intervene with dialysis.
Potassium homeostasis
In CKD, the decline in GFR is not necessarily 
accompanied by a parallel decline in urinary potas-
sium excretion, which is predominantly mediated 
Table 11-4
Clinical Abnormalities in Uremiaa
Fluid and electrolyte disturbances
Volume expansion (I)
Hyponatremia (I)
Hyperkalemia (I)
Hyperphosphatemia (I)
Endocrine-metabolic disturbances
Secondary hyperparathyroidism  
(I or P)
Adynamic bone (D)
Vitamin D–deficient osteomalacia (I)
Carbohydrate resistance (I)
Hyperuricemia (I or P)
Hypertriglyceridemia (I or P)
Increased Lp(a) level (P)
Decreased high-density lipoprotein 
level (P)
Protein-energy malnutrition (I or P)
Impaired growth and development (P)
Infertility and sexual dysfunction (P)
Amenorrhea (I/P)
β2-Microglobulin–associated 
amyloidosis (P or D)
Neuromuscular disturbances
Fatigue (I)b
Sleep disorders (P)
Headache (P)
Impaired mentation (I)b
Lethargy (I)b
Asterixis (I)
Muscular irritability
Peripheral neuropathy (I or P)
Restless legs syndrome (I or P)
Myoclonus (I)
Seizures (I or P)
Coma (I)
Muscle cramps (P or D)
Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome (D)
Myopathy (P or D)
Cardiovascular and pulmonary 
disturbances
Arterial hypertension (I or P)
Congestive heart failure or pulmonary 
edema (I)
Pericarditis (I)
Hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy 
(I, P, or D)
Uremic lung (I)
Accelerated atherosclerosis (P or D)
Hypotension and arrhythmias (D)
Vascular calcification (P or D)
Dermatologic disturbances
Pallor (I)b
Hyperpigmentation (I, P, or D)
Pruritus (P)
Ecchymoses (I)
Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy (D)
Uremic frost (I)
Gastrointestinal disturbances
Anorexia (I)
Nausea and vomiting (I)
Gastroenteritis (I)
Peptic ulcer (I or P)
Gastrointestinal bleeding (I, P, or D)
Idiopathic ascites (D)
Peritonitis (D)
Hematologic and immunologic 
disturbances
Anemia (I)b
Lymphocytopenia (P)
Bleeding diathesis (I or D)b
Increased susceptibility to infection  
(I or P)
Leukopenia (D)
Thrombocytopenia (D)
aVirtually all abnormalities in this table are completely reversed in time by successful renal transplantation. The response of these abnormalities to 
hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis therapy is more variable. (I) denotes an abnormality that usually improves with an optimal program of dialysis 
and related therapy; (P) denotes an abnormality that tends to persist or even progress, despite an optimal program; (D) denotes an abnormality 
that develops only after initiation of dialysis therapy.
bImproves with dialysis and erythropoietin therapy.
Abbreviation: Lp(a), lipoprotein A.
128
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
by aldosterone-dependent secretory events in distal 
nephron segments. Another defense against potassium 
retention in these patients is augmented potassi-
um excretion in the GI tract. Notwithstanding these 
two homeostatic responses, hyperkalemia may be pre-
cipitated in certain settings. These include increased 
dietary potassium intake, protein catabolism, hemolysis, 
hemorrhage, transfusion of stored red blood cells, and 
metabolic acidosis. In addition, a host of medications 
can inhibit renal potassium excretion. The most impor-
tant medications in this respect include the angiotensin- 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin 
receptor blockers (ARBs), and spironolactone and 
other potassium-sparing diuretics such as amiloride, 
eplerenone, and triamterene.
Certain causes of CKD can be associated with ear-
lier and more severe disruption of potassium-secretory 
mechanisms in the distal nephron, out of proportion 
to the decline in GFR. These include conditions asso-
ciated with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, such as 
diabetes, and renal diseases that preferentially affect the 
distal nephron, such as obstructive uropathy and sickle 
cell nephropathy.
Hypokalemia is not common in CKD and usually 
reflects markedly reduced dietary potassium intake, 
especially in association with excessive diuretic therapy 
or concurrent GI losses. Hypokalemia can also occur 
as a result of primary renal potassium wasting in asso-
ciation with other solute transport abnormalities, such 
as Fanconi’s syndrome, renal tubular acidosis, or other 
forms of hereditary or acquired tubulointerstitial dis-
ease. However, even with these conditions, as the GFR 
declines, the tendency to hypokalemia diminishes and 
hyperkalemia may supervene. Therefore, the use of 
potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics 
should be constantly reevaluated as GFR declines.
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic acidosis is a common disturbance in 
advanced CKD. The majority of patients can still 
acidify the urine, but they produce less ammonia and 
therefore cannot excrete the normal quantity of protons 
in combination with this urinary buffer. Hyperkale-
mia, if present, further depresses ammonia production. 
The combination of hyperkalemia and hyperchlore-
mic metabolic acidosis is often present, even at earlier 
stages of CKD (stages 1–3), in patients with diabetic 
nephropathy or in those with predominant tubu-
lointerstitial disease or obstructive uropathy; this is a 
non-anion-gap metabolic acidosis. Treatment of hyper-
kalemia may increase renal ammonia production, 
improve renal generation of bicarbonate, and improve 
the metabolic acidosis.
With worsening renal function, the total urinary net 
daily acid excretion is usually limited to 30–40 mmol, 
and the anions of retained organic acids can then lead 
to an anion-gap metabolic acidosis. Thus, the non-
anion-gap metabolic acidosis that can be seen in ear-
lier stages of CKD may be complicated by the addition 
of an anion-gap metabolic acidosis as CKD progresses. 
In most patients, the metabolic acidosis is mild; the 
pH is rarely <7.35 and can usually be corrected with 
oral sodium bicarbonate supplementation. Animal and 
human studies have suggested that even modest degrees 
of metabolic acidosis may be associated with the devel-
opment of protein catabolism. Alkali supplementa-
tion may attenuate the catabolic state and possibly slow 
CKD progression and accordingly is recommended 
when the serum bicarbonate concentration falls below 
20–23 mmol/L. The concomitant sodium load man-
dates careful attention to volume status and the potential 
need for diuretic agents.
Treatment	
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders
Adjustments in the dietary intake of salt and use of 
loop diuretics, occasionally in combination with meto-
lazone, may be needed to maintain euvolemia. In con-
trast, overzealous salt restriction or diuretic use can 
lead to ECFV depletion and precipitate a further decline 
in GFR. The rare patient with salt-losing nephropathy 
may require a sodium-rich diet or salt supplementa-
tion. Water restriction is indicated only if there is a 
problem with hyponatremia. Otherwise, patients with 
CKD and an intact thirst mechanism may be instructed 
to drink fluids in a quantity that keeps them just ahead 
of their thirst. Intractable ECFV expansion, despite 
dietary salt restriction and diuretic therapy, may be an 
indication to start renal replacement therapy. Hyper-
kalemia often responds to dietary restriction of potas-
sium, avoidance of potassium supplements (including 
occult sources, such as dietary salt substitutes) as well 
as potassium-retaining medications (especially ACE 
inhibitors or ARBs), or the use of kaliuretic diuretics.  
Kaliuretic diuretics promote urinary potassium excre-
tion, while potassium-binding resins, such as calcium 
resonium or sodium polystyrene, can promote potas-
sium loss through the GI tract and may reduce the 
incidence of hyperkalemia in CKD patients. Intractable 
hyperkalemia is an indication (although uncommon) 
to consider institution of dialysis in a CKD patient. The 
renal tubular acidosis and subsequent anion-gap meta-
bolic acidosis in progressive CKD will respond to alkali 
supplementation, typically with sodium bicarbonate. 
Recent studies suggest that this replacement should be 
considered when the serum bicarbonate concentration 
falls below 20–23 mmol/L to avoid the protein catabolic 
state seen with even mild degrees of metabolic acidosis 
and to slow the progression of CKD.
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
129
Disorders of Calcium and  
Phosphate Metabolism
The principal complications of abnormalities of calcium 
and phosphate metabolism in CKD occur in the skeleton 
and the vascular bed, with occasional severe involvement 
of extraosseous soft tissues. It is likely that disorders of 
bone turnover and disorders of vascular and soft tissue 
calcification are related to each other (Fig. 11-2).
Bone manifestations of CKD
The major disorders of bone disease can be classified 
into those associated with high bone turnover with 
increased PTH levels (including osteitis fibrosa cystica, 
the classic lesion of secondary hyperparathyroidism) 
and low bone turnover with low or normal PTH levels 
(adynamic bone disease and osteomalacia).
The pathophysiology of secondary hyperparathy-
roidism and the consequent high-turnover bone disease 
is related to abnormal mineral metabolism through the 
following events: (1) declining GFR leads to reduced 
excretion of phosphate and, thus, phosphate retention; 
(2) the retained phosphate stimulates increased synthe-
sis of PTH and growth of parathyroid gland mass; and 
(3) decreased levels of ionized calcium, resulting from 
diminished calcitriol production by the failing kidney as 
well as phosphate retention, also stimulate PTH produc-
tion. Low calcitriol levels contribute to hyperparathy-
roidism, both by leading to hypocalcemia and also by a 
direct effect on PTH gene transcription. These changes 
start to occur when the GFR falls below 60 mL/min.
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) is part of a 
family of phosphatonins that promotes renal phosphate 
excretion. Recent studies have shown that levels of this 
hormone, secreted by osteocytes, increases early in the 
course of CKD. It may defend normal serum phospho-
rus in at least three ways: (1) increased renal phosphate 
excretion; (2) stimulation of PTH, which also increases 
renal phosphate excretion; and (3) suppression of the 
formation of 1,25(OH)2D3, leading to diminished phos-
phorus absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. Inter-
estingly, high levels of FGF-23 are also an independent 
risk factor for left ventricular hypertrophy and mortality 
in dialysis patients. Moreover, elevated levels of FGF-23 
may indicate the need for therapeutic intervention (e.g., 
phosphate restriction), even when serum phosphate lev-
els are within the normal range.
Hyperparathyroidism stimulates bone turnover and 
leads to osteitis fibrosa cystica. Bone histology shows 
abnormal osteoid, bone and bone marrow fibrosis, and 
in advanced stages, the formation of bone cysts, some-
times with hemorrhagic elements so that they appear 
brown in color, hence the term brown tumor. Clinical 
manifestations of severe hyperparathyroidism include 
bone pain and fragility, brown tumors, compression 
syndromes, tumors, and erythropoietin resistance in 
part related to the bone marrow fibrosis. Furthermore, 
PTH itself is considered a uremic toxin, and high levels 
are associated with muscle weakness, fibrosis of cardiac 
muscle, and nonspecific constitutional symptoms.
Low-turnover bone disease can be grouped into two 
categories—adynamic bone disease and osteomalacia. In 
the latter condition, there is accumulation of unmineral-
ized bone matrix that may be caused by a number of pro-
cesses, including vitamin D deficiency, metabolic acidosis, 
and in the past, aluminum deposition. Adynamic bone 
disease is increasing in prevalence, especially among dia-
betics and the elderly. It is characterized by reduced bone 
volume and mineralization and may result from excessive 
suppression of PTH production, chronic inflammation, 
or both. Suppression of PTH can result from the use of 
vitamin D preparations or from excessive calcium expo-
sure in the form of calcium-containing phosphate binders 
or high-calcium dialysis solutions. Complications of ady-
namic bone disease include an increased incidence of 
fracture and bone pain and an association with increased 
vascular and cardiac calcification.
Calcium, phosphorus, and the  
cardiovascular system
Recent epidemiologic evidence has shown a strong asso-
ciation between hyperphosphatemia and increased car-
diovascular mortality rate in patients with stage 5 CKD 
and even in patients with earlier stages of CKD. Hyper-
phosphatemia and hypercalcemia are associated with 
increased vascular calcification, but it is unclear whether 
the excessive mortality rate is mediated by this mecha-
nism. Studies using CT and electron-beam CT scanning 
show that CKD patients have calcification of the media 
in coronary arteries and even heart valves that appear to 
be orders of magnitude greater than that in patients with-
out renal disease. The magnitude of the calcification is 
proportional to age and hyperphosphatemia and is also 
associated with low PTH levels and low bone turnover. 
It is possible that in patients with advanced kidney dis-
ease, ingested calcium cannot be deposited in bones with 
low turnover and therefore is deposited at extraosse-
ous sites, such as the vascular bed and soft tissues. It is 
interesting in this regard that there is also an association 
between osteoporosis and vascular calcification in the 
general population. Finally, there is recent evidence indi-
cating that hyperphosphatemia can induce a change in 
gene expression in vascular cells to an osteoblast-like pro-
file, leading to vascular calcification and even ossification.
Other complications of abnormal  
mineral metabolism
Calciphylaxis (calcific uremic arteriolopathy) is a devas-
tating condition seen almost exclusively in patients with 
130
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
advanced CKD. It is heralded by livedo reticularis and 
advances to patches of ischemic necrosis, especially on the 
legs, thighs, abdomen, and breasts (Fig. 11-3). Patholog-
ically, there is evidence of vascular occlusion in associa-
tion with extensive vascular and soft tissue calcification. 
It appears that this condition is increasing in incidence. 
Originally it was ascribed to severe abnormalities in cal-
cium and phosphorus control in dialysis patients, usually 
associated with advanced hyperparathyroidism. However, 
more recently, calciphylaxis has been seen with increas-
ing frequency in the absence of severe hyperparathyroid-
ism. Other etiologies have been suggested, including 
the increased use of oral calcium as a phosphate binder. 
Warfarin is commonly used in hemodialysis patients, and 
one of the effects of warfarin therapy is to decrease the 
vitamin K–dependent regeneration of matrix GLA pro-
tein. This latter protein is important in preventing vascu-
lar calcification. Thus, warfarin treatment is considered a 
risk factor for calciphylaxis, and if a patient develops this 
syndrome, this medication should be discontinued and 
replaced with alternative forms of anticoagulation.
Treatment	
Disorders of Calcium and Phosphate 
Metabolism
The optimal management of secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism and osteitis fibrosa is prevention. Once the 
parathyroid gland mass is very large, it is difficult to con-
trol the disease. Careful attention should be paid to the 
plasma phosphate concentration in CKD patients, who 
should be counseled on a low-phosphate diet as well as 
Figure 11-3
Calciphylaxis. This peritoneal dialysis patient was on 
chronic warfarin therapy for prophylactic anticoagulation for 
a mechanical heart valve. She slept with the dialysis catheter 
pressed between her legs. A small abrasion was followed 
by progressive skin necrosis along the catheter tract on her 
inner thighs. Despite treatment with hyperbaric oxygen, intra-
venous thiosulfate, and discontinuation of warfarin, she suc-
cumbed to systemic complications of the necrotic process.
the appropriate use of phosphate-binding agents. These 
are agents that are taken with meals and complex the 
dietary phosphate to limit its GI absorption. Examples of 
phosphate binders are calcium acetate and calcium car-
bonate. A major side effect of calcium-based phosphate 
binders is total-body calcium accumulation and hyper-
calcemia, especially in patients with low-turnover bone 
disease. Sevelamer and lanthanum are non-calcium-
containing polymers that also function as phosphate 
binders; they do not predispose CKD patients to hyper-
calcemia and may attenuate calcium deposition in the 
vascular bed.
Calcitriol exerts a direct suppressive effect on PTH 
secretion and also indirectly suppresses PTH secretion 
by raising the concentration of ionized calcium. How-
ever, calcitriol therapy may result in hypercalcemia and/
or hyperphosphatemia through increased GI absorp-
tion of these minerals. Certain analogues of calcitriol are 
available (e.g., paricalcitol) that suppress PTH secretion 
with less attendant hypercalcemia.
Recognition of the role of the extracellular calcium-
sensing receptor has led to the development of cal-
cimimetic agents that enhance the sensitivity of the 
parathyroid cell to the suppressive effect of calcium. 
This class of drug, which includes cinacalcet, produces a 
dose-dependent reduction in PTH and plasma calcium 
concentration in some patients.
Current KDOQI guidelines recommend a target PTH 
level between 150 and 300 pg/mL, recognizing that 
very low PTH levels are associated with adynamic bone 
disease and possible consequences of fracture and 
ectopic calcification.
Cardiovascular Abnormalities
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of morbid-
ity and mortality in patients at every stage of CKD. 
The incremental risk of cardiovascular disease in those 
with CKD compared to the age- and sex-matched gen-
eral population ranges from 10- to 200-fold, depending 
on the stage of CKD. Between 30 and 45% of patients 
reaching stage 5 CKD already have advanced cardio-
vascular complications. As a result, most patients with 
CKD succumb to cardiovascular disease (Fig. 11-4) 
before ever reaching stage 5 CKD. Thus, the focus of 
patient care in earlier CKD stages should be directed to 
prevention of cardiovascular complications.
Ischemic vascular disease
The presence of any stage of CKD is a major risk fac-
tor for ischemic cardiovascular disease, including occlu-
sive coronary, cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular 
disease. The increased prevalence of vascular disease in 
CKD patients derives from both traditional (“classic”) 
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
131
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No DM/CKD
DM no CKD
CKD no DM
DM+CKD
Dialysis
9%
15%
25%
30%
40%
Medicare Cohort, 1998–99, %
Figure 11-4
U.S. Renal Data System showing increased likelihood of 
dying rather than starting dialysis or reaching stage 5 chronic 
kidney disease (CKD). 1 , Death; 2 , ESRD/D; 3 , event-free. 
DM; diabetes mellitus. (Adapted from RN Foley et al: J Am 
Soc Nephrol 16:489-95, 2005.)
other hand, an increase upon subsequent testing suggests 
cardiac injury. Therefore, the trend in levels over the 
hours after presentation may be more informative than a 
single, elevated level. Interestingly, consistently elevated 
levels are an independent prognostic factor for adverse 
cardiovascular events in this population.
Heart failure
Abnormal cardiac function secondary to myocardial 
ischemia, left ventricular hypertrophy, and frank car-
diomyopathy, in combination with the salt and water 
retention that can be seen with CKD, often results in 
heart failure or even episodes of pulmonary edema. 
Heart failure can be a consequence of diastolic or sys-
tolic dysfunction, or both. A form of “low-pressure” 
pulmonary edema can also occur in advanced CKD, 
manifesting as shortness of breath and a “bat wing” dis-
tribution of alveolar edema fluid on the chest x-ray. 
This finding can occur even in the absence of ECFV 
overload and is associated with normal or mildly ele-
vated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. This process 
has been ascribed to increased permeability of alveolar 
capillary membranes as a manifestation of the uremic 
state, and it responds to dialysis. Other CKD-related 
risk factors, including anemia and sleep apnea, may con-
tribute to the risk of heart failure.
Hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy
Hypertension is one of the most common complications 
of CKD. It usually develops early during the course of 
CKD and is associated with adverse outcomes, includ-
ing the development of ventricular hypertrophy and a 
more rapid loss of renal function. Many studies have 
shown a relationship between the level of blood pres-
sure and the rate of progression of diabetic and non-
diabetic kidney disease. Left ventricular hypertrophy 
and dilated cardiomyopathy are among the strongest 
risk factors for cardiovascular morbidity and mortal-
ity in patients with CKD and are thought to be related 
primarily, but not exclusively, to prolonged hyperten-
sion and ECFV overload. In addition, anemia and the 
placement of an arteriovenous fistula for hemodialysis 
can generate a high cardiac output state and consequent 
heart failure.
The absence of hypertension may signify the pres-
ence of a salt-wasting form of renal disease, the effect of 
antihypertensive therapy, or volume depletion or may 
signify poor left ventricular function. Indeed, in epi-
demiologic studies of dialysis patients, low blood pres-
sure actually carries a worse prognosis than does high 
blood pressure. This mechanism, in part, accounts for 
the “reverse causation” seen in dialysis patients, wherein 
the presence of traditional risk factors, such as hyperten-
sion, hyperlipidemia, and obesity, appear to portend a 
and nontraditional (CKD-related) risk factors. Tradi-
tional risk factors include hypertension, hypervolemia, 
dyslipidemia, sympathetic overactivity, and hyperho-
mocysteinemia. The CKD-related risk factors comprise 
anemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperparathyroidism, sleep 
apnea, and generalized inflammation. The inflammatory 
state associated with a reduction in kidney function is 
reflected in increased circulating acute-phase reactants, 
such as inflammatory cytokines and C-reactive pro-
tein, with a corresponding fall in the “negative acute-
phase reactants,” such as serum albumin and fetuin. The 
inflammatory state appears to accelerate vascular occlu-
sive disease, and low levels of fetuin may permit more 
rapid vascular calcification, especially in the face of 
hyperphosphatemia. Other abnormalities seen in CKD 
may augment myocardial ischemia, including left ven-
tricular hypertrophy and microvascular disease. Coro-
nary reserve, defined as the increase in coronary blood 
flow in response to greater demand, is also attenuated. 
There is diminished availability of nitric oxide because 
of increased concentration of asymmetric dimethyl-1-
arginine and increased scavenging by reactive oxygen 
species. In addition, hemodialysis, with its attendant 
episodes of hypotension and hypovolemia, may further 
aggravate coronary ischemia. Interestingly, however, 
the largest increment in cardiovascular mortality rate in 
dialysis patients is not necessarily directly associated with 
documented acute myocardial infarction but, instead, 
presents with congestive heart failure and all of its mani-
festations, including sudden death.
Cardiac troponin levels are frequently elevated in 
CKD without evidence of acute ischemia. The eleva-
tion complicates the diagnosis of acute myocardial 
infarction in this population. Serial measurements may 
be needed, and if the level is unchanged, it is possible 
that there is no acute myocardial ischemia. On the 
132
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
better prognosis. Importantly, these observations derive 
from cross-sectional studies of late-stage CKD patients 
and should not be interpreted to discourage appropri-
ate management of these risk factors in CKD patients, 
especially at early stages. In contrast to the general pop-
ulation, it is possible that in late-stage CKD, low blood 
pressure, reduced body mass index, and hypolipidemia 
indicate the presence of an advanced malnutrition-
inflammation state, with poor prognosis.
The use of exogenous erythropoiesis-stimulating 
agents can increase blood pressure and the requirement 
for antihypertensive drugs. Chronic ECFV overload is 
also a contributor to hypertension, and improvement in 
blood pressure can often be seen with the use of dietary 
sodium restriction, diuretics, and fluid removal with 
dialysis. Nevertheless, because of activation of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone axis and other disturbances in 
the balance of vasoconstrictors and vasodilators, some 
patients remain hypertensive despite careful attention to 
ECFV status.
Treatment	
Cardiovascular Abnormalities
Management of Hypertension  There 
are two overall goals of therapy for hypertension in 
these patients: to slow the progression of the kidney 
disease itself, and to prevent the extrarenal compli-
cations of high blood pressure, such as cardiovascu-
lar disease and stroke. In all patients with CKD, blood 
pressure should be controlled to levels recommended 
by national guideline panels. In CKD patients with 
diabetes or proteinuria >1 g per 24 h, blood pressure 
should be reduced to 125/75, if achievable without 
prohibitive adverse effects. Salt restriction should be 
the first line of therapy. When volume management 
alone is not sufficient, the choice of antihypertensive 
agent is similar to that in the general population. The 
ACE inhibitors and ARBs slow the rate of decline of kid-
ney function, but occasionally can precipitate an epi-
sode of acute kidney injury, especially when used in 
patients with ischemic renovascular disease. The use 
of ACE inhibitors and ARBs may also be complicated 
by the development of hyperkalemia. Often the con-
comitant use of a kaliuretic diuretic, such as metola-
zone, can improve potassium excretion in addition to 
improving blood pressure control. Potassium-sparing 
diuretics should be used with caution or avoided alto-
gether in most patients. Indeed, increased usage of 
spironolactone for the management of heart failure 
has resulted in an increase in serious hyperkalemic 
events in patients with reduced kidney function.
Management 
of 
Cardiovascular 
Disease  There are many strategies available to 
treat the traditional and nontraditional risk factors in 
CKD patients. While these have been proved effec-
tive in the general population, there is little evidence 
for their benefit in patients with advanced CKD, espe-
cially those on dialysis. Certainly hypertension, ele-
vated serum levels of homocysteine, and dyslipidemia 
promote atherosclerotic disease and are treatable 
complications of CKD. Renal disease complicated by 
nephrotic syndrome is associated with a very ath-
erogenic lipid profile and hypercoagulability, which 
increases the risk of occlusive vascular disease. Since 
diabetes mellitus and hypertension are the two most 
frequent causes of advanced CKD, it is not surprising 
that cardiovascular disease is the most frequent cause 
of death in dialysis patients. The role of “inflamma-
tion” may be quantitatively more important in patients 
with kidney disease, and the treatment of more tradi-
tional risk factors may result in only modest success. 
However, modulation of traditional risk factors may 
be the only weapon in the therapeutic armamentar-
ium for these patients until the nature of inflamma-
tion in CKD and its treatment are better understood.
Lifestyle changes, including regular exercise, should 
be advocated but are not often implemented. Hyper-
lipidemia in patients with CKD should be managed 
according to national guidelines. If dietary measures 
are not sufficient, preferred lipid-lowering medications, 
such as statins, should be used. Again, the use of these 
agents has not been of proven benefit for patients with 
advanced CKD.
Pericardial disease
Chest pain with respiratory accentuation, accompanied 
by a friction rub, is diagnostic of pericarditis. Classic 
electrocardiographic abnormalities include PR-interval 
depression and diffuse ST-segment elevation. Pericar-
ditis can be accompanied by pericardial effusion that is 
seen on echocardiography and can rarely lead to tam-
ponade. However, the pericardial effusion can be 
asymptomatic, and pericarditis can be seen without sig-
nificant effusion.
Pericarditis is observed in advanced uremia, and with 
the advent of timely initiation of dialysis, is not as com-
mon as it once was. It is now more often observed in 
underdialyzed, nonadherent patients than in those start-
ing dialysis.
Treatment	
Pericardial Disease
Uremic pericarditis is an absolute indication for the ur-
gent initiation of dialysis or for intensification of the 
dialysis prescription in those already receiving dialysis. 
Because of the propensity to hemorrhage in pericardial 
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
133
fluid, hemodialysis should be performed without hepa-
rin. A pericardial drainage procedure should be con-
sidered in patients with recurrent pericardial effusion, 
especially with echocardiographic signs of impending 
tamponade. Nonuremic causes of pericarditis and effu-
sion include viral, malignant, tuberculous, and autoim-
mune etiologies. It may also be seen after myocardial 
infarction and as a complication of treatment with the 
antihypertensive drug minoxidil.
Hematologic Abnormalities
Anemia
A normocytic, normochromic anemia is observed 
as early as stage 3 CKD and is almost universal by 
stage 4. The primary cause in patients with CKD is 
insufficient production of erythropoietin (EPO) by 
the diseased kidneys. Additional factors include iron 
deficiency, acute and chronic inflammation with 
impaired iron utilization (“anemia of chronic dis-
ease”), severe hyperparathyroidism with consequent 
bone marrow fibrosis, and shortened red cell survival 
in the uremic environment. In addition, comorbid 
conditions such as hemoglobinopathy can worsen the 
anemia (Table 11-5).
The anemia of CKD is associated with a number 
of adverse pathophysiologic consequences, includ-
ing decreased tissue oxygen delivery and utilization, 
increased cardiac output, ventricular dilation, and ven-
tricular hypertrophy. Clinical manifestations include 
fatigue and diminished exercise tolerance, angina, heart 
failure, decreased cognition and mental acuity, and 
impaired host defense against infection. In addition, 
anemia may play a role in growth retardation in chil-
dren with CKD. While many studies in CKD patients 
have found that anemia and resistance to exogenous 
EPO are associated with a poor prognosis, the relative 
contribution to a poor outcome of the low hemato-
crit itself, versus inflammation as a cause of the anemia, 
remains unclear.
Table 11-5
Causes of Anemia in CKD
Relative deficiency of erythropoietin
Diminished red blood cell survival
Bleeding diathesis
Iron deficiency
Hyperparathyroidism/bone marrow fibrosis
“Chronic inflammation”
Folate or vitamin B12 deficiency
Hemoglobinopathy
Comorbid conditions: hypo/hyperthyroidism, pregnancy, 
HIV-associated disease, autoimmune disease, immuno-
suppressive drugs
Treatment	
Anemia
The availability of recombinant human EPO and modi-
fied EPO products, such as darbepoetin-alpha, has 
been one of the most significant advances in the 
care of renal patients since the introduction of dialy-
sis and renal transplantation. The routine use of these  
products has obviated the need for regular blood 
transfusions in severely anemic CKD patients, thus 
dramatically reducing the incidence of transfusion-
associated infections and iron overload. Frequent 
blood transfusions in dialysis patients also leads to the 
development of allo-antibodies that could sensitize 
the patient to donor kidney antigens and make renal 
transplantation more problematic.
Adequate bone marrow iron stores should be avail-
able before treatment with EPO is initiated. Iron supple-
mentation is usually essential to ensure an optimal 
response to EPO in patients with CKD because the de-
mand for iron by the marrow frequently exceeds the 
amount of iron that is immediately available for eryth-
ropoiesis (measured by percent transferrin saturation), 
as well as the amount in iron stores (measured by serum 
ferritin). For the CKD patient not yet on dialysis or the 
patient treated with peritoneal dialysis, oral iron supple-
mentation should be attempted. If there is GI intoler-
ance, the patient may have to undergo IV iron infusion. 
For patients on hemodialysis, IV iron can be adminis-
tered during dialysis. In addition to iron, an adequate 
supply of other major substrates and cofactors for red 
cell production must be ensured, including vitamin B12 
and folate. Anemia resistant to recommended doses of 
EPO in the face of adequate iron stores may be due to 
some combination of the following: acute or chronic 
inflammation, inadequate dialysis, severe hyperparathy-
roidism, chronic blood loss or hemolysis, chronic infec-
tion, or malignancy. Patients with a hemoglobinopathy, 
such as sickle cell disease or thalassemia, will usually 
not respond normally to exogenous EPO; however, an 
increase in hemoglobin concentration is still seen in 
many of these patients. Blood transfusions increase the 
risk of hepatitis, iron overload, and transplant sensitiza-
tion; they should be avoided unless the anemia fails to 
respond to EPO and the patient is symptomatic.
At least three randomized, controlled trials of eryth-
ropoietin-stimulating agents in CKD have failed to show 
an improvement in cardiovascular outcomes with this 
therapy. Indeed, there has been an indication that the 
use of EPO in CKD may be associated with an increased 
risk of stroke in those with type 2 diabetes, an increase 
in thromboembolic events, and perhaps a faster pro-
gression to the need for dialysis. Therefore, any benefit 
in terms of improvement of anemic symptoms needs to 
be balanced against the potential cardiovascular risk of 
EPO therapy in CKD. While further studies are needed, it 
134
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
is quite clear that complete normalization of the hemo-
globin concentration has not been demonstrated to be 
of incremental benefit to CKD patients. Current practice 
is to target a hemoglobin concentration of 100–115 g/L.
Abnormal hemostasis
Patients with later stages of CKD may have a prolonged 
bleeding time, decreased activity of platelet factor III, 
abnormal platelet aggregation and adhesiveness, and 
impaired prothrombin consumption. Clinical manifes-
tations include an increased tendency to bleeding and 
bruising, prolonged bleeding from surgical incisions, 
menorrhagia, and spontaneous GI bleeding. Interest-
ingly, CKD patients also have a greater susceptibility 
to thromboembolism, especially if they have renal dis-
ease that includes nephrotic-range proteinuria. The lat-
ter condition results in hypoalbuminemia and renal loss 
of anticoagulant factors, which can lead to a thrombo-
philic state.
Treatment	
Abnormal Hemostasis
Abnormal bleeding time and coagulopathy in patients 
with renal failure may be reversed temporarily with 
desmopressin (DDAVP), cryoprecipitate, IV conjugated 
estrogens, blood transfusions, and EPO therapy. Optimal 
dialysis will usually correct a prolonged bleeding time.
Given the coexistence of bleeding disorders and 
a propensity to thrombosis that is unique in the CKD 
patient, decisions about anticoagulation that have a 
favorable risk-benefit profile in the general population 
may not be applicable to the patient with advanced 
CKD. One example is warfarin anticoagulation for atrial 
fibrillation: the decision to anticoagulate should be 
made on an individual basis in the CKD patient, as there 
appears to be a greater risk of bleeding complications.
Certain anticoagulants, such as fractionated low-
molecular-weight heparin, may need to be avoided or 
dose adjusted in these patients, with monitoring of fac-
tor Xa activity where available. It is often more prudent 
to use conventional high-molecular-weight heparin, 
titrated to the measured partial thromboplastin time, in 
hospitalized patients requiring an alternative to warfarin 
anticoagulation.
Neuromuscular Abnormalities
Central nervous system (CNS), peripheral, and 
autonomic neuropathy as well as abnormalities in mus-
cle structure and function are all well-recognized com-
plications of CKD. Retained nitrogenous metabolites 
and middle molecules, including PTH, contribute to 
the pathophysiology of neuromuscular abnormalities. 
Subtle clinical manifestations of uremic neuromuscular 
disease usually become evident at stage 3 CKD. Early 
manifestations of CNS complications include mild 
disturbances in memory and concentration and sleep 
disturbance. Neuromuscular irritability, including hiccups, 
ramps, and fasciculations or twitching of muscles, becomes 
evident at later stages. In advanced untreated kidney 
failure, asterixis, myoclonus, seizures, and coma can be 
seen.
Peripheral neuropathy usually becomes clinically evi-
dent after the patient reaches stage 4 CKD, although 
electrophysiologic and histologic evidence occurs earlier. 
Initially, sensory nerves are involved more than motor, 
lower extremities more than upper, and distal parts of the 
extremities more than proximal. The “restless legs syn-
drome” is characterized by ill-defined sensations of some-
times debilitating discomfort in the legs and feet relieved 
by frequent leg movement. If dialysis is not instituted 
soon after onset of sensory abnormalities, motor involve-
ment follows, including muscle weakness. Evidence of 
peripheral neuropathy without another cause (e.g., diabe-
tes mellitus) is a firm indication for starting renal replace-
ment therapy. Many of the complications described 
above will resolve with dialysis, although subtle nonspe-
cific abnormalities may persist. Successful renal transplan-
tation may reverse residual neurologic changes.
Gastrointestinal and Nutritional 
Abnormalities
Uremic fetor, a urine-like odor on the breath, derives from 
the breakdown of urea to ammonia in saliva and is often 
associated with an unpleasant metallic taste (dysgeusia). 
Gastritis, peptic disease, and mucosal ulcerations at any 
level of the GI tract occur in uremic patients and can 
lead to abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and GI bleed-
ing. These patients are also prone to constipation, which 
can be worsened by the administration of calcium and 
iron supplements. The retention of uremic toxins also 
leads to anorexia, nausea, and vomiting.
Protein restriction may be useful to decrease nausea 
and vomiting; however, it may put the patient at risk 
for malnutrition and should be carried out, if possible, 
in consultation with a registered dietitian specializing 
in the management of CKD patients. Protein-energy 
malnutrition, a consequence of low protein and caloric 
intake, is common in advanced CKD and is often an 
indication for initiation of renal replacement therapy. In 
addition to diminished intake, these patients are resistant 
to the anabolic actions of insulin and other hormones 
and growth factors. Metabolic acidosis and the activa-
tion of inflammatory cytokines can promote protein 
catabolism. Assessment for protein-energy malnutri-
tion should begin at stage 3 CKD. A number of indices 
are useful in this assessment and include dietary history, 
including food diary and subjective global assessment; 
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
135
edema-free body weight; and measurement of urinary 
protein nitrogen appearance. Dual-energy x-ray absorp-
tiometry is now widely used to estimate lean body mass 
versus ECFV. Adjunctive tools include clinical signs, 
such as skin-fold thickness, mid-arm muscle circumfer-
ence, and additional laboratory tests such as serum pre-
albumin and cholesterol levels. Nutritional guidelines 
for patients with CKD are summarized in the “Treat-
ment” section below.
Endocrine-Metabolic Disturbances
Glucose metabolism is impaired in CKD, as evidenced 
by a slowing of the rate at which blood glucose lev-
els decline after a glucose load. However, fasting blood 
glucose is usually normal or only slightly elevated, and 
the mild glucose intolerance does not require specific 
therapy. Because the kidney contributes to insulin 
removal from the circulation, plasma levels of insu-
lin are slightly to moderately elevated in most uremic 
patients, both in the fasting and postprandial states. 
Because of this diminished renal degradation of insu-
lin, patients on insulin therapy may need progres-
sive reduction in dose as their renal function worsens. 
Many hypoglycemic agents require dose reduction in 
renal failure, and some, such as metformin, are contra-
indicated when the GFR is less than half of normal.
In women with CKD, estrogen levels are low, and 
menstrual abnormalities and inability to carry pregnan-
cies to term are common. When the GFR has declined 
to ∼40 mL/min, pregnancy is associated with a high 
rate of spontaneous abortion, with only ∼20% of preg-
nancies leading to live births, and pregnancy may has-
ten the progression of the kidney disease itself. Women 
with CKD who are contemplating pregnancy should 
consult first with a nephrologist in conjunction with an 
obstetrician specializing in high-risk pregnancy. Men 
with CKD have reduced plasma testosterone levels, and 
sexual dysfunction and oligospermia may supervene. 
Sexual maturation may be delayed or impaired in ado-
lescent children with CKD, even among those treated 
with dialysis. Many of these abnormalities improve or 
reverse with intensive dialysis or most importantly with 
successful renal transplantation.
Dermatologic Abnormalities
Abnormalities of the skin are prevalent in progressive 
CKD. Pruritus is quite common and one of the most 
vexing manifestations of the uremic state. In advanced 
CKD, even on dialysis, patients may become more 
pigmented, and this is felt to reflect the deposition of 
retained pigmented metabolites, or urochromes. Although 
many of the cutaneous abnormalities improve with 
dialysis, pruritus is often tenacious. The first lines of 
management are to rule out unrelated skin disorders, 
such as scabies, and to treat hyperphosphatemia, which 
can cause itch. EPO therapy was initially reported to 
improve uremic pruritus, although that is not always the 
case. Local moisturizers, mild topical glucocorticoids, 
oral antihistamines, and ultraviolet radiation have been 
reported to be helpful.
A skin condition unique to CKD patients called 
nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy consists of progressive 
subcutaneous induration, especially on the arms and 
legs. The condition is similar to scleromyxedema and is 
seen in patients with CKD who have been exposed to 
the magnetic resonance contrast agent gadolinium. Cur-
rent recommendations are that patients with CKD stage 
2 (GFR 30–59 mL/min) should minimize exposure 
to gadolinium, and those with CKD stages 3–5 (GFR 
<30 mL/min) should avoid the use of gadolinium 
agents unless it is medically necessary. Concomitant 
liver disease appears to be a risk factor. However, no 
patient should be denied an imaging investigation that 
is critical to clinical management, and under such cir-
cumstances, rapid removal of gadolinium by hemodialy-
sis (even in patients not yet receiving renal replacement 
therapy) shortly after the imaging procedure may miti-
gate this sometimes devastating complication.
Evaluation and Management of 
Patients with CKD
Initial Approach
History and physical examination
Symptoms and overt signs of kidney disease are often 
subtle or absent until renal failure supervenes. Thus, 
the diagnosis of kidney disease often surprises patients 
and may be a cause of skepticism and denial. Particu-
lar aspects of the history that are germane to renal dis-
ease include a history of hypertension (which can cause 
CKD or more commonly be a consequence of CKD), 
diabetes mellitus, abnormal urinalyses, and problems 
with pregnancy such as preeclampsia or early pregnancy 
loss. A careful drug history should be elicited: patients 
may not volunteer use of analgesics, for example. Other 
drugs to consider include nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory agents, gold, penicillamine, antimicrobials, che-
motherapeutic agents, antiretroviral agents, proton 
pump inhibitors, phosphate-containing bowel cathar-
tics, and lithium, as well as prior exposure to medical 
imaging radiocontrast agents. In evaluating the uremic 
syndrome, questions about appetite, weight loss, nau-
sea, hiccups, peripheral edema, muscle cramps, pruritus, 
and restless legs are especially helpful. A careful fam-
ily history of kidney disease, together with assessment 
of manifestations in other organ systems such as audi-
tory, visual, integumentary and others, may lead to the 
diagnosis of a heritable form of CKD (e.g., Alport or 
136
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
Fabry syndrome, cystinuria, among others) or shared 
environmental exposure to nephrotoxic agents (e.g., 
heavy metals, aristolochic acid). It should be noted that 
clustering of CKD, sometimes of different etiologies, is 
often observed within families.
The physical examination should focus on blood 
pressure and target organ damage from hypertension. 
Thus, funduscopy and precordial examination (left ven-
tricular heave, a fourth heart sound) should be carried 
out. Funduscopy is important in the diabetic patient, as 
it may show evidence of diabetic retinopathy, which is 
associated with nephropathy. Other physical examina-
tion manifestations of CKD include edema and sensory 
polyneuropathy. The finding of asterixis or a pericardial 
friction rub not attributable to other causes usually sig-
nifies the presence of the uremic syndrome.
Laboratory investigation
Laboratory studies should focus on a search for clues 
to an underlying causative or aggravating disease pro-
cess and on the degree of renal damage and its con-
sequences. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis, 
looking for multiple myeloma, should be obtained in all 
patients >35 years with unexplained CKD, especially if 
there is associated anemia and elevated, or even inap-
propriately normal, serum calcium concentration in 
the face of renal insufficiency. In the presence of glo-
merulonephritis, autoimmune diseases such as lupus and 
underlying infectious etiologies such as hepatitis B and 
C and HIV should be assessed. Serial measurements of 
renal function should be obtained to determine the pace 
of renal deterioration and ensure that the disease is truly 
chronic rather than acute or subacute and hence poten-
tially reversible. Serum concentrations of calcium, phos-
phorus, vitamin D, and PTH should be measured to 
evaluate metabolic bone disease. Hemoglobin concen-
tration, iron, B12, and folate should also be evaluated. 
A 24-h urine collection may be helpful, as protein 
excretion >300 mg may be an indication for therapy 
with ACE inhibitors or ARBs.
Imaging studies
The most useful imaging study is a renal ultrasound, 
which can verify the presence of two kidneys, deter-
mine if they are symmetric, provide an estimate of kid­
ney size, and rule out renal masses and evidence of 
obstruction. Since it takes time for kidneys to shrink 
as a result of chronic disease, the finding of bilaterally 
small kidneys supports the diagnosis of CKD of long-
standing duration, with an irreversible component of 
scarring. If the kidney size is normal, it is possible that 
the renal disease is acute or subacute. The exceptions 
are diabetic nephropathy (where kidney size is increased 
at the onset of diabetic nephropathy before CKD 
with loss of GFR supervenes), amyloidosis, and HIV 
nephropathy, where kidney size may be normal in the 
face of CKD. Polycystic kidney disease that has reached 
some degree of renal failure will almost always present 
with enlarged kidneys with multiple cysts (Chap. 16). 
A discrepancy >1 cm in kidney length suggests either 
a unilateral developmental abnormality or disease pro-
cess or renovascular disease with arterial insufficiency 
affecting one kidney more than the other. The diagnosis 
of renovascular disease can be undertaken with differ-
ent techniques, including Doppler sonography, nuclear 
medicine studies, or CT or MRI studies. If there is a 
suspicion of reflux nephropathy (recurrent childhood 
urinary tract infection, asymmetric renal size with scars 
on the renal poles), a voiding cystogram may be indi-
cated. However, in most cases by the time the patient 
has CKD, the reflux has resolved, and even if still pres-
ent, repair does not improve renal function. Radio-
graphic contrast imaging studies are not particularly 
helpful in the investigation of CKD. Intravenous or 
intraarterial dye should be avoided where possible in 
the CKD patient, especially with diabetic nephropathy, 
because of the risk of radiographic contrast dye–induced 
renal failure. When unavoidable, appropriate precau-
tionary measures include avoidance of hypovolemia 
at the time of contrast exposure, minimization of the 
dye load, and choice of radiographic contrast prepara-
tions with the least nephrotoxic potential. Additional 
measures thought to attenuate contrast-induced wors-
ening of renal function include judicious administra-
tion of sodium bicarbonate–containing solutions and 
N-acetyl-cysteine.
Renal biopsy
In the patient with bilaterally small kidneys, renal 
biopsy is not advised because (1) it is technically dif-
ficult and has a greater likelihood of causing bleeding 
and other adverse consequences, (2) there is usually so 
much scarring that the underlying disease may not be 
apparent, and (3) the window of opportunity to render 
disease-specific therapy has passed. Other contraindi-
cations to renal biopsy include uncontrolled hyperten-
sion, active urinary tract infection, bleeding diathesis 
(including ongoing anticoagulation), and severe obesity. 
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy is the favored 
approach, but a surgical or laparoscopic approach can 
be considered, especially in the patient with a single 
kidney where direct visualization and control of bleed-
ing are crucial. In the CKD patient in whom a kidney 
biopsy is indicated (e.g., suspicion of a concomitant or 
superimposed active process such as interstitial nephritis 
or in the face of accelerated loss of GFR), the bleed-
ing time should be measured, and, if increased, desmo-
pressin should be administered immediately prior to the 
procedure.
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
137
A brief run of hemodialysis (without heparin) may 
also be considered prior to renal biopsy to normalize the 
bleeding time.
Establishing the Diagnosis and 
Etiology of CKD
The most important initial diagnostic step in the evalu-
ation of a patient presenting with elevated serum creati-
nine is to distinguish newly diagnosed CKD from acute 
or subacute renal failure because the latter two conditions 
may respond to therapy specific to the disease. Previous 
measurements of serum creatinine concentration are par-
ticularly helpful in this regard. Normal values from recent 
months or even years suggest that the current extent of 
renal dysfunction could be more acute, and hence revers-
ible, than might otherwise be appreciated. In contrast, 
elevated serum creatinine concentration in the past sug-
gests that the renal disease represents the progression of a 
chronic process. Even if there is evidence of chronicity, 
there is the possibility of a superimposed acute process 
(e.g., ECFV depletion, urinary infection or obstruction, 
or nephrotoxin exposure) supervening on the chronic 
condition. If the history suggests multiple systemic mani-
festations of recent onset (e.g., fever, polyarthritis, and 
rash), it should be assumed that renal insufficiency is part 
of the acute process.
Some of the laboratory tests and imaging studies out-
lined above can be helpful. Evidence of metabolic bone 
disease with hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and 
elevated PTH and bone alkaline phosphatase levels sug-
gests chronicity. Normochromic, normocytic anemia 
suggests that the process has been ongoing for some 
time. The finding of bilaterally reduced kidney size 
(<8.5 cm in all but the smallest adults) favors CKD.
While renal biopsy can usually be performed in early 
CKD (stages 1–3), it is not always indicated. For exam-
ple, in a patient with a history of type 1 diabetes mel-
litus for 15–20 years with retinopathy, nephrotic-range 
proteinuria, and absence of hematuria, the diagnosis of 
diabetic nephropathy is very likely and biopsy is usually 
not necessary. However, if there were some other find-
ing not typical of diabetic nephropathy, such as hema-
turia or white blood cell casts, or absence of diabetic 
retinopathy, some other disease may be present and a 
biopsy may be indicated. Ischemic nephropathy is usu-
ally diagnosed clinically by the presence of long-stand-
ing hypertension, evidence of ischemic disease else-
where (e.g., cardiac or peripheral vascular disease), and 
the finding of nonnephrotic proteinuria in the absence 
of urinary blood or red cell casts. It is important to con-
sider progressive ischemic nephropathy because a small 
subset of these patients may respond to revascularization 
procedures, although this remains controversial.
In the absence of a clinical diagnosis, renal biopsy 
may be the only recourse to establish an etiology in 
early-stage CKD. However, as noted above, once the 
CKD is advanced and the kidneys are small and scarred, 
there is little utility and significant risk in attempting to 
arrive at a specific diagnosis.
Treatment	
Chronic Kidney Disease
Treatments aimed at specific causes of CKD are dis-
cussed elsewhere. Among others, these include opti-
mized glucose control in diabetes mellitus, immu-
nomodulatory agents for glomerulonephritis, and 
emerging specific therapies to retard cytogenesis in 
polycystic kidney disease. The optimal timing of both 
specific and nonspecific therapy is usually well before 
there has been a measurable decline in GFR and cer-
tainly before CKD is established (Table 11-6). It is help-
ful to sequentially measure and plot the rate of decline 
of GFR in all patients. Any acceleration in the rate of 
decline should prompt a search for superimposed 
acute or subacute processes that may be reversible. 
These include ECFV depletion, uncontrolled hyperten-
sion, urinary tract infection, new obstructive uropathy, 
exposure to nephrotoxic agents [such as nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or radiographic dye], 
and reactivation or flare of the original disease, such as 
lupus or vasculitis.
Table 11-6
Clinical Action Plan
Stage
Description
GFR,  
mL/min 
per 1.73 m2
Actiona
1
Kidney damage 
with normal  
or ↑ GFR
≥90
Diagnosis and 
treatment, treat-
ment of comor-
bid conditions, 
slowing progres-
sion, CVD risk 
reduction
2
Kidney damage 
with mild ↓ 
GFR
60–89
Estimating pro-
gression
3
Moderate ↓ 
GFR
30–59
Evaluating and 
treating  
complications
4
Severe ↓ GFR
15–29
Preparation for  
kidney replace-
ment therapy
5
Kidney failure
<15 (or 
dialysis)
Kidney replace-
ment (if uremia 
present)
aIncludes actions from preceding stages.
Abbreviations: CVD, cardiovascular disease; GFR, glomerular filtra-
tion rate.
Source: National Kidney Foundation: Am J Kidney Dis 39:S1, 2002.
138
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
Slowing the Progression of CKD  There 
is variation in the rate of decline of GFR among patients 
with CKD. However, the following interventions should 
be considered in an effort to stabilize or slow the decline 
of renal function.
Reducing 
Intraglomerular 
Hypertension 
and Proteinuria  Increased intraglomerular filtra-
tion pressures and glomerular hypertrophy develop as 
a response to loss of nephron number from different 
kidney diseases. This response is maladaptive, as it pro-
motes the ongoing decline of kidney function even if 
the inciting process has been treated or spontaneously 
resolved. Control of systemic and glomerular hyperten-
sion is important in slowing the progression of CKD. 
Therefore, in addition to reduction of cardiovascular 
disease risk, antihypertensive therapy in patients with 
CKD also aims to slow the progression of nephron injury 
by reducing intraglomerular hypertension. Elevated 
blood pressure increases proteinuria by increasing its 
flux across the glomerular capillaries. Conversely, the 
renoprotective effect of antihypertensive medications 
is gauged through the consequent reduction of pro-
teinuria. Thus, the more effective a given treatment is in 
lowering protein excretion, the greater the subsequent 
impact on protection from decline in GFR. This observa-
tion is the basis for the treatment guideline establishing 
125/75 mmHg as the target blood pressure in protein-
uric CKD patients.
ACE inhibitors and ARBs inhibit the angiotensin-
induced vasoconstriction of the efferent arterioles of 
the glomerular microcirculation. This inhibition leads to 
a reduction in both intraglomerular filtration pressure 
and proteinuria. Several controlled studies have shown 
that these drugs are effective in slowing the progression 
of renal failure in patients with advanced stages of both 
diabetic and nondiabetic CKD. This slowing in progres-
sion of CKD is strongly associated with the proteinuria-
lowering effect. In the absence of an anti-proteinuric 
response with either agent alone, combined treatment 
with both ACE inhibitors and ARBs has been considered. 
The combination is associated with a greater reduction 
in proteinuria compared to either agent alone. Insofar 
as reduction in proteinuria is a surrogate for improved 
renal outcome, the combination would appear to be 
advantageous. However, a recent randomized, con-
trolled study found a greater incidence of acute renal 
failure and adverse cardiac events from such combina-
tion therapy. It is uncertain, therefore, whether the ACE 
plus ARB therapy can be advised routinely. Adverse 
effects from these agents include cough and angio-
edema with ACE inhibitors, anaphylaxis, and hyperka-
lemia with either class. A progressive increase in serum 
creatinine concentration with these agents may suggest 
the presence of renovascular disease within the large 
or small arteries. Development of these side effects 
may mandate the use of second-line antihypertensive 
agents instead of the ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Among 
the calcium channel blockers, diltiazem and verapamil 
may exhibit superior antiproteinuric and renoprotec-
tive effects compared to the dihydropyridines. At least 
two different categories of response can be considered: 
one in which progression is strongly associated with sys-
temic and intraglomerular hypertension and proteinuria 
(e.g., diabetic nephropathy, glomerular diseases) and 
in which ACE inhibitors and ARBs are likely to be the 
first choice; and another in which proteinuria is mild or 
absent initially (e.g., adult polycystic kidney disease and 
other tubulointerstitial diseases), where the contribu-
tion of intraglomerular hypertension is less prominent, 
and other antihypertensive agents can be useful for 
control of systemic hypertension.
Slowing Progression of Diabetic 
Renal Disease  Diabetic nephropathy is now 
the leading cause of CKD requiring renal replacement 
therapy in many parts of the world, and its preva-
lence is increasing disproportionately in the devel-
oping world. Furthermore, the prognosis of diabetic 
patients on dialysis is poor, with survival compar­
able to many forms of cancer. Accordingly, it is man-
datory to develop strategies whose aim is to prevent 
or slow the progression of diabetic nephropathy in 
these patients.
Control of Blood Glucose  Excellent glycemic 
control reduces the risk of kidney disease and its pro-
gression in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
It is recommended that plasma values for preprandial 
glucose be kept in the 5.0–7.2 mmol/L (90–130 mg/dL) 
range and hemoglobin A1C should be <7%. As the GFR 
decreases with progressive nephropathy, the use and 
dose of oral hypoglycemics needs to be reevaluated. 
For example, chlorpropamide may be associated with 
prolonged hypoglycemia in patients with decreased 
renal function; metformin can cause lactic acidosis in 
the patient with renal impairment and should be dis-
continued when the GFR is reduced; and the thiazoli-
dinediones (e.g., rosiglitazone, pioglitazone, and others)  
may increase renal salt and water absorption and aggra-
vate volume-overload states, and contribute to adverse 
cardiovascular events. Finally, as renal function declines, 
renal degradation of administered insulin will also 
decline, so that less insulin may be required for glycemic 
control.
Control of Blood Pressure and Proteinuria 
Hypertension is found in the majority of type 2 diabetic 
patients at diagnosis. This finding correlates with the 
presence of albuminuria and is a strong predictor of car-
diovascular events and nephropathy. Microalbuminuria, 
 
CHAPTER 11
Chronic Kidney Disease
139
the finding of albumin in the urine not detectable by 
the urine dipstick, precedes the decline in GFR and her-
alds renal and cardiovascular complications. Testing for 
microalbumin is recommended in all diabetic patients, at 
least annually. If the patient already has established pro-
teinuria, then testing for microalbumin is not necessary. 
Antihypertensive treatment reduces albuminuria and 
diminishes its progression even in normotensive diabetic 
patients. In addition to treatment of hypertension in 
general, the use of ACE inhibitors and ARBs in particular 
is associated with additional renoprotection. These salu-
tary effects are mediated by reducing intraglomerular 
pressure and inhibition of angiotensin-driven sclerosing 
pathways, in part through inhibition of TGF-β–mediated 
pathways. Recent studies have highlighted the benefit 
of renin-angiotensin axis blockade on the develop­
ment of retinopathy in diabetic patients, but do not nec-
essarily show a clear-cut renal benefit of intervention at 
the very earliest stages, prior to onset of overt protein-
uria. In any case, as noted above, the combination of ACE 
inhibitors with ARBs is not recommended.
Protein 
Restriction  While protein restriction 
has been advocated to reduce symptoms associated 
with uremia, it may also slow the rate of renal decline 
at earlier stages of renal disease. This concept is based  
on clinical and experimental evidence that protein-
mediated hyperfiltration contributes to ongoing 
decline in renal function in many different forms of 
renal disease. A number of studies have shown that 
protein restriction may be effective in slowing the 
progression of CKD, especially proteinuric and dia-
betic renal diseases. However, the Modification of Diet 
in Renal Disease study was unable to demonstrate a 
robust benefit in delaying progression to advanced 
stages of CKD with dietary restriction of protein intake. 
Nonetheless, restriction of dietary protein intake has 
been recommended for CKD patients. KDOQI clinical 
practice guidelines include a daily protein intake of 
between 0.60 and 0.75 g/kg per day, depending upon 
patient adherence, comorbid disease, presence of pro-
teinuria, and nutritional status. It is further advised that 
at least 50% of the protein intake be of high biologic 
value. As patients approach stage 5 CKD, spontane-
ous protein intake tends to decrease, and patients may 
enter a state of protein-energy malnutrition. In these 
circumstances, a protein intake of up to 0.90 g/kg per 
day might be recommended, again with an emphasis 
on proteins of high biologic value.
Sufficient energy intake is important to prevent 
protein-calorie malnutrition, and 35 kcal/kg is recom-
mended. Monitoring of parameters of nutritional sta-
tus must accompany the dietary intervention, using 
the parameters outlined above in the section on GI and 
nutritional abnormalities.
Managing Other Complications of 
Chronic Kidney Disease
Medication 
Dose 
Adjustment  Although the 
loading dose of most drugs is not affected by CKD 
because no renal elimination is used in the calcula-
tion, the maintenance doses of many drugs will need 
to be adjusted. For those agents in which >70% excre-
tion is by a nonrenal route, such as hepatic elimination, 
dose adjustment may not be needed. Some drugs that 
should be avoided include metformin, meperidine, and 
oral hypoglycemics that are eliminated by the kidney. 
NSAIDs should be avoided because of the risk of further 
worsening of kidney function. Many antibiotics, antihy-
pertensives, and antiarrhythmics may require a reduction 
in dosage or change in the dose interval. Several online 
web-based databases for dose adjustment of medications 
according to stage of CKD or estimated GFR are avail-
able (e.g., http://www.globalrph.com/renaldosing2.htm). 
Nephrotoxic medical imaging radiocontrast agents and 
gadolinium should be avoided or used according to strict 
guidelines when medically necessary as described above.
Preparation for Renal Replacement Therapy 
(See also Chap. 13) Temporary relief of symptoms and 
signs of impending uremia, such as anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting, lassitude, and pruritus, may sometimes be 
achieved with protein restriction. However, this carries 
a significant risk of protein-energy malnutrition, and 
thus plans for more long-term management should be 
in place.
Maintenance dialysis and kidney transplantation has 
extended the lives of hundreds of thousands of patients 
with CKD worldwide. Clear indications for initiation of 
renal replacement therapy for patients with CKD include 
uremic pericarditis, encephalopathy, intractable mus-
cle cramping, anorexia, and nausea not attributable to 
reversible causes such as peptic ulcer disease, evidence 
of malnutrition, and fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, 
principally hyperkalemia or ECF volume overload, that 
are refractory to other measures.
Recommendations for the optimal time for initiation 
of renal replacement therapy have been established by 
the National Kidney Foundation in their KDOQI Guide-
lines and are based on recent evidence demonstrating 
that delaying initiation of renal replacement therapy 
until patients are malnourished or have severe uremic 
complications leads to a worse prognosis on dialysis 
or with transplantation. Because of the interindividual 
variability in the severity of uremic symptoms and renal 
function, it is ill advised to assign an arbitrary urea 
nitrogen or creatinine level to the need to start dialysis. 
Moreover, patients may become accustomed to chronic 
uremia and deny symptoms, only to find that they feel 
better with dialysis and realize in retrospect how poorly 
they were feeling before its initiation.
140
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
Previous studies suggested that starting dialysis 
before the onset of severe symptoms and signs of ure-
mia was associated with prolongation of survival. This 
led to the concept of “healthy” start and is congruent 
with the philosophy that it is better to keep patients 
feeling well all along rather than allowing them to be­-
come ill with uremia before trying to return them to 
better health with dialysis or transplantation. Although 
recent studies have not confirmed a clear association 
of early-start dialysis with improved patient survival, 
there is still merit in this approach. On a practical level, 
advanced preparation may help to avoid problems with 
the dialysis process itself (e.g., a poorly functioning fis-
tula for hemodialysis or malfunctioning peritoneal dialy-
sis catheter) and thus preempt the morbidity associated 
with resorting to the insertion of temporary hemodialy-
sis access with its attendant risks of sepsis, bleeding, and 
thrombosis.
Patient Education  Social, psychological, and phys-
ical preparation for the transition to renal replacement 
therapy and the choice of the optimal initial modality 
are best accomplished with a gradual approach involv-
ing a multidisciplinary team. Along with conservative 
measures discussed in the sections above, it is impor-
tant to prepare patients with an intensive educational 
program, explaining the likelihood and timing of ini-
tiation of renal replacement therapy and the various 
forms of therapy available. The more knowledgeable 
that patients are about hemodialysis (both in center 
and home based), peritoneal dialysis, and kidney trans-
plantation, the easier and more appropriate will be their 
decisions. Patients who are provided with educational 
programs are more likely to choose home-based dialy-
sis therapy. This approach is of societal benefit because 
home-based therapy is less expensive and is associated 
with improved quality of life. The educational programs 
should be commenced no later than stage 4 CKD so that 
the patient has sufficient time and cognitive function to 
learn the important concepts, make informed choices, 
and implement preparatory measures for renal replace-
ment therapy.
Exploration of social service support is also impor-
tant. In those who may perform home dialysis or 
undergo preemptive renal transplantation, early educa-
tion of family members for selection and preparation of 
a home dialysis helper, or a biologically or emotionally 
related potential living kidney donor, should occur long 
before the onset of symptomatic renal failure.
Kidney transplantation (Chap. 13) offers the best 
potential for complete rehabilitation, because dialysis 
replaces only a small fraction of the kidneys’ filtration 
function and none of the other renal functions, includ-
ing endocrine and anti-inflammatory effects. Gener-
ally, kidney transplantation follows a period of dialysis 
treatment, although preemptive kidney transplantation 
(usually from a living donor) can be carried out if it is 
certain that the renal failure is irreversible.
Implications for Global Health
In distinction to the natural decline and success-
ful eradication of many devastating infectious 
diseases, there is rapid growth in the prevalence 
of metabolic and vascular disease in developing coun-
tries. Diabetes mellitus is becoming increasingly preva-
lent in these countries, perhaps due in part to change in 
dietary habits, diminished physical activity, and weight 
gain. Therefore, it follows that there will be a propor-
tionate increase in vascular and renal disease. Healthcare 
agencies must plan for improved screening for early 
detection, prevention, and treatment plans in these 
nations and must start considering options for improved 
availability of renal replacement therapies.
 Kathleen D. Liu 
I  Glenn M. Chertow 
141
 Dialysis may be required for the treatment of either 
acute or chronic kidney disease. The use of continu-
ous renal replacement therapies (CRRTs) and slow 
low-effi ciency dialysis (SLED) is specifi c to the manage-
ment of acute renal failure and is discussed in  Chap. 10 . 
These modalities are performed continuously (CRRT) 
or over 6–12 hours per session (SLED), in contrast to 
the 3–4 hours of an intermittent hemodialysis session. 
 Advantages and disadvantages of CRRT and SLED are 
discussed in  Chap. 10 . 
 Peritoneal dialysis is rarely used in developed coun-
tries for the treatment of acute renal failure because of 
the increased risk of infection and (as will be discussed 
in more detail below) less effi cient clearance per unit of 
time. The focus of the majority of this chapter will be 
on the use of peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis for 
end-stage renal disease (ESRD). 
 With the widespread availability of dialysis, the lives 
of hundreds of thousands of patients with ESRD have 
been prolonged. In the United States alone, there are 
now approximately 530,000 patients with ESRD, the 
vast majority of whom require dialysis. The incidence 
rate for ESRD is 350 cases per million population per 
year. The incidence of ESRD is disproportionately 
higher in African Americans (approximately 1000 per 
million population per year) as compared with white 
Americans (275 per million population per year). In the 
United States, the leading cause of ESRD is diabetes 
mellitus, currently accounting for nearly 55% of newly 
diagnosed cases of ESRD. Approximately one-third 
(33%) of patients have ESRD that has been attributed 
to hypertension, although it is unclear whether in these 
cases hypertension is the cause or a consequence of vas-
cular disease or other unknown causes of kidney failure. 
Other prevalent causes of ESRD include glomerulo-
nephritis, polycystic kidney disease, and obstructive 
uropathy. 
Globally, mortality rates for patients with ESRD 
are lowest in Europe and Japan but are very high 
in the developing world because of the limited 
availability of dialysis. In the United States, the mortality 
rate of patients on dialysis is approximately 18–20% 
per year, with a 5-year survival rate of approximately 
30–35%. Deaths are due mainly to cardiovascular dis-
eases and infections (approximately 50 and 15% of deaths, 
respectively). Older age, male sex, nonblack race, diabe-
tes mellitus, malnutrition, and underlying heart disease 
are important predictors of death. 
 treatment oPtions For 
esrd Patients 
 Commonly accepted criteria for initiating patients on 
maintenance dialysis include the presence of uremic 
symptoms, the presence of hyperkalemia unrespon-
sive to conservative measures, persistent extracellular 
volume expansion despite diuretic therapy, acidosis 
refractory to medical therapy, a bleeding diathesis, and 
a creatinine clearance or estimated glomerular fi ltra-
tion rate (GFR) below 10 mL/min per 1.73 m 2 (see 
 Chap. 11 for estimating equations). Timely referral 
to a nephrologist for advanced planning and creation 
of a dialysis access, education about ESRD treat-
ment options, and management of the complications 
of advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD), including 
hypertension, anemia, acidosis, and secondary hyper-
parathyroidism, is advisable. Recent data have sug-
gested that a sizable fraction of ESRD cases result 
following episodes of acute renal failure, particularly 
among persons with underlying CKD. 
 In ESRD, treatment options include hemodialysis (in 
center or at home); peritoneal dialysis, as either continu-
ous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) or continuous 
 DIALYSIS IN THE TREATMENT OF 
RENAL FAILURE 
 cHaPter 12 
142
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD); or transplantation 
(Chap. 13). Although there are significant geographic 
variations and differences in practice patterns, hemodi-
alysis remains the most common therapeutic modality 
for ESRD (>90% of patients) in the United States. In 
contrast to hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis is continu-
ous but much less efficient, in terms of solute clearance. 
While no large-scale clinical trials have been completed 
comparing outcomes among patients randomized to 
either hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, outcomes asso-
ciated with both therapies are similar in most reports, and 
the decision of which modality to select is often based on 
personal preferences and quality-of-life considerations.
Hemodialysis
Hemodialysis relies on the principles of solute diffusion 
across a semipermeable membrane. Movement of meta-
bolic waste products takes place down a concentration 
gradient from the circulation into the dialysate. The rate 
of diffusive transport increases in response to several fac-
tors, including the magnitude of the concentration gra-
dient, the membrane surface area, and the mass transfer 
coefficient of the membrane. The latter is a function of 
the porosity and thickness of the membrane, the size 
of the solute molecule, and the conditions of flow on 
the two sides of the membrane. According to laws of dif­
fusion, the larger the molecule, the slower its rate of 
transfer across the membrane. A small molecule, such as 
urea (60 Da), undergoes substantial clearance, whereas a 
larger molecule, such as creatinine (113 Da), is cleared 
less efficiently. In addition to diffusive clearance, move-
ment of waste products from the circulation into the 
dialysate may occur as a result of ultrafiltration. Con-
vective clearance occurs because of solvent drag, with 
solutes being swept along with water across the semi-
permeable dialysis membrane.
The Dialyzer
There are three essential components to hemodialysis: 
the dialyzer, the composition and delivery of the dial-
ysate, and the blood delivery system (Fig. 12-1). The 
dialyzer is a plastic chamber with the ability to perfuse 
blood and dialysate compartments simultaneously at 
very high flow rates. The surface area of modern dialy-
sis membranes in adult patients is usually in the range 
of 1.5–2.0 m2. The hollow-fiber dialyzer is the most 
common in use in the United States. These dialyzers are 
composed of bundles of capillary tubes through which 
blood circulates while dialysate travels on the outside of 
the fiber bundle.
Recent advances have led to the development of 
many different types of membrane material. Broadly, 
there are four categories of dialysis membranes: cellulose, 
substituted cellulose, cellulosynthetic, and synthetic. Over 
the past three decades, there has been a gradual switch 
Venous
Arterial
Dialysate
Dialysate
"Delivery" system
Dialysate drain
Hollow fiber
dialyzer
Arterial line
Venous line
V
Arteriovenous
fistula
Na+
Cl–
K+
Acetate–
Ca2+ Mg2+
Water treatment
(deionization
and reverse
osmosis)
Acid
concentrate
NaBicarb
NaCl
Arterial pressure
Venous pressure
Blood flow rate
Air (leak) detection
Dialysate
flow rate
Dialysate
pressure
Dialysate
conductivity
Blood (leak)
detection
A
Figure 12-1
Schema for hemodialysis.
 
CHAPTER 12
Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
143
from cellulose-derived to synthetic membranes, because 
the latter are more “biocompatible.” Bioincompatibility is 
generally defined as the ability of the membrane to acti-
vate the complement cascade. Cellulosic membranes are 
bioincompatible because of the presence of free hydroxyl 
groups on the membrane surface. In contrast, with the 
substituted cellulose membranes (e.g., cellulose acetate) 
or the cellulosynthetic membranes, the hydroxyl groups 
are chemically bound to either acetate or tertiary amino 
groups, resulting in limited complement activation. Syn-
thetic membranes, such as polysulfone, polymethylmeth-
acrylate, and polyacrylonitrile membranes, are even more 
biocompatible because of the absence of these hydroxyl 
groups. The majority of dialyzers now manufactured in 
the United States are derived from polysulfone or newer 
derivatives (polyarylethersulfone).
Reprocessing and reuse of hemodialyzers are often 
employed for patients on maintenance hemodialysis in 
the United States. However, as the manufacturing costs 
for disposable dialyzers have declined, more and more 
outpatient dialysis facilities are no longer reprocess-
ing dialyzers. In most centers employing reuse, only 
the dialyzer unit is reprocessed and reused, whereas in 
the developing world blood lines are also frequently 
reused. The reprocessing procedure can be either man-
ual or automated. It consists of the sequential rinsing 
of the blood and dialysate compartments with water, a 
chemical cleansing step with reverse ultrafiltration from 
the dialysate to the blood compartment, the testing 
of the patency of the dialyzer, and, finally, disinfection 
of the dialyzer. Formaldehyde, peracetic acid–hydrogen 
peroxide, glutaraldehyde, and bleach have all been used 
as reprocessing agents.
Dialysate
The potassium concentration of dialysate may be var-
ied from 0 to 4 mmol/L depending on the predialy-
sis serum potassium concentration. The usual dialysate 
calcium concentration in U.S. hemodialysis centers is 
1.25 mmol/L (2.5 meq/L), although modification may be 
required in selected settings (e.g., higher dialysate cal-
cium concentrations may be used in patients with hypo-
calcemia associated with secondary hyperparathyroidism 
or following parathyroidectomy). The usual dialysate 
sodium concentration is 140 mmol/L. Lower dialysate 
sodium concentrations are associated with a higher fre-
quency of hypotension, cramping, nausea, vomiting, 
fatigue, and dizziness in some patients, although may 
attenuate thirst. In patients who frequently develop 
hypotension during their dialysis run, “sodium modeling” 
to counterbalance urea-related osmolar gradients is 
often employed. With sodium modeling, the dialysate 
sodium concentration is gradually lowered from the 
range of 145–155 mmol/L to isotonic concentrations 
(140 mmol/L) near the end of the dialysis treatment, 
typically declining either in steps or in a linear or expo-
nential fashion. Higher dialysate sodium concentrations 
and sodium modeling may predispose patients to posi-
tive sodium balance; thus, these strategies to ameliorate 
intradialytic hypotension may be undesirable in hyper-
tensive patients or in patients with large interdialytic 
weight gains. Because patients are exposed to approxi-
mately 120 L of water during each dialysis treatment, 
water used for the dialysate is subjected to filtration, 
softening, deionization, and, ultimately, reverse osmo-
sis. During the reverse osmosis process, water is forced 
through a semipermeable membrane at very high pres-
sure to remove microbiologic contaminants and >90% 
of dissolved ions.
Blood Delivery System
The blood delivery system is composed of the extra-
corporeal circuit in the dialysis machine and the dialysis 
access. The dialysis machine consists of a blood pump, 
dialysis solution delivery system, and various safety mon-
itors. The blood pump moves blood from the access site, 
through the dialyzer, and back to the patient. The blood 
flow rate may range from 250–500 mL/min, depending 
largely on the type and integrity of the vascular access. 
Negative hydrostatic pressure on the dialysate side can 
be manipulated to achieve desirable fluid removal or 
ultrafiltration. Dialysis membranes have different ultrafil-
tration coefficients (i.e., mL removed/min per mmHg) 
so that along with hydrostatic changes, fluid removal can 
be varied. The dialysis solution delivery system dilutes 
the concentrated dialysate with water and monitors the 
temperature, conductivity, and flow of dialysate.
Dialysis Access
The fistula, graft, or catheter through which blood is 
obtained for hemodialysis is often referred to as a dialysis 
access. A native fistula created by the anastomosis of an 
artery to a vein (e.g., the Brescia-Cimino fistula, in 
which the cephalic vein is anastomosed end-to-side to 
the radial artery) results in arterialization of the vein. 
This facilitates its subsequent use in the placement of 
large needles (typically 15 gauge) to access the circu-
lation. Although fistulas have the highest long-term 
patency rate of all dialysis access options, fistulas are cre-
ated in a minority of patients in the United States. Many 
patients undergo placement of an arteriovenous graft 
(i.e., the interposition of prosthetic material, usually 
polytetrafluoroethylene, between an artery and a vein) 
or a tunneled dialysis catheter. In recent years, nephrolo-
gists, vascular surgeons, and health care policy makers in 
the United States have encouraged the creation of arte-
riovenous fistulas in a larger fraction of patients (the “fistula 
144
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
first” initiative). Unfortunately, even when created, arte-
riovenous fistulas may not mature sufficiently to provide 
reliable access to the circulation, or they may thrombose 
early in their development. Novel surgical approaches 
(e.g., brachiobasilic fistula creation with transposition of 
the basilic vein fistula to the arm surface) have increased 
options for “native” vascular access.
Grafts and catheters tend to be used among persons 
with smaller-caliber veins or persons whose veins have 
been damaged by repeated venipuncture, or after pro-
longed hospitalization. The most important complica-
tion of arteriovenous grafts is thrombosis of the graft and 
graft failure, due principally to intimal hyperplasia at the 
anastomosis between the graft and recipient vein. When 
grafts (or fistulas) fail, catheter-guided angioplasty can be 
used to dilate stenoses; monitoring of venous pressures on 
dialysis and of access flow, although not routinely per-
formed, may assist in the early recognition of impending 
vascular access failure. In addition to an increased rate of 
access failure, grafts and (in particular) catheters are asso-
ciated with much higher rates of infection than fistulas.
Intravenous large-bore catheters are often used in 
patients with acute and chronic kidney disease. For per-
sons on maintenance hemodialysis, tunneled catheters 
(either two separate catheters or a single catheter with 
two lumens) are often used when arteriovenous fistulas 
and grafts have failed or are not feasible due to anatomic 
considerations. These catheters are tunneled under the 
skin; the tunnel reduces bacterial translocation from the 
skin, resulting in a lower infection rate than with non-
tunneled temporary catheters. Most tunneled catheters 
are placed in the internal jugular veins; the external jug-
ular, femoral, and subclavian veins may also be used.
Nephrologists, interventional radiologists, and vas-
cular surgeons generally prefer to avoid placement of 
catheters into the subclavian veins; while flow rates are 
usually excellent, subclavian stenosis is a frequent com-
plication and, if present, will likely prohibit permanent 
vascular access (i.e., a fistula or graft) in the ipsilateral 
extremity. Infection rates may be higher with femo-
ral catheters. For patients with multiple vascular access 
complications and no other options for permanent vas-
cular access, tunneled catheters may be the last “life-
line” for hemodialysis. Translumbar or transhepatic 
approaches into the inferior vena cava may be required 
if the superior vena cava or other central veins draining 
the upper extremities are stenosed or thrombosed.
Goals of Dialysis
The hemodialysis procedure is targeted at removing 
both low- and high-molecular-weight solutes. The pro-
cedure consists of pumping heparinized blood through 
the dialyzer at a flow rate of 300–500 mL/min, while 
dialysate flows in an opposite counter-current direction at 
500–800 mL/min. The efficiency of dialysis is deter-
mined by blood and dialysate flow through the dialyzer 
as well as dialyzer characteristics (i.e., its efficiency in 
removing solute). The dose of dialysis, which is currently 
defined as a derivation of the fractional urea clearance 
during a single dialysis treatment, is further governed 
by patient size, residual kidney function, dietary protein 
intake, the degree of anabolism or catabolism, and the 
presence of comorbid conditions.
Since the landmark studies of Sargent and Gotch 
relating the measurement of the dose of dialysis using 
urea concentrations with morbidity in the National 
Cooperative Dialysis Study, the delivered dose of dialysis 
has been measured and considered as a quality assurance 
and improvement tool. While the fractional removal 
of urea nitrogen and derivations thereof are consid-
ered to be the standard methods by which “adequacy of 
dialysis” is measured, a large multicenter randomized 
clinical trial (the HEMO study) failed to show a differ-
ence in mortality associated with a large difference in 
urea clearance. Still, multiple observational studies and 
widespread expert opinion have suggested that higher 
dialysis dose is warranted; current targets include a urea 
reduction ratio (the fractional reduction in blood urea 
nitrogen per hemodialysis session) of >65–70% and a 
body water–indexed clearance × time product (KT/V) 
above 1.2 or 1.05, depending on whether urea concen-
trations are “equilibrated.” For the majority of patients 
with ESRD, between 9 and 12 h of dialysis are required 
each week, usually divided into three equal sessions. 
Several studies have suggested that longer hemodialysis 
session lengths may be beneficial (independent of urea 
clearance), although these studies are confounded by a 
variety of patient characteristics, including body size 
and nutritional status. Hemodialysis “dose” should be 
individualized, and factors other than the urea nitrogen 
should be considered, including the adequacy of ultra-
filtration or fluid removal and control of hyperkalemia, 
hyperphosphatemia, and metabolic acidosis. Several 
authors have highlighted improved intermediate out-
comes associated with more frequent hemodialysis (i.e., 
more than three times a week), although these stud-
ies are also confounded by multiple factors. A random-
ized clinical trial is currently under way to test whether 
more frequent dialysis results in differences in a variety 
of physiologic and functional markers.
Complications During Hemodialysis
Hypotension is the most common acute complica-
tion of hemodialysis, particularly among patients with 
diabetes mellitus. Numerous factors appear to increase 
the risk of hypotension, including excessive ultrafil-
tration with inadequate compensatory vascular filling, 
impaired vasoactive or autonomic responses, osmolar 
 
CHAPTER 12
Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
145
shifts, overzealous use of antihypertensive agents, and 
reduced cardiac reserve. Patients with arteriovenous fis-
tulas and grafts may develop high output cardiac failure 
due to shunting of blood through the dialysis access; on 
rare occasions, this may necessitate ligation of the fistula 
or graft. Because of the vasodilatory and cardiodepres-
sive effects of acetate, its use as the buffer in dialysate 
was once a common cause of hypotension. Since the 
introduction of bicarbonate-containing dialysate, dial-
ysis-associated hypotension has become less common. 
The management of hypotension during dialysis con-
sists of discontinuing ultrafiltration, the administration of 
100–250 mL of isotonic saline or 10 mL of 23% satu-
rated hypertonic saline, or administration of salt-poor 
albumin. Hypotension during dialysis can frequently be 
prevented by careful evaluation of the dry weight and by 
ultrafiltration modeling, such that more fluid is removed 
at the beginning rather than the end of the dialysis pro-
cedure. Additional maneuvers include the performance 
of sequential ultrafiltration followed by dialysis, cooling 
of the dialysate during dialysis treatment, and avoiding 
heavy meals during dialysis. Midodrine, a selective α1 
adrenergic pressor agent, has been advocated by some 
practitioners, although there is insufficient evidence of 
its safety and efficacy to support its routine use.
Muscle cramps during dialysis are also a common 
complication of the procedure. The etiology of dialysis- 
associated cramps remains obscure. Changes in mus-
cle perfusion because of excessively aggressive volume 
removal, particularly below the estimated dry weight, and 
the use of low-sodium–containing dialysate have been 
proposed as precipitants of dialysis-associated cramps. Strat-
egies that may be used to prevent cramps include reducing 
volume removal during dialysis, ultrafiltration profiling, 
and the use of higher concentrations of sodium in the dial-
ysate or sodium modeling (see earlier in the chapter).
Anaphylactoid reactions to the dialyzer, particularly on 
its first use, have been reported most frequently with the 
bioincompatible cellulosic-containing membranes. With 
the gradual phasing out of cuprophane membranes in the 
United States, dialyzer reactions have become uncom-
mon. Dialyzer reactions can be divided into two types: 
A and B. Type A reactions are attributed to an IgE-
mediated intermediate hypersensitivity reaction to ethyl-
ene oxide used in the sterilization of new dialyzers. This 
reaction typically occurs soon after the initiation of a 
treatment (within the first few minutes) and can progress 
to full-blown anaphylaxis if the therapy is not promptly 
discontinued. Treatment with steroids or epinephrine 
may be needed if symptoms are severe. The type B reac-
tion consists of a symptom complex of nonspecific chest 
and back pain, which appears to result from complement 
activation and cytokine release. These symptoms typi-
cally occur several minutes into the dialysis run and 
typically resolve over time with continued dialysis.
Cardiovascular disease constitutes the major cause of 
death in patients with ESRD. Cardiovascular mortal-
ity and event rates are higher in dialysis patients than in 
patients posttransplantation, although rates are extraor-
dinarily high in both populations. The underlying cause 
of cardiovascular disease is unclear but may be related 
to shared risk factors (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hyperten-
sion, atherosclerotic and arteriosclerotic vascular disease), 
chronic inflammation, massive changes in extracellular 
volume (especially with high interdialytic weight gains), 
inadequate treatment of hypertension, dyslipidemia, 
anemia, dystrophic vascular calcification, hyperhomo-
cysteinemia, and, perhaps, alterations in cardiovascular 
dynamics during the dialysis treatment. Few studies have 
targeted cardiovascular risk reduction in ESRD patients; 
none have demonstrated consistent benefit. Two clinical 
trials of statin agents in ESRD demonstrated significant 
reductions in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 
concentrations but no significant reductions in death or 
cardiovascular events [Die Deutsche Diabetes Dialyse 
study (4D) and AURORA study]. Nevertheless, most 
experts recommend conventional cardioprotective strat-
egies (e.g., lipid-lowering agents, aspirin, β-adrenergic 
antagonists) in dialysis patients based on the patients’ car-
diovascular risk profile, which appears to be increased 
by more than an order of magnitude relative to persons 
unaffected by kidney disease.
Peritoneal Dialysis
In peritoneal dialysis, 1.5–3 L of a dextrose-containing 
solution is infused into the peritoneal cavity and allowed 
to dwell for a set period of time, usually 2–4 h. As with 
hemodialysis, toxic materials are removed through a 
combination of convective clearance generated through 
ultrafiltration and diffusive clearance down a concentra-
tion gradient. The clearance of solutes and water during 
a peritoneal dialysis exchange depends on the balance 
between the movement of solute and water into the peri-
toneal cavity versus absorption from the peritoneal cavity. 
The rate of diffusion diminishes with time and eventually 
stops when equilibration between plasma and dialysate is 
reached. Absorption of solutes and water from the peri-
toneal cavity occurs across the peritoneal membrane into 
the peritoneal capillary circulation and via peritoneal lym-
phatics into the lymphatic circulation. The rate of peri-
toneal solute transport varies from patient to patient and 
may be altered by the presence of infection (peritonitis), 
drugs, and physical factors such as position and exercise.
Forms of Peritoneal Dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis may be carried out as CAPD, CCPD, 
or a combination of both. In CAPD, dialysis solution is 
146
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
manually infused into the peritoneal cavity during the 
day and exchanged three to five times daily. A nighttime 
dwell is frequently instilled at bedtime and remains in 
the peritoneal cavity through the night. The drainage of 
spent dialysate is performed manually with the assistance 
of gravity to move fluid out of the abdomen. In CCPD, 
exchanges are performed in an automated fashion, usu-
ally at night; the patient is connected to an automated 
cycler that performs a series of exchange cycles while the 
patient sleeps. The number of exchange cycles required 
to optimize peritoneal solute clearance varies by the 
peritoneal membrane characteristics; as with hemodialy-
sis, experts suggest careful tracking of solute clearances to 
ensure dialysis “adequacy.”
Peritoneal dialysis solutions are available in volumes 
typically ranging from 1.5 to 3 L. Lactate is the pre-
ferred buffer in peritoneal dialysis solutions. The most 
common additives to peritoneal dialysis solutions are 
heparin, to prevent obstruction of the dialysis catheter 
lumen, with fibrin and antibiotics during an episode of 
acute peritonitis. Insulin may also be added in patients 
with diabetes mellitus.
Access to the Peritoneal Cavity
Access to the peritoneal cavity is obtained through a 
peritoneal catheter. Catheters used for maintenance 
peritoneal dialysis are flexible, being made of silicone 
rubber with numerous side holes at the distal end. 
These catheters usually have two Dacron cuffs to pro-
mote fibroblast proliferation, granulation, and invasion 
of the cuff. The scarring that occurs around the cuffs 
anchors the catheter and seals it from bacteria tracking 
from the skin surface into the peritoneal cavity; it also 
prevents the external leakage of fluid from the perito-
neal cavity. The cuffs are placed in the preperitoneal 
plane and ∼2 cm from the skin surface.
The peritoneal equilibrium test is a formal evaluation of 
peritoneal membrane characteristics that measures the 
transfer rates of creatinine and glucose across the perito-
neal membrane. Patients are classified as low, low–average, 
high–average, and high transporters. Patients with rapid 
equilibration (i.e., high transporters) tend to absorb more 
glucose and lose efficiency of ultrafiltration with long 
daytime dwells. High transporters also tend to lose larger 
quantities of albumin and other proteins across the peri-
toneal membrane. In general, patients with rapid trans-
porting characteristics require more frequent, shorter 
dwell time exchanges, nearly always obligating use of a 
cycler for feasibility. Slower (low and low–average) trans-
porters tend to do well with fewer exchanges. The effi-
ciency of solute clearance also depends on the volume of 
dialysate infused. Larger volumes allow for greater solute 
clearance, particularly with CAPD in patients with low 
and low–average transport characteristics. Interestingly, 
solute clearance also increases with physical activity, pre-
sumably related to more efficient flow dynamics within 
the peritoneal cavity.
As with hemodialysis, the optimal dose of perito-
neal dialysis is unknown. Several observational studies 
have suggested that higher rates of urea and creatinine 
clearance (the latter generally measured in L/week) are 
associated with lower mortality rates and fewer uremic 
complications. However, a randomized clinical trial 
[Adequacy of Peritoneal Dialysis in Mexico (ADE-
MEX)] failed to show a significant reduction in mortal-
ity or complications with a relatively large increment in 
urea clearance. In general, patients on peritoneal dialysis 
do well when they retain residual kidney function. The 
rates of technique failure increase with years on dialysis 
and have been correlated with loss of residual function 
to a greater extent than loss of peritoneal membrane 
capacity. Recently, a nonabsorbable carbohydrate (ico-
dextrin) has been introduced as an alternative osmotic 
agent. Studies have demonstrated more efficient ultra-
filtration with icodextrin than with dextrose-containing 
solutions. Icodextrin is typically used as the “last fill” for 
patients on CCPD or for the longest dwell in patients 
on CAPD. For some patients in whom CCPD does not 
provide sufficient solute clearance, a hybrid approach 
can be adopted where one or more daytime exchanges 
are added to the CCPD regimen. While this approach 
can enhance solute clearance and prolong a patient’s 
capacity to remain on peritoneal dialysis, the burden of 
the hybrid approach can be overwhelming to some.
Complications During Peritoneal 
Dialysis
The major complications of peritoneal dialysis are perito-
nitis, catheter-associated nonperitonitis infections, weight 
gain and other metabolic disturbances, and residual ure-
mia (especially among patients with no residual kidney 
function).
Peritonitis typically develops when there has been 
a break in sterile technique during one or more of the 
exchange procedures. Peritonitis is usually defined by 
an elevated peritoneal fluid leukocyte count (100/mm3, 
of which at least 50% are polymorphonuclear neutro-
phils); these cutoffs are lower than those in spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis because of the presence of dextrose 
in peritoneal dialysis solutions and rapid bacterial pro-
liferation in this environment without antibiotic ther-
apy. The clinical presentation typically consists of pain 
and cloudy dialysate, often with fever and other con-
stitutional symptoms. The most common culprit organ-
isms are gram-positive cocci, including Staphylococcus, 
reflecting the origin from the skin. Gram-negative rod 
infections are less common; fungal and mycobacterial 
infections can be seen in selected patients, particularly 
 
CHAPTER 12
Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
147
after antibacterial therapy. Most cases of peritonitis can 
be managed either with intraperitoneal or oral antibi-
otics, depending on the organism; many patients with 
peritonitis do not require hospitalization. In cases where 
peritonitis is due to hydrophilic gram-negative rods 
(e.g., Pseudomonas sp.) or yeast, antimicrobial therapy is 
usually not sufficient, and catheter removal is required 
to ensure complete eradication of infection. Nonperi-
tonitis catheter-associated infections (often termed tun-
nel infections) vary widely in severity. Some cases can be 
managed with local antibiotic or silver nitrate adminis-
tration, while others are severe enough to require par-
enteral antibiotic therapy and catheter removal.
Peritoneal dialysis is associated with a variety of 
metabolic complications. As noted above, albumin and 
other proteins can be lost across the peritoneal mem-
brane in concert with the loss of metabolic wastes. The 
hypoproteinemia induced by peritoneal dialysis obli-
gates a higher dietary protein intake in order to main-
tain nitrogen balance. Hyperglycemia and weight gain 
are also common complications of peritoneal dialysis. 
Several hundred calories in the form of dextrose are 
absorbed each day, depending on the concentration 
employed. Peritoneal dialysis patients, particularly those 
with type II diabetes mellitus, are then prone to other 
complications of insulin resistance, including hyper-
triglyceridemia. On the positive side, the continuous 
nature of peritoneal dialysis usually allows for a more 
liberal diet, due to continuous removal of potassium 
and phosphorus—two major dietary components whose 
accumulation can be hazardous in ESRD.
Global Perspective
The incidence of ESRD is increasing worldwide 
with longer life expectancies and improved care 
of infectious and cardiovascular diseases. The 
management of ESRD varies widely by country and 
within country by region, and it is influenced by eco-
nomic and other major factors. In general, peritoneal 
dialysis is more commonly performed in poorer coun-
tries owing to its lower expense and the high cost of 
establishing in-center hemodialysis units.
Acknowledgment
We are grateful to Dr. Ajay Singh and Dr. Barry Brenner, 
authors of “Dialysis in the Treatment of Renal Failure” in 
the 16th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 
for contributions to this chapter.
 Anil Chandraker 
I  Edgar L. Milford 
I  Mohamed H. Sayegh 
148
 Transplantation of the human kidney is the treatment 
of choice for advanced chronic renal failure. World-
wide, tens of thousands of these procedures have been 
performed. When azathioprine and prednisone initially 
were used as immunosuppressive drugs in the 1960s, 
the results with properly matched familial donors were 
superior to those with organs from deceased donors: 
75–90% compared with 50–60% graft survival rates at 
1 year. During the 1970s and 1980s, the success rate 
at the 1-year mark for deceased-donor transplants rose 
progressively. Currently, deceased-donor grafts have an 
89% 1-year survival and living-donor grafts have a 95% 
1-year survival. Although there has been improvement 
in long-term survival, it has not been as impressive as 
the short-term survival, and currently the “average” 
( t 1/2 ) life expectancy of a living-donor graft is around 
20 years and that of a deceased-donor graft is close to 
14 years. 
 Mortality rates after transplantation are highest in the 
fi rst year and are age related: 2% for ages 18–34 years, 3% 
for ages 35–49 years, and 6.8% for ages ≥50–60 years. 
These rates compare favorably with those in the chronic 
dialysis population even after risk adjustments for age, 
diabetes, and cardiovascular status. Occasionally, acute 
irreversible rejection may occur after many months of 
good function, especially if the patient neglects to take 
the prescribed immunosuppressive drugs. Most grafts, 
however, succumb at varying rates to a chronic pro-
cess consisting of interstitial fi brosis, tubular atrophy, 
vasculopathy, and glomerulopathy, the pathogenesis of 
which is incompletely understood. Overall, transplanta-
tion returns most patients to an improved lifestyle and 
an improved life expectancy compared with patients on 
dialysis. There are at least 100,000 patients with func-
tioning kidney transplants in the United States, and 
 TRANSPLANTATION IN THE TREATMENT 
OF RENAL FAILURE 
 chapteR 13 
when one adds in the numbers of kidney transplants in 
centers around the world, the total activity is doubled. 
 Recent activity anD ReSultS 
 In 2008 there were more than 10,500 deceased-donor 
kidney transplants and 6000 living-donor transplants in 
the United States, with the ratio of deceased to living 
donors being stable over the last few years. The back-
log of patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) has 
been increasing every year, and it always lags behind the 
number of available donors. As the number of patients 
with end-stage kidney disease increases, the demand for 
kidney transplants continues to increase. In 2008, 33,051 
new registrants were added to the waiting list and fewer 
than 17,000 patients were transplanted. This imbalance 
is set to worsen over the coming years with the pre-
dicted increased rates of obesity and diabetes worldwide. 
In an attempt to increase utilization of deceased-donor 
kidneys and reduce discard rates of organs, criteria for 
the use of so-called expanded criteria donor (ECD) kid-
neys and kidneys from donors after cardiac death (DCD) 
have been developed ( Table 13-1 ). ECD kidneys are 
usually used for older patients who are expected to fare 
less well on dialysis. 
 The overall results of transplantation are presented in 
Table 13-2 as the survival of grafts and of patients. At 
the 1-year mark, graft survival is higher for living-donor 
recipients, most likely because those grafts are not subject 
to as much ischemic injury. The more powerful drugs 
now in use for immunosuppression have almost equalized 
the risk of graft rejection in all patients for the fi rst year. 
At 5 and 10 years, however, there has been a steeper 
decline in survival of those with deceased-donor kidneys. 
 
CHAPTER 13
Transplantation in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
149
Recipient Selection
There are few absolute contraindications to renal 
transplantation. The transplant procedure is relatively 
noninvasive, as the organ is placed in the inguinal fossa 
without entering the peritoneal cavity. Recipients with-
out perioperative complications often can be discharged 
from the hospital in excellent condition within 5 days 
of the operation.
Virtually all patients with ESRD who receive a 
transplant have a greater life expectancy than do risk-
matched patients who remain on dialysis. Even though 
diabetic patients and older candidates have a higher 
Table 13-1
Definition of an Expanded Criteria Donor 
(ECD) and a Non-Heart-Beating Donor 
[Donation After Cardiac Death (DCD)]
Expanded Criteria Donor (ECD)
Deceased donor >60 years
Deceased donor >50 years and hypertension and creati-
nine >1.5 mg/dL
Deceased donor >50 years and hypertension and death 
caused by cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
Deceased donor >50 years and death caused by CVA and 
creatinine >1.5 mg/dL
Donation after Cardiac Deatha (DCD)
	
I	 Brought in dead
	
II	 Unsuccessful resuscitation
	 III	 Awaiting cardiac arrest
	 IV	 Cardiac arrest after brainstem death
	
V	 Cardiac arrest in a hospital patient
aKidneys can be used for transplantation from categories II–V but are 
commonly only used from categories III and IV. The survival of these 
kidneys has not been shown to be inferior to that of deceased-donor 
kidneys.
Note: Kidneys can be bought ECD and DCD. ECD kidneys have 
been shown to have a poorer survival, and there is a separate, 
shorter waiting list for ECD kidneys. They are generally utilized for 
patients for whom the benefits of being transplanted earlier outweigh 
the associated risks of using an ECD kidney.
Table 13-2
Mean Rates of Graft and Patient Survival for Kidneys Transplanted in the United States from 
1992 to 2002a
1-Year Follow-Up
5-Year Follow-Up
10-Year Follow-Up
Grafts, %
Patients, %
Grafts, %
Patients, %
Grafts, %
Patients, %
Deceased donor
89
95
67
81
41
61
Living donor
95
98
80
90
56
76
aAll patients transplanted are included, and the follow-up unadjusted survival data from the 1-, 5-, and 10-year periods are presented to show 
the attrition rates over time within the two types of organ donors.
Source: Data from Summary Tables, 2004 and 2005 Annual Reports, Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients.
mortality rate than other transplant recipients, their sur-
vival is improved with transplantation compared with 
remaining on dialysis. This global benefit of transplan-
tation as a treatment modality poses substantial ethi-
cal issues for policy makers, as the number of deceased 
kidneys available is far from sufficient to meet the cur-
rent needs of the candidates. The current standard of 
care is that the candidate should have a life expectancy 
of >5 years to be put on a deceased organ wait list. 
Even for living donation, the candidate should have 
>5 years of life expectancy. This standard has been 
established because the benefits of kidney transplanta-
tion over dialysis are realized only after a perioperative 
period in which the mortality rate is higher in trans-
planted patients than in dialysis patients with compa-
rable risk profiles.
All candidates must have a thorough risk-versus- 
benefit evaluation before being approved for transplan-
tation. In particular, an aggressive approach to diagnosis 
of correctable coronary artery disease, presence of latent 
or indolent infection (HIV, hepatitis B or C, tuberculo-
sis), and neoplasm should be a routine part of the can-
didate workup. Most transplant centers consider overt 
AIDS and active hepatitis absolute contraindications to 
transplantation because of the high risk of opportunistic 
infection. Some centers are now transplanting individu-
als with hepatitis and even HIV infection under strict 
protocols to determine whether the risks and benefits 
favor transplantation over dialysis.
Among the few absolute “immunologic” contraindi-
cations to transplantation is the presence of a potentially 
harmful antibody against the donor kidney at the time 
of the anticipated transplant. Harmful antibodies that 
can cause very early graft loss include natural antibodies 
against the ABO blood group antigens and antibodies 
against human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I (A, B, 
C) or class II (DR) antigens. These antibodies are rou-
tinely excluded by proper screening of the candidate’s 
ABO compatibility, HLA typing of donor and recipi-
ent, and direct cross-matching of candidate serum with 
lymphocytes of the donor.
150
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
Donor Selection
Donors can be deceased or volunteer living donors. The 
latter are usually family members selected to have at 
least partial compatibility for HLA antigens. Living vol-
unteer donors should be normal on physical examina-
tion and of the same major ABO blood group, because 
crossing major blood group barriers prejudices survival 
of the allograft. It is possible, however, to transplant a 
kidney of a type O donor into an A, B, or AB recipi-
ent. Selective renal arteriography should be performed 
on donors to rule out the presence of multiple or 
abnormal renal arteries because the surgical procedure 
is difficult and the ischemic time of the transplanted 
kidney is long when there are vascular abnormali-
ties. Transplant surgeons are now using a laparoscopic 
method to isolate and remove the living donor’s kidney. 
This operation has the advantage of less evident surgical 
scars, and, because there is less tissue trauma, the lapa-
roscopic donors have a substantially shorter hospital stay 
and less discomfort than those who have the traditional 
surgery. Deceased donors should be free of malignant 
neoplastic disease, hepatitis, and HIV because of possible 
transmission to the recipient. Increased risk of graft fail-
ure exists when the donor is elderly or has renal failure 
and when the kidney has a prolonged period of isch-
emia and storage.
In the United States, there is a coordinated national 
system of regulations, allocation support, and outcomes 
analysis for kidney transplantation called the Organ Pro-
curement Transplant Network. It is now possible to 
remove deceased-donor kidneys and maintain them for 
up to 48 h on cold pulsatile perfusion or simple flush-
ing and cooling. This approach permits adequate time 
for typing, cross-matching, transportation, and selection 
problems to be solved.
Tissue Typing and Clinical 
Immunogenetics
Matching for antigens of the HLA major histocompat-
ibility gene complex is an important criterion for selec-
tion of donors for renal allografts. Each mammalian 
species has a single chromosomal region that encodes 
the strong, or major, transplantation antigens, and this 
region on the human sixth chromosome is called HLA. 
HLA antigens have been classically defined by sero-
logic techniques, but methods to define specific nucleo-
tide sequences in genomic DNA are increasingly being 
used. Other “minor” antigens may play crucial roles, 
in addition to the ABH(O) blood groups and endothe-
lial antigens that are not shared with lymphocytes. The 
Rh system is not expressed on graft tissue. Evidence for 
designation of HLA as the genetic region that encodes 
major transplantation antigens comes from the success 
Table 13-3
Effect of HLA-A, -B, -DR Mismatching on 
Kidney Graft Survival
Degree of Donor 
Mismatch
1-Year 
Survival, %
5-Year 
Survival, %
Cadaver donor (all)
89.2
61.3
0/6-HLA mismatch
91.3
68.2
3/6-HLA mismatch
90.1
60.8
6/6-HLA mismatch
85.2
55.3
Living related donor (all)
94.7
76.0
0/6-HLA mismatch
96.7
87.0
3/6-HLA mismatch
94.3
73.2
6/6-HLA mismatch
92.7
57.7
Note: 0-mismatched related donor transplants are virtually all from 
HLA-identical siblings, whereas 3/6-mismatched transplants can be 
one haplotype mismatched (1-A, 1-B, and 1-DR antigen) from a par-
ent, child, or sibling; 6/6-HLA-mismatched living related kidneys are 
derived from siblings or relatives outside the nuclear family.
rate in living related donor renal and bone marrow 
transplantation, with superior results in HLA-identical 
sibling pairs. Nevertheless, 5% of HLA-identical renal 
allografts are rejected, often within the first weeks after 
transplantation. These failures represent states of prior 
sensitization to non-HLA antigens. Non-HLA minor 
antigens are relatively weak when initially encountered 
and are therefore suppressible by conventional immu-
nosuppressive therapy. Once priming has occurred, how­
ever, secondary responses are much more refractory 
to treatment.
Living Donors
When first-degree relatives are donors, graft survival 
rates at 1 year are 5–7% greater than those for deceased-
donor grafts. The 5-year survival rates still favor a par-
tially matched (3/6 HLA mismatched) family donor 
over a randomly selected cadaver donor (Table 13-3). 
In addition, living donors provide the advantage of 
immediate availability. For both living and deceased 
donors, the 5-year outcomes are poor if there is a com-
plete (6/6) HLA mismatch.
The survival rate of living unrelated renal allografts is 
as high as that of perfectly HLA-matched cadaver renal 
transplants and comparable to that of kidneys from liv-
ing relatives. This outcome is probably a consequence 
of both short cold ischemia time and the extra care 
taken to document that the condition and renal func-
tion of the donor are optimal before proceeding with 
a living unrelated donation. It is illegal in the United 
States to purchase organs for transplantation.
Concern has been expressed about the potential risk 
to a volunteer kidney donor of premature renal failure 
 
CHAPTER 13
Transplantation in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
151
after several years of increased blood flow and hyper-
filtration per nephron in the remaining kidney. There 
are a few reports of the development of hypertension, 
proteinuria, and even lesions of focal segmental sclero-
sis in donors over long-term follow-up. Difficulties in 
donors followed for ≥20 years are unusual, however, 
and it may be that having a single kidney becomes sig-
nificant only when another condition, such as hyper-
tension, is superimposed. It is also desirable to consider 
the risk of development of type 1 diabetes mellitus in a 
family member who is a potential donor to a diabetic 
renal failure patient. Anti-insulin and anti-islet cell anti-
bodies should be measured, and glucose tolerance tests 
should be performed in such donors to exclude a pre-
diabetic state.
Presensitization
A positive cytotoxic cross-match of recipient serum 
with donor T lymphocytes representing anti-HLA 
class I is usually predictive of an acute vasculitic event 
termed hyperacute rejection. Patients with anti-HLA anti-
bodies can be transplanted safely if careful cross-match-
ing of donor blood lymphocytes with recipient serum 
is performed. The known sources of such sensitization 
are blood transfusion, a prior transplant, and pregnancy. 
Patients sustained by dialysis often show fluctuating 
antibody titers and specificity patterns. At the time of 
assignment of a cadaveric kidney, cross-matches are per-
formed with at least a current serum. Previously ana-
lyzed antibody specificities and additional cross-matches 
are performed accordingly. The minimal purpose for 
the cross-match is avoidance of hyperacute rejection 
mediated by recipient antibodies to donor HLA class I 
antigens. More sensitive tests, such as flow cytometry, 
can be useful for avoidance of accelerated, and often 
untreatable, early graft rejection in patients receiving sec-
ond or third transplants. Donor T lymphocytes, which 
express only class I antigens, are used as targets for detec-
tion of anti–class I (HLA-A and -B) antibodies.
Preformed anti–class II (HLA-DR) antibodies against 
the donor carry a higher risk of graft loss as well, par-
ticularly in recipients who have suffered early loss of a 
prior kidney transplant. B lymphocytes expressing both 
class I and class II antigens are used in these assays. 
Non-HLA antigens restricted in expression to endothe-
lium and sometimes monocytes have been described, 
but clinical relevance is not well established. A series 
of minor histocompatibility antigens do not elicit anti-
bodies, and sensitization to these antigens is detectable 
only by cytotoxic T cells, an assay too cumbersome for 
routine use. Desensitization before transplantation by 
reducing the level of antidonor antibodies via plasma-
pheresis of blood and administration of pooled immuno-
globulin or both has been useful in reducing the hazard 
of hyperacute rejection.
Immunology of Rejection
Both cellular and humoral (antibody-mediated) effector 
mechanisms can play roles in kidney transplant rejection. 
Antibodies can also initiate a form of antibody-dependent 
but cell-mediated cytotoxicity by recipient cells that bear 
receptors for the Fc portion of immunoglobulin.
Cellular rejection is mediated by lymphocytes that 
respond to HLA antigens expressed within the organ. 
The CD4+ lymphocyte responds to class II (HLA-DR) 
incompatibility by proliferating and releasing proin-
flammatory cytokines that augment the proliferative 
response of both CD4+ and CD8+ cells. CD8+ cyto-
toxic lymphocyte precursors respond primarily to class I 
(HLA-A, -B) antigens and mature into cytotoxic effec-
tor cells. The cytotoxic effector (“killer”) T cells cause 
organ damage through direct contact and lysis of donor 
target cells. The natural role of HLA antigen molecules 
is to present processed peptide fragments of antigen to 
T lymphocytes, the fragments residing in a “groove” 
of the HLA molecule distal to the cell surface. T cells 
can be directly stimulated by intact nonself HLA mol-
ecules expressed on donor parenchymal cells and resid-
ual donor leukocytes residing in the kidney interstitium. 
In addition, donor HLA molecules can be processed by 
a variety of donor or recipient cells capable of antigen 
presentation of peptides and then presented to T cells 
in the same manner as most other antigens. The former 
mode of stimulation is sometimes called direct presenta-
tion, and the latter mode indirect presentation (Fig. 13-1). 
There is evidence that non-HLA antigens can also play 
a role in renal transplant rejection episodes. Recipients 
who receive a kidney from an HLA-identical sibling 
can have rejection episodes and require maintenance 
immunosuppression, whereas identical twin transplants 
require no immunosuppression. There are documented 
non-HLA antigens, such as an endothelial-specific anti-
gen system with limited polymorphism and a tubular 
antigen, that can be targets of humoral or cellular rejec-
tion responses, respectively.
Immunosuppressive Treatment
Immunosuppressive therapy, as currently available, gen-
erally suppresses all immune responses, including those 
to bacteria, fungi, and even malignant tumors. In the 
1950s, when clinical renal transplantation began, sub-
lethal total-body irradiation was employed. We have 
now reached the point where sophisticated pharma-
cologic immunosuppression is available, but it still has 
the hazard of promoting infection and malignancy. In 
general, all clinically useful drugs are more selective to 
primary than to memory immune responses. Agents 
to suppress the immune response are discussed in the 
152
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
following paragraphs, and those currently in clinical use 
are listed in Table 13-4.
Drugs
Azathioprine, an analogue of mercaptopurine, was 
for two decades the keystone to immunosuppressive 
therapy in humans but has given way to more effec-
tive agents. This agent can inhibit synthesis of DNA, 
RNA, or both. Therapy with azathioprine in doses of 
1.5–2 mg/kg per d is generally added to cyclosporine 
as a means of decreasing the requirements for the 
latter. Reduction in the dose is required because of 
leukopenia and occasionally thrombocytopenia. Exces-
sive amounts of azathioprine may also cause jaundice, 
anemia, and alopecia. If it is essential to administer allo-
purinol concurrently, the azathioprine dose must be 
reduced. As inhibition of xanthine oxidase delays deg-
radation, this combination is best avoided.
Mycophenolate mofetil or mycophenolate sodium, both of 
which are metabolized to mycophenolic acid, is now 
used in place of azathioprine in most centers. It has a 
similar mode of action and a mild degree of gastroin-
testinal toxicity but produces minimal bone marrow 
suppression. Its advantage is its increased potency in 
preventing or reversing rejection. Patients with hyper-
uricemia can be given allopurinol without adjustment of 
the mycophenolic acid dose. The usual dose is 2–3 g/d 
in divided doses.
Glucocorticoids are important adjuncts to immunosup-
pressive therapy. Among all the agents employed, pred-
nisone has effects that are easiest to assess, and in large 
doses it is usually effective for the reversal of rejection. 
In general, 200–300 mg prednisone is given immediately 
before or at the time of transplantation, and the dose is 
reduced to 30 mg within a week. The side effects of the 
glucocorticoids, particularly impairment of wound heal-
ing and predisposition to infection, make it desirable to 
taper the dose as rapidly as possible in the immediate 
postoperative period. Many centers now have protocols 
for early discontinuance or avoidance of steroids because 
of long-term adverse effects on bone, skin, and glucose 
metabolism. For treatment of acute rejection, methyl-
prednisolone, 0.5–1 g IV, is administered immediately 
upon diagnosis of beginning rejection and continued 
once daily for 3 days. When the drug is effective, the 
results are usually apparent within 96 h. Such “pulse” 
doses are not effective in chronic rejection. Most 
patients whose renal function is stable after 6 months or 
a year do not require large doses of prednisone; mainte-
nance doses of 10–15 mg/d are the rule. Many patients 
tolerate an alternate-day course of steroids without an 
increased risk of rejection. A major effect of steroids is 
on the monocyte-macrophage system, preventing the 
release of interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-1.
Cyclosporine is a fungal peptide with potent immu-
nosuppressive activity. It acts on the calcineurin path-
way to block transcription of mRNA for IL-2 and other 
proinflammatory cytokines, thereby inhibiting T-cell 
proliferation. Although it works alone, cyclosporine is 
more effective in conjunction with glucocorticoids and 
mycophenolate. Clinical results with tens of thousands 
of renal transplants have been impressive. Among its 
toxic effects (nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, hirsutism, 
tremor, gingival hyperplasia, diabetes), only nephrotox-
icity presents a serious management problem and is fur-
ther discussed below.
Allogeneic APC
CD8
MHC molecule
Allogeneic peptide
CD4
Tc
Tc
TH
TH
Allogeneic APC
Self APC
Direct Pathway
Indirect Pathway
B cell
CD4
Cytokines
Activated
cytotoxic T cell
Cellular
rejection
Transplant
arteriosclerosis
Antibody-mediated
rejection
Delayed-type
hypersensitivity
Alloantibodies
Macrophage
Figure 13-1
Recognition pathways for major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) antigens. Graft rejection is initiated by CD4 
helper T lymphocytes (TH) having antigen receptors that 
bind to specific complexes of peptides and MHC class II 
molecules on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). In transplanta-
tion, in contrast to other immunologic responses, there are 
two sets of T-cell clones involved in rejection. In the direct 
pathway the class II MHC of donor allogeneic APCs is rec-
ognized by CD4 TH cells that bind to the intact MHC mol-
ecules, and class I MHC allogeneic cells are recognized by 
CD8 T cells. The latter generally proliferate into cytotoxic 
cells (TC). In the indirect pathway, the incompatible MHC 
molecules are processed into peptides that are presented 
by the self-APCs of the recipient. The indirect, but not the 
direct, pathway is the normal physiologic process in T-cell 
recognition of foreign antigens. Once TH cells are activated, 
they proliferate and, by secretion of cytokines and direct 
contact, exert strong helper effects on macrophages, TC, 
and B cells. (From MH Sayegh, LH Turka: N Engl J Med, 
338:1813, 1998. hj 1998, Massachusetts Medical 
Society. All rights reserved.)
 
CHAPTER 13
Transplantation in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
153
Tacrolimus (previously called FK506) is a fungal mac-
rolide that has the same mode of action as cyclosporine 
as well as a similar side-effect profile; it does not, how-
ever, produce hirsutism or gingival hyperplasia. De novo 
diabetes mellitus is more common with tacrolimus. The 
drug was first used in liver transplantation and may substi-
tute for cyclosporine entirely or be tried as an alternative 
in renal patients whose rejections are poorly controlled by 
cyclosporine.
Sirolimus (previously called rapamycin) is another fun-
gal macrolide but has a different mode of action, i.e., it 
inhibits T-cell growth factor signaling pathways, prevent-
ing the response to IL-2 and other cytokines. Sirolimus 
can be used in conjunction with cyclosporine or tacro-
limus, or with mycophenolic acid, to avoid calcineurin 
inhibitors. Its use with tacrolimus alone shows promise 
as a steroid-sparing regimen, especially in patients who 
would benefit from pancreatic islet cell transplantation, 
where steroids have an adverse effect on islet survival.
Antibodies to Lymphocytes
When serum from animals made immune to host lym-
phocytes is injected into the recipient, a marked sup-
pression of cellular immunity to the tissue graft results. 
The action on cell-mediated immunity is greater than 
the action on humoral immunity. A globulin frac-
tion of serum [antilymphocyte globulin (ALG)] is the 
agent generally employed. For use in humans, periph-
eral human lymphocytes, thymocytes, or lymphocytes 
from spleens or thoracic duct fistulas have been injected 
into horses, rabbits, or goats to produce antilymphocyte 
serum, from which the globulin fraction is then sepa-
rated. A rabbit antithymocyte globulin (thymoglobulin) 
is the agent most commonly in use currently. Monoclo-
nal antibodies against defined lymphocyte subsets offer a 
more precise and standardized form of therapy. OKT3 
is directed to the CD3 molecules that form a portion 
of the T-cell antigen-receptor complex and is thus 
expressed on all mature T cells.
Another approach to more selective therapy is to tar-
get the 55-kDa alpha chain of the IL-2 receptor, which 
is expressed only on T cells that have been recently 
activated. Two such antibodies to the IL-2 receptor, in 
which either a chimeric protein has been made between 
mouse Fab with human Fc (basiliximab) or the antibody 
has been “humanized” by splicing the combining sites 
of the mouse into a molecule that is 90% human IgG 
(daclizumab), are in use for prophylaxis of acute rejec-
tion in the immediate posttransplant period. They are 
effective at decreasing the acute rejection rate and have 
few adverse side effects.
More recently, two new strategies have involved 
administration of engineered biologic agents: a deplet-
ing T-cell antibody (alemtuzumab) as induction therapy 
to minimize maintenance immunosuppression and a 
Table 13-4
Maintenance Immunosuppressive Drugs
Agent
Pharmacology
Mechanisms
Side Effects
Glucocorticoids
Increased bioavailability with 
hypoalbuminemia and liver 
disease; prednisone/pred-
nisolone generally used
Binds cytosolic receptors and heat 
shock proteins. Blocks transcription 
of IL-1, -2, -3, -6; TNF-α; and IFN-γ
Hypertension, glucose intoler-
ance, dyslipidemia, osteo-
porosis
Cyclosporine (CsA)
Lipid-soluble polypeptide, 
variable absorption, micro-
emulsion more predictable
Trimolecular complex with cyclophilin 
and calcineurin → block in cytokine 
(e.g., IL-2) production; however, 
stimulates TGF-β production
Nephrotoxicity, hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, glucose intoler-
ance, hirsutism/hyperplasia 
of gums
Tacrolimus (FK506)
Macrolide, well absorbed
Trimolecular complex with FKBP-12 
and calcineurin → block in cytokine 
(e.g., IL-2) production; may stimu-
late TGF-β production
Similar to CsA, but hirsutism/
hyperplasia of gums unusual, 
and diabetes more likely
Azathioprine
Mercaptopurine analogue
Hepatic metabolites inhibit purine 
synthesis
Marrow suppression (WBC > 
RBC > platelets)
Mycophenolate 
mofetil (MMF)
Metabolized to mycopheno-
lic acid
Inhibits purine synthesis via inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase
Diarrhea/cramps; dose-related 
liver and marrow suppres-
sion is uncommon
Sirolimus
Macrolide, poor oral bio-
availability
Complexes with FKBP-12 and then 
blocks p70 S6 kinase in the IL-2 
receptor pathway for proliferation
Hyperlipidemia, thrombocy-
topenia
Abbreviations: FKBP-12, FK506-binding protein 12; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; RBC, red blood cell; TGF, transforming growth factor; TNF, 
tumor necrosis factor; WBC, white blood cell.
154
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
fusion protein (Belatacept) to block B7 T-cell costim-
ulatory signals. The latter has shown promise in phase 
2 trials and is currently being tested in phase 3 trials in 
kidney transplantation. Both of these new biologics as 
well as antilymphocyte globulin are increasingly being 
used as “induction” therapy at the time of transplanta-
tion to minimize or eliminate the use of either steroids 
or calcineurin inhibitors because of their perceived 
toxicities. The next step in the evolution of this thera-
peutic strategy, which has already been achieved in the 
short term in small numbers of immunologically well-
matched patients, is the elimination of all maintenance 
immunosuppression therapy altogether.
Clinical Course and Management 
of the Recipient
Adequate hemodialysis should be performed within 
48 h of surgery, and care should be taken that the serum 
potassium level is not markedly elevated so that intraop-
erative cardiac arrhythmias can be averted. The diuresis 
that commonly occurs postoperatively must be care-
fully monitored. In some instances, it may be massive, 
reflecting the inability of ischemic tubules to regulate 
sodium and water excretion; with large diureses, mas-
sive potassium losses may occur. Most chronically ure-
mic patients have some excess of extracellular fluid, 
and it is useful to maintain an expanded fluid volume 
in the immediate postoperative period. Acute tubular 
necrosis (ATN) may cause immediate oliguria or may 
follow an initial short period of graft function. ATN is 
most likely when cadaveric donors have been underper-
fused or if the interval between cessation of blood flow 
and organ harvest (warm ischemic time) is more than a 
few minutes. Recovery usually occurs within 3 weeks, 
although periods as long as 6 weeks have been reported. 
Superimposition of rejection on ATN is common, and 
the differential diagnosis may be difficult without a graft 
biopsy. Cyclosporine therapy prolongs ATN, and some 
patients do not diurese until the dose is reduced drasti-
cally. Many centers avoid starting cyclosporine for the 
first several days, using ALG or a monoclonal antibody 
along with mycophenolic acid and prednisone until 
renal function is established. Figure 13-2 illustrates an 
algorithm followed by many transplant centers for early 
posttransplant management of recipients at high or low 
risk of early renal dysfunction.
The Rejection Episode
Early diagnosis of rejection allows prompt institution 
of therapy to preserve renal function and prevent irre-
versible damage. Clinical evidence of rejection is rarely 
characterized by fever, swelling, and tenderness over 
the allograft. Rejection may present only with a rise in 
serum creatinine, with or without a reduction in urine 
volume. The focus should be on ruling out other causes 
of functional deterioration.
Doppler ultrasonography or magnetic resonance 
angiography may be useful in ascertaining changes in 
the renal vasculature and in renal blood flow, even 
in the absence of changes in urinary flow. Thrombo-
sis of the renal vein occurs rarely; it may be revers-
ible if it is caused by technical factors and intervention 
is prompt. Diagnostic ultrasound is the procedure of 
choice to rule out urinary obstruction or to confirm 
the presence of perirenal collections of urine, blood, or 
lymph. When renal function has been good initially, a 
rise in the serum creatinine level is the most sensitive 
and reliable indicator of possible rejection and may be 
the only sign.
Calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine and tacrolimus) 
may cause deterioration in renal function in a manner 
similar to a rejection episode. In fact, rejection pro-
cesses tend to be more indolent with these inhibitors, 
and the only way to make a diagnosis may be by renal 
biopsy. Calcineurin inhibitors have an afferent arterio-
lar constrictor effect on the kidney and may produce 
permanent vascular and interstitial injury after sus-
tained high-dose therapy. The addition of angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs is likely to raise serum creati-
nine levels. The former are generally safe to use after 
the early months, whereas the latter are best avoided 
in all renal transplant patients. There is no universally 
accepted lesion that makes a diagnosis of calcineurin 
inhibitor toxicity, although interstitial fibrosis, isomet-
ric tubular vacuolization, and thickening of arteriolar 
walls have been noted by some. Basically, if the biopsy 
does not reveal moderate and active cellular rejection 
activity, the serum creatinine most likely will respond 
to a reduction in dose. Blood levels of drug can be use-
ful if they are very high or very low but do not cor-
relate precisely with renal function, although serial 
changes in a patient can be useful. If rejection activ-
ity is present in the biopsy, appropriate therapy is indi-
cated. The first rejection episode is usually treated with 
IV administration of methylprednisolone, 500–1000 mg 
daily for 3 days. Failure to respond is an indication for 
antibody therapy, usually with OKT3 or antithymo-
cyte globulin.
Biopsy may be necessary to confirm the presence of 
rejection; when evidence of antibody-mediated injury is 
present with endothelial injury and deposition of com-
plement component C4d is detected by fluorescence 
labeling, one can usually detect the antibody in recipi-
ent blood. The prognosis is poor, and aggressive use 
of plasmapheresis, immunoglobulin infusions, or anti-
CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) that targets B 
lymphocytes is indicated.
 
CHAPTER 13
Transplantation in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
155
Management Problems
The usual clinical manifestations of infection in the 
posttransplant period are blunted by immunosuppressive 
therapy. The major toxic effect of azathioprine is bone 
marrow suppression, which is less likely with myco-
phenolic acid, whereas calcineurin inhibitors have no 
marrow effects. All drugs predispose to unusual oppor-
tunistic infections, however. The typical times after 
transplantation when the most common opportunistic 
infections occur are shown in Table 13-5. The signs 
and symptoms of infection may be masked or distorted. 
Fever without obvious cause is common, and only after 
days or weeks may it become apparent that it has a viral 
or fungal origin. Bacterial infections are most common 
during the first month after transplantation. The impor-
tance of blood cultures in such patients cannot be over-
emphasized because systemic infection without obvious 
foci is common, although wound infections with or 
without urinary fistulas are the most common. Particu-
larly ominous are rapidly occurring pulmonary lesions, 
which may result in death within 5 days of onset. 
When these lesions become apparent, immunosuppres-
sive agents should be discontinued, except for mainte-
nance doses of prednisone.
Aggressive diagnostic procedures, including transbron-
chial and open-lung biopsy, are frequently indicated. 
No response
Empirical IV steroid “pulse”
therapy (methylprednisolone
0.2–1.0 g/d x 3 days)
Low calcineurin
inhibitor level
Adequate calcineurin
inhibitor level
Transplant dysfunctiona
Recipient PRA <10%, and
Recipient First Transplant and
    
    Donor cold ischemia time <12 h, and
    Donor physiology ideal, and
    Donor 15–35 years old
Recipient High % PRA (sensitization level)
Recipient Prior Transplant (lost in <3 months)
    Donor cold ischemia time >24 h, or
    Donor age >60 years, or
    Donor age >50 years with hypertension, or
    Donor kidney biopsy >20% glomerulosclerosis
“High risk”
Antilymphocyte globulin
“induction” therapy
Avoid calcineurin inhibitor 
until kidney function
is established
Steroids
   Calcineurin inhibitor
   Mycophenolic acid mofetil
No response
Acute rejection
Renal biopsy
Empirical IV steroid “pulse”
therapy (methylprednisolone
0.2–1 g/d x 3 days)
“Low risk”
Persistent renal dysfunction
or
De novo transplant dysfunctiona with
adequate calcineurin inhibitor levels
Steroids
   Calcineurin inhibitor
   Mycophenolic acid mofetil
Anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (OKT3 5 g/d x 7–10 days)
ALGORITHM FOR KIDNEY RECIPIENT CARE
Figure 13-2
A typical algorithm for early posttransplant care of a kid-
ney recipient. If any of the recipient or donor “high-risk” 
factors exist, more aggressive management is called for. 
Low-risk patients can be treated with a standard immuno-
suppressive regimen. Patients at higher risk of rejection or 
early ischemic and nephrotoxic transplant dysfunction are 
often induced with an antilymphocyte globulin to provide 
more potent early immunosuppression or to spare calcineurin 
nephrotoxicity. aWhen there is early transplant dysfunction, 
prerenal, obstructive, and vascular causes must be ruled out 
by ultrasonographic examination. The panel reactive anti-
body (PRA) is a quantitation of how much antibody is present 
in a candidate against a panel of cells representing the distri-
bution of antigens in the donor pool. APC, antigen-presenting 
cell; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
156
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
In the case of Pneumocystis carinii  infection, trimethoprim- 
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is the treatment of 
choice; amphotericin B has been used effectively in sys-
temic fungal infections. Prophylaxis against P. carinii 
with daily or alternate-day low-dose TMP-SMX is very 
effective. Involvement of the oropharynx with Candida 
may be treated with local nystatin. Tissue-invasive fun-
gal infections require treatment with systemic agents 
such as fluconazole. Small doses (a total of 300 mg) of 
amphotericin given over a period of 2 weeks may be 
effective in fungal infections refractory to fluconazole. 
Macrolide antibiotics, especially ketoconazole and eryth-
romycin, and some calcium channel blockers (diltiazem, 
verapamil) compete with calcineurin inhibitors for P450 
catabolism and cause elevated levels of these immunosup-
pressive drugs. Analeptics, such as phenytoin and carba-
mazepine, will increase catabolism to result in low levels. 
Aspergillus, Nocardia, and especially cytomegalovirus (CMV)
 infections also occur.
CMV is a common and dangerous DNA virus in 
transplant recipients. It does not generally appear until 
the end of the first posttransplant month. Active CMV 
infection is sometimes associated, or occasionally con-
fused, with rejection episodes. Patients at highest risk 
for severe CMV disease are those without anti-CMV 
antibodies who receive a graft from a CMV antibody–
positive donor (15% mortality). Valganciclovir is a 
cost-effective and bioavailable oral form of ganciclovir 
that has been proved effective in both prophylaxis and 
treatment of CMV disease. Early diagnosis in a febrile 
patient with clinical suspicion of CMV disease can be 
made by determining CMV viral load in the blood. 
A rise in IgM antibodies to CMV is also diagnostic. 
Culture of CMV from blood may be less sensitive. Tis-
sue invasion of CMV is common in the gastrointesti-
nal tract and lungs. CMV retinopathy occurs late in the 
course, if untreated. Treatment of active CMV disease 
with valganciclovir is always indicated. In many patients 
immune to CMV, viral activation can occur with major 
immunosuppressive regimens.
The polyoma group (BK, JC, SV40) is another class 
of DNA viruses that can become dormant in kidneys 
and can be activated by immunosuppression. When 
reactivation occurs with BK, there is a 50% chance of 
progressive fibrosis and loss of the graft within 1 year by 
the activated virus. Risk of infection is associated with 
the overall degree of immunosuppression rather than the 
individual immunosuppressive drugs used. Renal biopsy 
is necessary for the diagnosis. There have been prom-
ising results with leflunomide, cidofovir, and quinolone 
anitibiotics (which are effective against polyoma heli-
case), but it is most important to reduce the immuno-
suppressive load.
The complications of glucocorticoid therapy are well 
known and include gastrointestinal bleeding, impair-
ment of wound healing, osteoporosis, diabetes mellitus, 
cataract formation, and hemorrhagic pancreatitis. The 
treatment of unexplained jaundice in transplant patients 
should include cessation or reduction of immunosup-
pressive drugs if hepatitis or drug toxicity is suspected. 
Therapy in such circumstances often does not result in 
rejection of a graft, at least for several weeks. Acyclovir 
is effective in therapy for herpes simplex virus infections.
Chronic Lesions of the 
Transplanted Kidney
Although 1-year transplant survival is excellent, most 
recipients experience progressive decline in kidney 
function over time thereafter. Chronic renal transplant 
dysfunction can be caused by recurrent disease, hyperten-
sion, cyclosporine or tacrolimus nephrotoxicity, chronic 
immunologic rejection, secondary focal glomerulosclero-
sis, or a combination of these pathophysiologies. Chronic 
vascular changes with intimal proliferation and medial 
hypertrophy are commonly found. Control of systemic 
and intrarenal hypertension with ACE inhibitors is 
thought to have a beneficial influence on the rate of pro-
gression of chronic renal transplant dysfunction. Renal 
biopsy can distinguish subacute cellular rejection from 
recurrent disease or secondary focal sclerosis.
Malignancy
The incidence of tumors in patients on immunosup-
pressive therapy is 5–6%, or approximately 100 times 
greater than that in the general population in the same 
age range. The most common lesions are cancer of the 
skin and lips and carcinoma in situ of the cervix, as well 
as lymphomas such as non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The 
risks are increased in proportion to the total immuno-
suppressive load administered and the time elapsed since 
transplantation. Surveillance for skin and cervical cancers 
is necessary.
Table 13-5
The Most Common Opportunistic Infections 
in Renal Transplant Recipients
Peritransplant (<1 month)
Wound infections
Herpesvirus
Oral candidiasis
Urinary tract infection
Early (1–6 months)
Pneumocystis carinii
Cytomegalovirus
Legionella 
Listeria
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Late (>6 months)
Aspergillus 
Nocardia
BK virus (polyoma)
Herpes zoster
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
 
CHAPTER 13
Transplantation in the Treatment of Renal Failure 
157
Other Complications
Hypercalcemia after transplantation may indicate fail-
ure of hyperplastic parathyroid glands to regress. Asep-
tic necrosis of the head of the femur is probably due to 
preexisting hyperparathyroidism, with aggravation by 
glucocorticoid treatment. With improved management 
of calcium and phosphorus metabolism during chronic 
dialysis, the incidence of parathyroid-related complica-
tions has fallen dramatically. Persistent hyperparathyroid 
activity may require subtotal parathyroidectomy.
Hypertension may be caused by (1) native kidney dis-
ease, (2) rejection activity in the transplant, (3) renal 
artery stenosis if an end-to-end anastomosis was con-
structed with an iliac artery branch, and (4) renal calci-
neurin inhibitor toxicity. This toxicity may improve with 
reduction in dose. Whereas ACE inhibitors may be use-
ful, calcium channel blockers are more frequently used 
initially. Amelioration of hypertension to the range of 
120–130/70–80 mmHg should be the goal in all patients.
Although most transplant patients have robust pro-
duction of erythropoietin and normalization of hemo-
globin, anemia is commonly seen in the posttransplant 
period. Often the anemia is attributable to bone mar-
row–suppressant immunosuppressive medications such as 
azathioprine, mycophenolic acid, and sirolimus. Gastro-
intestinal bleeding is a common side effect of high-dose 
and long-term steroid administration. Many transplant 
patients have creatinine clearances of 30–50 mL/min and 
can be considered in the same way as other patients with 
chronic renal insufficiency for anemia management, 
including supplemental erythropoietin.
Chronic hepatitis, particularly when due to hepatitis B 
virus, can be a progressive, fatal disease over a decade or so. 
Patients who are persistently hepatitis B surface antigen– 
positive are at higher risk, according to some studies, but 
the presence of hepatitis C virus is also a concern when 
one embarks on a course of immunosuppression in a trans-
plant recipient.
Both chronic dialysis and renal transplant patients have 
a higher incidence of death from myocardial infarction 
and stroke than does the population at large, and this is 
particularly true in diabetic patients. Contributing factors 
are the use of glucocorticoids and sirolimus, as well as 
hypertension. Recipients of renal transplants have a high 
prevalence of coronary artery and peripheral vascular 
diseases. The percentage of deaths from these causes has 
been slowly rising as the numbers of transplanted diabetic 
patients and the average age of all recipients increase. 
More than 50% of renal recipient mortality is attributable 
to cardiovascular disease. In addition to strict control of 
blood pressure and blood lipid levels, close monitoring 
of patients for indications of further medical or surgical 
intervention is an important part of management.
 Robert Finberg 
I  Joyce Fingeroth 
158
 KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION 
 (See  Table 14-1 .) 
 early infections 
 Bacteria often cause infections that develop in the 
period immediately after kidney transplantation. There 
is a role for perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis, and 
many centers give cephalosporins to decrease the risk 
of postoperative complications. Urinary tract infec-
tions developing soon after transplantation are usually 
related to anatomic alterations resulting from surgery. 
Such early infections may require prolonged treatment 
(e.g., 6 weeks of antibiotic administration for pyelone-
phritis). Urinary tract infections that occur >6 months 
after transplantation may be treated for shorter periods 
because they do not seem to be associated with the high 
rate of pyelonephritis or relapse seen with infections 
that occur in the fi rst 3 months. 
 Daily prophylaxis with one double-strength tablet of 
TMP-SMX (800 mg of sulfamethoxazole; 160 mg of tri-
methoprim) for the fi rst 4–6 months after transplantation 
decreases the incidence of early and middle-period infec-
tions (see  Table 14-1 , and  Table 14-2 ). 
 INFECTIONS IN KIDNEY 
TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS 
 CHAPTER 14 
 middle-Period infections 
 Because of continuing immunosuppression, kidney 
transplant recipients are predisposed to lung infections 
characteristic of those in patients with T-cell defi ciency 
(i.e., infections with intracellular bacteria, mycobacteria, 
nocardiae, fungi, viruses, and parasites). A high mortal-
ity rate associated with  Legionella pneumophila infection 
led to the closing of renal transplant units in hospitals 
with endemic legionellosis. 
 About 50% of all renal transplant recipients present-
ing with fever 1–4 months after transplantation have 
evidence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease; CMV 
itself accounts for the fever in more than two-thirds of 
cases and thus is the predominant pathogen during this 
period. CMV infection may also present as arthralgias, 
myalgias, or organ-specifi c symptoms. During this period, 
this infection may represent primary disease (in the case 
of a seronegative recipient of a kidney from a seropositive 
donor) or may represent reactivation disease or superin-
fection. Patients may have atypical lymphocytosis. Unlike 
immunocompetent patients, however, they rarely have 
lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly. Therefore, clinical 
suspicion and laboratory confi rmation are necessary for 
diagnosis. The clinical syndrome may be accompanied 
by bone marrow suppression (particularly leukopenia). 
TABLE 14-1
 common infections after kidney transPlantation 
 Period after transPlantation 
 early (<1 month) 
 middle (1–4 months) 
 late (>6 months) 
 Bacterial and fungal ( Candida ) infections 
(cystitis, pyelonephritis) associated with 
urinary tract catheters (highest risk in kidney 
transplantation) 
 Renal transplantation: BK virus 
infection (associated with 
nephropathy); JC virus infection 
 Renal transplantation: bacteria (late urinary 
tract infections, usually not associated 
with bacteremia); BK virus (nephropathy, 
graft failure, generalized vasculopathy) 
 
CHAPTER 14
Infections in Kidney Transplant Recipients 
159
CMV also causes glomerulopathy and is associated with 
an increased incidence of other opportunistic infec-
tions. Because of the frequency and severity of dis-
ease, a considerable effort has been made to prevent 
and treat CMV infection in renal transplant recipients. 
An immune globulin preparation enriched with anti-
bodies to CMV was used by many centers in the past 
in an effort to protect the group at highest risk for 
severe infection (seronegative recipients of seroposi-
tive kidneys). However, with the development of effec-
tive oral antiviral agents, CMV immune globulin is no 
longer used. Ganciclovir (valganciclovir) is beneficial 
when prophylaxis is indicated and for the treatment of 
serious CMV disease. The availability of valganciclo-
vir has allowed most centers to move to oral prophy-
laxis for transplant recipients. Infection with the other 
herpesviruses may become evident within 6 months 
after transplantation or later. Early after transplantation, 
herpes simplex virus (HSV) may cause either oral or 
anogenital lesions that are usually responsive to acyclovir. 
Large ulcerating lesions in the anogenital area may lead 
to bladder and rectal dysfunction as well as predisposing 
to bacterial infection. Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) may 
cause fatal disseminated infection in nonimmune kidney 
transplant recipients, but in immune patients reactivation 
zoster usually does not disseminate outside the derma-
tome; thus disseminated VZV infection is a less fearsome 
complication in kidney transplantation than in hemato-
poeitic stem cell (HSC) transplantation. human herpes-
virus type 6 (HHV-6) reactivation may take place and 
(although usually asymptomatic) may be associated with 
fever, rash, marrow suppression, or rarely encephalitis.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) disease is more serious; it 
may present as an extranodal proliferation of B cells that 
invade the CNS, nasopharynx, liver, small bowel, heart, 
and other organs, including the transplanted kidney. 
The disease is diagnosed by the finding of a mass of 
proliferating EBV-positive B cells. The incidence of 
Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disor-
der (EBV-LPD) is higher among patients who acquire 
EBV infection from the donor and among patients given 
high doses of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, glucocorticoids, 
and anti–T-cell antibodies. Disease may regress once 
immunocompetence is restored. Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus (KSHV) infection can be trans-
mitted with the donor kidney and result in development 
of Kaposi’s sarcoma, although it more often represents 
reactivation of latent infection of the recipient. Kaposi’s 
sarcoma often appears within 1 year after transplanta-
tion, although the range of onset is wide (1 month to 
~20 years). Avoidance of immunosuppressive agents that 
inhibit calcineurin has been associated with less Kaposi’s 
sarcoma, less EBV disease, and even less CMV replica-
tion. The use of rapamycin (sirolimus) has independently 
led to regression of Kaposi’s sarcoma.
The papovaviruses BK virus and JC virus (polyoma-
virus hominis types 1 and 2) have been cultured from 
the urine of kidney transplant recipients (as they have 
from that of HSC transplant recipients) in the setting 
of profound immunosuppression. High levels of BK 
virus replication detected by polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) in urine and blood are predictive of pathol-
ogy, especially in the setting of renal transplantation. 
JC virus may rarely cause similar disease in kidney 
transplantation. Urinary excretion of BK virus and BK 
viremia are associated with the development of ureteral 
strictures, polyomavirus-associated nephropathy (1–10% 
of renal transplant recipients), and (less commonly) gen-
eralized vasculopathy. Timely detection and early reduc-
tion of immunosuppression are critical and can reduce 
rates of graft loss related to polyomavirus-associated 
nephropathy from 90% to 10–30%. Therapeutic responses 
TABLE 14-2
Prophylactic Regimens Commonly Used to Decrease Risk of Infection in Transplant Recipients
Risk Factor
Organism
Prophylactic Drug
Examination(s)a
Travel to or residence in area 
with known risk of endemic 
fungal infection
Histoplasma, Blastomyces, 
Coccidioides
Consider imidazoles based on clini-
cal and laboratory assessment
Chest radiography, anti-
gen testing, serology
Latent herpesviruses
HSV, VZV, CMV, EBV
Acyclovir after HSC transplantation 
to prevent HSV and VZV infection; 
ganciclovir for CMV (?EBV/?KSHV) 
in some settings
Serologic tests for HSV, 
VZV, CMV, HHV-6, EBV, 
KSHV; PCR
Latent fungi and parasites
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 
Toxoplasma gondii
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(dapsone or atovaquone)
Serologic test for  
Toxoplasma
History of exposure to active 
or latent tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Isoniazid if recent conversion or 
positive chest imaging and/or no 
previous treatment
Chest imaging; TST and/
or cell-based assay
aSerologic examination, TST (tuberculin skin test), and interferon assays may be less reliable after transplantation.
Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HHV-6, human herpesvirus type 6; HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; HSV, herpes 
simplex virus; KSHV, Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated herpesvirus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
160
Section III
Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Renal Failure
to IVIg, quinolones, leflunomide, and cidofovir have 
been reported, but the efficacy of these agents has not 
been substantiated through adequate clinical study. Most 
centers approach the problem by reducing immuno-
suppression in an effort to enhance host immunity and 
decrease viral titers. JC virus is associated with rare cases 
of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Adeno-
viruses may persist and cause hemorrhagic nephritis/
cystitis with continued immunosuppression in these 
patients, but disseminated disease as seen in HSC trans-
plant recipients is much less common.
Kidney transplant recipients are also subject to infec-
tions with other intracellular organisms. These patients 
may develop pulmonary infections with Mycobacterium, 
Aspergillus, and Mucor species as well as infections with 
other pathogens in which the T-cell/macrophage axis 
plays an important role. Listeria monocytogenes is a com-
mon cause of bacteremia ≥1 month after renal trans-
plantation and should be seriously considered in renal 
transplant recipients presenting with fever and head-
ache. Kidney transplant recipients may develop Sal-
monella bacteremia, which can lead to endovascular 
infections and require prolonged therapy. Pulmonary 
infections with Pneumocystis are common unless the 
patient is maintained on TMP-SMX prophylaxis. 
Nocardia infection may present in the skin, bones, and 
lungs or in the CNS, where it usually takes the form 
of single or multiple brain abscesses. Nocardiosis gen-
erally occurs ≥1 month after transplantation and may 
follow immunosuppressive treatment for an episode of 
rejection. Pulmonary manifestations most commonly 
consist of localized disease with or without cavities, 
but the disease may be disseminated. The diagnosis is 
made by culture of the organism from sputum or from 
the involved nodule. As with Pneumocystis, prophylaxis 
with TMP-SMX is often efficacious in the prevention 
of disease.
Toxoplasmosis can occur in seropositive patients but 
is less common than in other transplant settings, usually 
developing in the first few months after kidney trans-
plantation. Again, TMP-SMX is helpful in prevention. 
In endemic areas, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, 
and blastomycosis may cause pulmonary infiltrates or 
disseminated disease.
Late infections
Late infections (>6 months after kidney transplantation) 
may involve the CNS and include CMV retinitis as well 
as other CNS manifestations of CMV disease. Patients 
(particularly those whose immunosuppression has been 
increased) are at risk for subacute meningitis due to Cryp-
tococcus neoformans. Cryptococcal disease may present in 
an insidious manner (sometimes as a skin infection before 
the development of clear CNS findings). Listeria menin-
gitis may have an acute presentation and requires prompt 
therapy to avoid a fatal outcome. TMP-SMX prophylaxis 
may reduce the frequency of Listeria infections.
Patients who continue to take glucocorticoids are 
predisposed to ongoing infection. “Transplant elbow,” 
a recurrent bacterial infection in and around the elbow 
that is thought to result from a combination of poor ten-
sile strength of the skin of steroid-treated patients and 
steroid-induced proximal myopathy, requires patients to 
push themselves up with their elbows to get out of chairs. 
Bouts of cellulitis (usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus) 
recur until patients are provided with elbow protection.
Kidney transplant recipients are susceptible to inva-
sive fungal infections, including those due to Aspergillus 
and Rhizopus, which may present as superficial lesions 
before dissemination. Mycobacterial infection (particu-
larly that with Mycobacterium marinum) can be diagnosed 
by skin examination. Infection with Prototheca wicker-
hamii (an achlorophyllic alga) has been diagnosed by skin 
biopsy. Warts caused by human papillomaviruses (HPVs) 
are a late consequence of persistent immunosuppression; 
imiquimod or other forms of local therapy are usually 
satisfactory. Merkel cell carcinoma, a rare and aggressive 
neuroendocrine skin tumor, the frequency of which is 
increased fivefold in elderly solid-organ transplantation 
(SOT) (especially kidney) recipients, has been linked to a 
novel polyoma virus (Merkel cell polyomavirus).
Notably, although BK virus replication and virus- 
associated disease can be detected far earlier, the median time 
to clinical diagnosis of polyomavirus-associated nephro-
pathy is ~300 days, qualifying it as a late-onset disease. With 
establishment of better screening procedures (e.g., blood 
PCR), it is likely that this disease will be detected ear-
lier (see “Middle-Period Infections” discussed earlier).
SECTION IV
Glomerular  
and Tubular  
Disorders
162
 Julia b. lewis  I   eric G. neilson 
 Two human kidneys harbor nearly 1.8 million glomer-
ular capillary tufts. Each glomerular tuft resides within 
Bowman’s space. The capsule circumscribing this space 
is lined by parietal epithelial cells that transition into tubu-
lar epithelia forming the proximal nephron or migrate 
into the tuft to replenish podocytes. The glomerular cap-
illary tuft derives from an afferent arteriole that forms a 
branching capillary bed embedded in mesangial matrix 
( Fig. 15-1 ). This capillary network funnels into an effer-
ent arteriole, which passes fi ltered blood into cortical 
peritubular capillaries or medullary vasa recta that supply 
and exchange with a folded tubular architecture. Hence 
the glomerular capillary tuft, fed and drained by arterioles, 
represents an arteriolar portal system. Fenestrated endo-
thelial cells resting on a glomerular basement membrane 
(GBM) line glomerular capillaries. Delicate foot processes 
extending from epithelial podocytes shroud the outer 
surface of these capillaries, and podocytes interconnect 
to each other by slit-pore membranes forming a selec-
tive fi ltration barrier. 
 The glomerular capillaries fi lter 120–180 L/d of plasma 
water containing various solutes for reclamation or dis-
charge by downstream tubules. Most large proteins and 
all cells are excluded from fi ltration by a physicochemi-
cal barrier governed by pore size and negative electro-
static charge. The mechanics of fi ltration and reclamation
are quite complicated for many solutes . For exam-
ple, in the case of serum albumin, the glomerulus is 
an imperfect barrier. Although albumin has a nega-
tive charge, which would tend to repel the negatively 
charged GBM, it only has a physical radius of 3.6 nm, 
while pores in the GBM and slit-pore membranes have 
a radius of 4 nm. Consequently, variable amounts of 
albumin inevitably cross the fi ltration barrier to be 
reclaimed by megalin and cubilin receptors along the 
proximal tubule. Remarkably, humans with normal 
nephrons do not excrete more than 8–10 mg of albu-
min in daily voided urine, approximately 20–60% of 
total excreted protein. This amount of albumin, and 
other proteins, can rise to gram quantities following glo-
merular injury. 
 The breadth of diseases affecting the glomerulus is 
expansive because the glomerular capillaries can be injured 
in a variety of ways, producing many different lesions and 
several unique changes to urinalysis. Some order to this 
vast subject is brought by grouping all of these diseases 
into a smaller number of clinical syndromes. 
 Pathogenesis of 
glomerular Disease 
 There are many forms of glomerular disease with patho-
genesis variably linked to the presence of genetic mutations, 
infection, toxin exposure, autoimmunity, atherosclero-
sis, hypertension, emboli, thrombosis, or diabetes mel-
litus. Even after careful study, however, the cause often 
remains unknown, and the lesion is called  idiopathic.
Specifi c or unique features of pathogenesis are mentioned 
with the description of each of the glomerular diseases 
later in this chapter. 
 Some glomerular diseases result from genetic muta-
tions producing familial disease or a founder effect: con-
genital nephrotic syndrome from mutations in  NPHS1
(nephrin) and  NPHS2 (podocin) affect the slit-pore 
membrane at birth, and  TRPC6 cation channel muta-
tions produce  focal segmental glomerulosclerosis  (FSGS)
in adulthood; polymorphisms in the gene encoding 
apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) are a major risk for nearly 
70% of African Americans with nondiabetic end-stage 
renal disease (ESRD), particularly FSGS; mutations in 
complement factor H associated with  membranoprolifera-
tive glomerulonephritis  (MPGN) or  atypical hemolytic ure-
mic syndrome (aHUS) , type II partial lipodystrophy from 
mutations in genes encoding lamin A/C, or PPARγ
cause a metabolic syndrome associated with MPGN, 
which is sometimes accompanied by dense deposits and 
C3 nephritic factor; Alport’s syndrome, from mutations 
 GLOMERULAR DISEASES 
 chaPter 15 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
163
in the genes encoding for the α3, α4, or α5 chains of 
type IV collagen, produces split-basement membranes with 
glomerulosclerosis; and lysosomal storage diseases, such as 
α-galactosidase A deficiency causing Fabry’s disease and 
N-acetylneuraminic acid hydrolase deficiency causing 
nephrosialidosis, produce FSGS.
Systemic hypertension and atherosclerosis can pro-
duce pressure stress, ischemia, or lipid oxidants that lead 
to chronic glomerulosclerosis. Malignant hypertension can 
quickly complicate glomerulosclerosis with fibrinoid 
necrosis of arterioles and glomeruli, thrombotic micro-
angiopathy, and acute renal failure. Diabetic nephropathy 
is an acquired sclerotic injury associated with thicken-
ing of the GBM secondary to the long-standing effects 
of hyperglycemia, advanced glycosylation end products, 
and reactive oxygen species.
Inflammation of the glomerular capillaries is called 
glomerulonephritis. Most glomerular or mesangial anti-
gens involved in immune-mediated glomerulonephritis are 
unknown (Fig. 15-2). Glomerular epithelial or mesangial 
cells may shed or express epitopes that mimic other immu-
nogenic proteins made elsewhere in the body. Bacteria, 
fungi, and viruses can directly infect the kidney producing 
their own antigens. Autoimmune diseases like idiopathic 
membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN) or MPGN are 
confined to the kidney, while systemic inflammatory 
diseases like lupus nephritis or granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s) spread to the kidney, causing secondary glo-
merular injury. Antiglomerular basement membrane disease 
producing Goodpasture’s syndrome primarily injures 
both the lung and kidney because of the narrow distri-
bution of the α3 NC1 domain of type IV collagen that is 
the target antigen.
Local activation of toll-like receptors on glomerular 
cells, deposition of immune complexes, or complement 
injury to glomerular structures induces mononuclear 
cell infiltration, which subsequently leads to an adaptive 
immune response attracted to the kidney by local release 
Figure 15-1
Glomerular architecture. A. The glomerular capillaries form 
from a branching network of renal arteries (arterioles) lead-
ing to an afferent arteriole, glomerular capillary bed (tuft), 
and a draining efferent arteriole. (From VH Gattone II et al: 
Hypertension 5:8, 1983.) B. Scanning electron micrograph 
of podocytes that line the outer surface of the glomerular 
capillaries (arrow shows foot process). C. Scanning electron 
micrograph of the fenestrated endothelia lining the glomeru-
lar capillary. D. The various normal regions of the glomerulus 
on light microscopy. (A–C, courtesy of Dr. Vincent Gattone, 
Indiana University; with permission.)
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
164
of chemokines. Neutrophils, macrophages, and T cells 
are drawn by chemokines into the glomerular tuft, where 
they react with antigens and epitopes on or near somatic 
cells or their structures, producing more cytokines and 
proteases that damage the mesangium, capillaries, and/or 
the GBM. While the adaptive immune response is simi-
lar to that of other tissues, early T-cell activation plays an 
important role in the mechanism of glomerulonephritis. 
Antigens presented by class II major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) molecules on macrophages and den-
dritic cells in conjunction with associative recognition 
molecules engage the CD4/8 T-cell repertoire.
Mononuclear cells by themselves can injure the kid-
ney, but autoimmune events that damage glomeruli 
Basement
membrane
Endothelia
Podocytes
Subendothelial
deposit
Subepithelial
deposit
Linear IgG staining 
IgG lumpy-bumpy staining 
C
B
A
D
Basement membrane
damage
Extracapillary
proliferation
Endocapillary
proliferation
Cytokines
Chemokines
TH1/2
Cytokines
Chemokines
Mθ
N
Oxidants
Proteases
C3/C5-9MAC
Immune
deposits
Figure 15-2 
The glomerulus is injured by a variety of mechanisms. 
A. Preformed immune deposits can precipitate from the cir-
culation and collect along the glomerular basement mem-
brane (GBM) in the subendothelial space or can form in situ 
along the subepithelial space. B. Immunofluorescent staining 
of glomeruli with labeled anti-IgG demonstrating linear stain-
ing from a patient with anti-GBM disease or immune depos-
its from a patient with membranous glomerulonephritis. 
C. The mechanisms of glomerular injury have a complicated 
pathogenesis. Immune deposits and complement deposi-
tion classically draw macrophages and neutrophils into the 
glomerulus. T lymphocytes may follow to participate in the 
injury pattern as well. D. Amplification mediators as locally 
derived oxidants and proteases expand this inflammation, 
and, depending on the location of the target antigen and 
the genetic polymorphisms of the host, basement mem-
branes are damaged with either endocapillary or extracapil-
lary proliferation.
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
165
classically produce a humoral immune response. Post-
streptococcal glomerulonephritis, lupus nephritis, and idio-
pathic membranous nephritis typically are associated with 
immune deposits along the GBM, while anti-GBM 
antibodies produce the linear binding of anti-GBM dis-
ease. Preformed circulating immune complexes can pre-
cipitate along the subendothelial side of the GBM, while 
other immune deposits form in situ on the sub­epithelial 
side. These latter deposits accumulate when circulating 
autoantibodies find their antigen trapped along the sub-
epithelial edge of the GBM. Immune deposits in the 
glomerular mesangium may result from the deposition 
of preformed circulating complexes or in situ antigen- 
antibody interactions. Immune deposits stimulate the 
release of local proteases and activate the complement 
cascade, producing C5–9 attack complexes. In addition, 
local oxidants damage glomerular structures, producing 
proteinuria and effacement of the podocytes. Overlap-
ping etiologies or pathophysiologic mechanisms can pro-
duce similar glomerular lesions, suggesting that down-
stream molecular and cellular responses often converge 
toward common patterns of injury.
Progression of  
Glomerular Disease
Persistent glomerulonephritis that worsens renal func-
tion is always accompanied by interstitial nephritis, renal 
fibrosis, and tubular atrophy (Fig. 4-27). What is not so 
obvious, however, is that renal failure in glomerulone-
phritis best correlates histologically with the appearance 
of tubulointerstitial nephritis rather than with the type 
of inciting glomerular injury.
Loss of renal function due to interstitial damage is 
explained hypothetically by several mechanisms. The 
simplest explanation is that urine flow is impeded by 
tubular obstruction as a result of interstitial inflamma-
tion and fibrosis. Thus, obstruction of the tubules with 
debris or by extrinsic compression results in aglomeru-
lar nephrons. A second mechanism suggests that inter-
stitial changes, including interstitial edema or fibrosis, 
alter tubular and vascular architecture and thereby 
compromise the normal tubular transport of solutes and 
water from tubular lumen to vascular space. This fail-
ure increases the solute and water content of the tubule 
fluid, resulting in isosthenuria and polyuria. Adap-
tive mechanisms related to tubuloglomerular feedback 
also fail, resulting in a reduction of renin output from 
the juxtaglomerular apparatus trapped by interstitial 
inflammation. Consequently, the local vasoconstrictive 
influence of angiotensin II on the glomerular arteri-
oles decreases, and filtration drops owing to a gener-
alized decrease in arteriolar tone. A third mechanism 
involves changes in vascular resistance due to damage 
of peritubular capillaries. The cross-sectional volume 
of these capillaries is decreased by interstitial inflam-
mation, edema, or fibrosis. These structural alterations 
in vascular resistance affect renal function through two 
mechanisms. First, tubular cells are very metaboli-
cally active, and, as a result, decreased perfusion leads 
to ischemic injury. Second, impairment of glomerular 
arteriolar outflow leads to increased intraglomerular 
hypertension in less-involved glomeruli; this selective 
intraglomerular hypertension aggravates and extends 
mesangial sclerosis and glomerulosclerosis to less-involved 
glomeruli. Regardless of the exact mechanism, early 
acute tubulointerstitial nephritis (Fig. 4-27) suggests poten-
tially recoverable renal function, while the development 
of chronic interstitial fibrosis prognosticates permanent loss 
(Fig. 4-30).
Persistent damage to glomerular capillaries spreads to 
the tubulointerstitium in association with proteinuria. 
There is an untested hypothesis that efferent arterioles 
leading from inflamed glomeruli carry forward inflam-
matory mediators, which induces downstream interstitial 
nephritis, resulting in fibrosis. Glomerular filtrate from 
injured glomerular capillaries adherent to Bowman’s 
capsule may also be misdirected to the periglomeru-
lar interstitium. Most nephrologists believe, however, 
that proteinuric glomerular filtrate forming tubular fluid 
is the primary route to downstream tubulointerstitial 
injury, although none of these hypotheses are mutually 
exclusive.
The simplest explanation for the effect of protein-
uria on the development of interstitial nephritis is that 
increasingly severe proteinuria, carrying activated cyto-
kines and lipoproteins producing reactive oxygen spe-
cies, triggers a downstream inflammatory cascade in and 
around epithelial cells lining the tubular nephron. These 
effects induce T-lymphocyte and macrophage infiltrates 
in the interstitial spaces along with fibrosis and tubular 
atrophy.
Tubules disaggregate following direct damage to their 
basement membranes, leading to epithelial-mesenchymal 
transitions forming more interstitial fibroblasts at the site 
of injury. Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), fibro-
blast growth factor 2 (FGF-2), hypoxemia-inducible 
factor 1α (HIF-1α), and platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF) are particularly active in this transition. With 
persistent nephritis, fibroblasts multiply and lay down 
tenascin and a fibronectin scaffold for the polymeriza-
tion of new interstitial collagen types I/III. These events 
form scar tissue through a process called fibrogenesis. In 
experimental studies, bone morphogenetic protein 7 and 
hepatocyte growth factor can reverse early fibrogenesis 
and preserve tubular architecture. When fibroblasts out-
distance their survival factors, apoptosis occurs, and the 
permanent renal scar becomes acellular, leading to irre-
versible renal failure.
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
166
approach to the 
patient	
Glomerular Disease
Hematuria, Proteinuria, and Pyuria  
Patients with glomerular disease usually have some 
hematuria with varying degrees of proteinuria. Hema-
turia is typically asymptomatic. As few as three to five 
red blood cells in the spun sediment from first-voided 
morning urine is suspicious. The diagnosis of glomerular 
injury can be delayed because patients will not realize 
they have microscopic hematuria, and only rarely with 
the exception of IgA nephropathy and sickle cell disease 
is gross hematuria present. When working up micro-
scopic hematuria, perhaps accompanied by minimal 
proteinuria (<500 mg/24 h), it is important to exclude 
anatomic lesions, such as malignancy of the urinary 
tract, particularly in older men. Microscopic hematu-
ria may also appear with the onset of benign prostatic 
hypertrophy, interstitial nephritis, papillary necrosis, 
hypercalciuria, renal stones, cystic kidney diseases, or 
renal vascular injury. However, when red blood cell casts 
(Fig. 4-34) or dysmorphic red blood cells are found in 
the sediment, glomerulonephritis is likely.
Sustained proteinuria >1–2 g/24 h is also commonly 
associated with glomerular disease. Patients often will 
not know they have proteinuria unless they become 
edematous or notice foaming urine on voiding. Sus-
tained proteinuria has to be distinguished from lesser 
amounts of so-called benign proteinuria in the normal 
population (Table 15-1). This latter class of proteinuria 
is nonsustained, generally <1 g/24 h, and is sometimes 
called functional or transient proteinuria. Fever, exercise, 
obesity, sleep apnea, emotional stress, and congestive 
heart failure can explain transient proteinuria. Protein-
uria only seen with upright posture is called orthostatic 
proteinuria and has a benign prognosis. Isolated pro-
teinuria sustained over multiple clinic visits is found 
in diabetic nephropathy, nil lesion, mesangioprolifera-
tive glomerulonephritis, and FSGS. Proteinuria in most 
adults with glomerular disease is nonselective, contain-
ing albumin and a mixture of other serum proteins, 
while in children with nil lesion from minimal change 
disease, the proteinuria is selective and composed 
largely of albumin.
Table 15-1
Urine Assays for Albuminuria/Proteinuria
24-h Albumina 
(mg/24 h)
Albumina/Creatinine 
Ratio (mg/g)
Dipstick Proteinuria
24-h Urine Proteinb 
(mg/24 h)
Normal
8–10
<30
–
<150
Microalbuminuria
30–300
30–300
–/Trace/1+
–
Proteinuria
>300
>300
Trace–3+
>150
aAlbumin detected by radioimmunoassay.
bAlbumin represents 30–70% of the total protein excreted in the urine.
Some patients with inflammatory glomerular disease, 
such as acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis or 
MPGN, have pyuria characterized by the presence of con-
siderable numbers of leukocytes. This latter finding has 
to be distinguished from urine infected with bacteria.
Clinical Syndromes  Various forms of glo-
merular injury can also be parsed into several distinct 
syndromes on clinical grounds (Table 15-2). These syn-
dromes, however, are not always mutually exclusive. 
There is an acute nephritic syndrome producing 1–2 g/
24 h of proteinuria, hematuria with red blood cell casts, 
pyuria, hypertension, fluid retention, and a rise in serum 
creatinine associated with a reduction in glomerular fil-
tration. If glomerular inflammation develops slowly, the 
serum creatinine will rise gradually over many weeks, 
but if the serum creatinine rises quickly, particularly over 
a few days, acute nephritis is sometimes called rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN); the histopatho-
logic term crescentic glomerulonephritis is the pathologic 
equivalent of the clinical presentation of RPGN. When 
patients with RPGN present with lung hemorrhage 
from Goodpasture’s syndrome, antineutrophil cytoplas-
mic antibodies (ANCA)-associated small-vessel vascu-
litis, lupus erythematosus, or cryoglobulinemia, they 
are often diagnosed as having a pulmonary-renal syn-
drome. Nephrotic syndrome describes the onset of heavy 
proteinuria (>3.0 g/24 h), hypertension, hypercholester-
olemia, hypoalbuminemia, edema/anasarca, and micro-
scopic hematuria; if only large amounts of proteinuria 
are present without clinical manifestations, the condi-
tion is sometimes called nephrotic-range proteinuria. The 
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in these patients may ini-
tially be normal or, rarely, higher than normal, but with 
persistent hyperfiltration and continued nephron loss, 
it typically declines over months to years. Patients with 
a basement membrane syndrome either have genetically 
abnormal basement membranes (Alport’s syndrome) 
or an autoimmune response to basement membrane  
collagen IV (Goodpasture’s syndrome) associated with 
microscopic hematuria, mild to heavy proteinuria, and 
hypertension with variable elevations in serum creatinine. 
Glomerular-vascular syndrome describes patients with 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
167
Table 15-2
Patterns of Clinical Glomerulonephritis
Glomerular Syndromes
Proteinuria
Hematuria
Vascular Injury
Acute Nephritic Syndromes
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritisa
+/++
++/+++
-
Subacute bacterial endocarditisa
+/++
++
-
Lupus nephritisa
+/++
++/+++
-
Antiglomerular basement membrane diseasea
++
++/+++
-
IgA nephropathya
+/++
++/+++ c
-
ANCA small-vessel vasculitisa
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
+/++
++/+++
++++
Microscopic polyangiitis
+/++
++/+++
++++
Churg-Strauss syndrome
+/++
++/+++
++++
Henoch-Schönlein purpuraa
+/++
++/+++
++++
Cryoglobulinemiaa
+/++
++/+++
++++
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritisa
++
++/+++
-
Mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis
+
+/++
-
Pulmonary-Renal Syndromes
Goodpasture’s syndromea
++
++/+++
-
ANCA small-vessel vasculitisa
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
+/++
++/+++
++++
Microscopic polyangiitis
+/++
++/+++
++++
Churg-Strauss syndrome
+/++
++/+++
++++
Henoch-Schönlein purpuraa
+/++
++/+++
++++
Cryoglobulinemiaa
+/++
++/+++
++++
Nephrotic Syndromes
Minimal change disease
++++
-
-
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
+++/++++
+
-
Membranous glomerulonephritis
++++
+
-
Diabetic nephropathy
++/++++
-/+
-
AL and AA amyloidosis
+++/++++
+
+/++
Light-chain deposition disease
+++
+
-
Fibrillary-immunotactoid disease
+++/++++
+
+
Fabry’s disease
+
+
-
Basement Membrane Syndromes
Anti-GBM diseasea
++
++/+++
-
Alport’s syndrome
++
++
-
Thin basement membrane disease
+
++
-
Nail-patella syndrome
++/+++
++
-
Glomerular Vascular Syndromes
Atherosclerotic nephropathy
+
+
+++
Hypertensive nephropathyb
+/++
+/++
++
Cholesterol emboli
+/++
++
+++
Sickle cell disease
+/++
++ c
+++
(continued )
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
168
vascular injury producing hematuria and moderate pro-
teinuria. Affected individuals can have vasculitis, throm-
botic microangiopathy, antiphospholipid syndrome, 
or, more commonly, a systemic disease such as athero-
sclerosis, cholesterol emboli, hypertension, sickle cell 
anemia, and autoimmunity. Infectious disease–associated 
syndrome is most important if one has an international 
perspective. Save for subacute bacterial endocarditis in 
the Western Hemisphere, malaria and schistosomiasis 
may be the most common causes of glomerulonephri-
tis throughout the world, closely followed by HIV and 
chronic hepatitis B and C. These infectious diseases pro-
duce a variety of inflammatory reactions in glomerular 
capillaries, ranging from nephrotic syndrome to acute 
nephritic injury, and urinalyses that demonstrate a com-
bination of hematuria and proteinuria.
These six general categories of syndromes are usu-
ally determined at the bedside with the help of a his-
tory and physical examination, blood chemistries, renal 
ultrasound, and urinalysis. These initial studies help 
frame further diagnostic workup that typically involves 
some testing of the serum for the presence of various 
proteins (HIV and hepatitis B and C antigens), antibodies 
[anti-GBM, antiphospholipid, antistreptolysin O (ASO), 
anti-DNAse, antihyaluronidase, ANCA, anti-DNA, cryo-
globulins, anti-HIV, and anti-hepatitis B and C antibodies] 
or depletion of complement components (C3 and C4). The 
bedside history and physical examination can also help 
determine whether the glomerulonephritis is isolated to 
the kidney (primary glomerulonephritis) or is part of a sys-
temic disease (secondary glomerulonephritis).
When confronted with an abnormal urinalysis and 
elevated serum creatinine, with or without edema or 
congestive heart failure, one must consider whether 
the glomerulonephritis is acute or chronic. This assess-
ment is best made by careful history (last known 
urinalysis or serum creatinine during pregnancy or 
insurance physical, evidence of infection, or use of 
medication or recreational drugs); the size of the  
kidneys on renal ultrasound examination; and how 
the patient feels at presentation. Chronic glomeru-
lar disease often presents with decreased kidney size. 
Patients who quickly develop renal failure are fatigued 
and weak; feel miserable; often have uremic symptoms 
associated with nausea, vomiting, fluid retention, and 
somnolence. Primary glomerulonephritis presenting 
Table 15-2
Patterns of Clinical Glomerulonephritis (Continued)
Glomerular Syndromes
Proteinuria
Hematuria
Vascular Injury
Thrombotic microangiopathies
++
++
+++
Antiphospholipid syndrome
++
++
+++
ANCA small-vessel vasculitisa
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
+/++
++/+++
++++
Microscopic polyangiitis
+/++
++/+++
++++
Churg-Strauss syndrome
+++
++/+++
++++
Henoch-Schönlein purpuraa
+/++
++/+++
++++
Cryoglobulinemiaa
+/++
++/+++
++++
AL and AA amyloidosis
+++/++++
+
+/++
Infectious Disease–Associated Syndromes
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritisa
+/++
++/+++
-
Subacute bacterial endocarditisa
+/++
++
-
HIV
+++
+/++
-
Hepatitis B and C
+++
+/++
-
Syphilis
+++
+
-
Leprosy
+++
+
-
Malaria
+++
+/++
-
Schistosomiasis
+++
+/++
-
aCan present as rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN); sometimes called crescentic glomerulonephritis.
bCan present as a malignant hypertensive crisis producing an aggressive fibrinoid necrosis in arterioles and small arteries with microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia.
cCan present with gross hematuria.
Abbreviations: AA, amyloid A; AL, amyloid L; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; GBM, glomerular basement membrane.
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
169
with renal failure that has progressed slowly, how-
ever,  can be remarkably asymptomatic, as are patients 
with acute glomerulonephritis without much loss in 
renal function. Once this initial information is collected, 
selected patients who are clinically stable, have ade-
quate blood clotting parameters, and are willing and 
able to receive treatment are encouraged to have a renal 
biopsy. Biopsies can be done safely with an ultrasound-
guided biopsy gun.
Renal Pathology
A renal biopsy in the setting of glomerulonephri-
tis quickly identifies the type of glomerular injury and 
often suggests a course of treatment. The biopsy is pro-
cessed for light microscopy using stains for hematoxylin 
and eosin (H&E) to assess cellularity and architecture, 
periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) to stain carbohydrate moieties 
in the membranes of the glomerular tuft and tubules, 
Jones-methenamine silver to enhance basement membrane 
structure, Congo red for amyloid deposits, and Mas-
son’s trichrome to identify collagen deposition and assess 
the degree of glomerulosclerosis and interstitial fibro-
sis. Biopsies are also processed for direct immunofluo-
rescence using conjugated antibodies against IgG, IgM, 
and IgA to detect the presence of “lumpy-bumpy” 
immune deposits or “linear” IgG or IgA antibodies 
bound to GBM, antibodies against trapped complement 
proteins (C3 and C4), or specific antibodies against a rel-
evant antigen. High-resolution electron microscopy can 
clarify the principal location of immune deposits and 
the status of the basement membrane.
Each region of a renal biopsy is assessed separately. 
By light microscopy, glomeruli (at least 10 and ideally 
20) are reviewed individually for discrete lesions; <50% 
involvement is considered focal, and >50% is diffuse. 
Injury in each glomerular tuft can be segmental, involv-
ing a portion of the tuft, or global, involving most of 
the glomerulus. Glomeruli having proliferative character-
istics show increased cellularity. When cells in the cap-
illary tuft proliferate, it is called endocapillary, and when 
cellular proliferation extends into Bowman’s space, it is 
called extracapillary. Synechiae are formed when epithelial 
podocytes attach to Bowman’s capsule in the setting of 
glomerular injury; crescents, which in some cases may be 
the extension of synechiae, develop when fibrocellular/
fibrin collections fill all or part of Bowman’s space; and 
sclerotic glomeruli show acellular, amorphous accumula-
tions of proteinaceous material throughout the tuft with 
loss of functional capillaries and normal mesangium. 
Since age-related glomerulosclerosis is common in adults, 
one can estimate the background percentage of sclerosis 
by dividing the patient’s age in half and subtracting 10. 
Immunofluorescent and electron microscopy can detect 
the presence and location of subepithelial, subendothelial, 
or mesangial immune deposits, or reduplication or split-
ting of the basement membrane. In the other regions of 
the biopsy, the vasculature surrounding glomeruli and 
tubules can show angiopathy, vasculitis, the presence of 
fibrils, or thrombi. The tubules can be assessed for adja-
cency to one another; separation can be the result of 
edema, tubular dropout, or collagen deposition resulting 
from interstitial fibrosis. Interstitial fibrosis is an ominous 
sign of irreversibility and progression to renal failure.
Acute Nephritic Syndromes
Acute nephritic syndromes classically present with hyper-
tension, hematuria, red blood cell casts, pyuria, and 
mild to moderate proteinuria. Extensive inflammatory 
damage to glomeruli causes a fall in GFR and eventually 
produces uremic symptoms with salt and water reten-
tion, leading to edema and hypertension.
Poststreptococcal 
Glomerulonephritis
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis is prototypical 
for acute endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis. The 
incidence of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis has 
dramatically decreased in developed countries and in 
these locations is typically sporadic; epidemics are less 
common. Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephri-
tis in underdeveloped countries usually affects children 
between the ages of 2 and 14 years, but in developed 
countries is more typical in the elderly, especially in 
association with debilitating conditions. It is more com-
mon in males, and the familial or cohabitant incidence is 
as high as 40%. Skin and throat infections with particular 
M types of streptococci (nephritogenic strains) antedate 
glomerular disease; M types 47, 49, 55, 2, 60, and 57 are 
seen following impetigo and M types 1, 2, 4, 3, 25, 49, 
and 12 with pharyngitis. Poststreptococcal glomerulo-
nephritis due to impetigo develops 2–6 weeks after skin 
infection and 1–3 weeks after streptococcal pharyngitis.
The renal biopsy in poststreptococcal glomerulone-
phritis demonstrates hypercellularity of mesangial and 
endothelial cells, glomerular infiltrates of polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes, granular subendothelial immune 
deposits of IgG, IgM, C3, C4, and C5-9, and subepithe-
lial deposits (which appear as “humps”) (Fig. 4-6). (See 
Glomerular Schematic 1.) Poststreptococcal glomeru-
lonephritis is an immune-mediated disease involving 
putative streptococcal antigens, circulating immune 
complexes, and activation of complement in associa-
tion with cell-mediated injury. Many candidate antigens 
have been proposed over the years; candidates from 
nephritogenic streptococci of interest at the moment 
are a cationic cysteine proteinase known as strepto-
coccal pyrogenic exotoxin B (SPEB) that is generated 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
170
by proteolysis of a zymogen precursor (zSPEB), and 
NAPlr, the nephritis-associated plasmin receptor. These 
two antigens have biochemical affinity for plasmin and bind 
as complexes facilitated by this relationship, and both 
activate the alternate complement pathway. The neph-
ritogenic antigen, SPEB, has been demonstrated inside 
the subepithelial “humps” on biopsy.
The classic presentation is an acute nephritic picture 
with hematuria, pyuria, red blood cell casts, edema, 
hypertension, and oliguric renal failure, which may be 
severe enough to appear as RPGN. Systemic symptoms 
of headache, malaise, anorexia, and flank pain (due to 
swelling of the renal capsule) are reported in as many 
as 50% of cases. Five percent of children and 20% of 
adults have proteinuria in the nephrotic range. In the 
first week of symptoms, 90% of patients will have a 
depressed CH50 and decreased levels of C3 with nor-
mal levels of C4. Positive rheumatoid factor (30–40%), 
cryoglobulins and circulating immune complexes (60–
70%), and ANCA against myeloperoxidase (10%) are 
also reported. Positive cultures for streptococcal infec-
tion are inconsistently present (10–70%), but increased 
titers of ASO (30%), anti-DNAse (70%), or antihyal-
uronidase antibodies (40%) can help confirm the diag-
nosis. Consequently, the diagnosis of poststreptococcal 
glomerulonephritis rarely requires a renal biopsy. A sub-
clinical disease is reported in some series to be four to 
five times as common as clinical nephritis, and these lat-
ter cases are characterized by asymptomatic microscopic 
hematuria with low serum C3 complement levels.
Treatment is supportive, with control of hyperten-
sion, edema, and dialysis as needed. Antibiotic treatment 
for streptococcal infection should be given to all patients 
and their cohabitants. There is no role for immuno-
suppressive therapy, even in the setting of crescents. 
Recurrent poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis is rare 
POST-
STREPTOCOCCAL
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Hump
Poly
Mesangial
deposits
Glomerular Schematic 1
despite repeated streptococcal infections. Early death 
is rare in children but does occur in the elderly. Over-
all, the prognosis is good, with permanent renal failure 
being very uncommon, less than 1% in children. Com-
plete resolution of the hematuria and proteinuria in the 
majority of children occurs within 3–6 weeks of the on-
set of nephritis but 3–10% of children may have persis-
tent microscopic hematuria, non-nephrotic proteinuria, 
or hypertension. The prognosis in elderly patients is 
worse with a high incidence of azotemia (up to 60%), 
nephrotic-range proteinuria, and end-stage renal disease.
Subacute Bacterial Endocarditis
Endocarditis-associated glomerulonephritis is typically a com-
plication of subacute bacterial endocarditis, particularly 
in patients who remain untreated for a long time, have 
negative blood cultures, or have right-sided endocarditis. 
Glomerulonephritis is unusual in acute bacterial endo-
carditis because it takes 10–14 days to develop immune 
complex–mediated injury, by which time the patient has 
been treated, often with emergent surgery. Grossly, the 
kidneys in subacute bacterial endocarditis have subcap-
sular hemorrhages with a “flea-bitten” appearance, and 
microscopy on renal biopsy reveals focal proliferation 
around foci of necrosis associated with abundant mesan-
gial, subendothelial, and subepithelial immune deposits 
of IgG, IgM, and C3. Patients who present with a clini-
cal picture of RPGN have crescents. Embolic infarcts 
or septic abscesses may also be present. The pathogen-
esis hinges on the renal deposition of circulating immune 
complexes in the kidney with complement activation. 
Patients present with gross or microscopic hematuria, 
pyuria, and mild proteinuria or, less commonly, RPGN 
with rapid loss of renal function. A normocytic anemia, 
elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hypocomple-
mentemia, high titers of rheumatoid factor, type III 
cryoglobulins, and circulating immune complexes are 
often present. Levels of serum creatinine may be ele-
vated at diagnosis, but with modern therapy there is little 
progression to chronic renal failure. Primary treatment 
is eradication of the infection with 4–6 weeks of anti-
biotics, and if accomplished expeditiously, the prognosis 
for renal recovery is good. ANCA-associated vasculi-
tis sometimes accompanies or is confused with subacute 
bacterial endocarditis (SBE) and should be ruled out, as 
the treatment is different.
As variants of persistent bacterial infection in blood, 
glomerulonephritis can occur in patients with ventric-
uloatrial and ventriculoperitoneal shunts; pulmonary, 
intraabdominal, pelvic, or cutaneous infections; and 
infected vascular prostheses. The clinical presentation 
of these conditions is variable and includes proteinuria, 
microscopic hematuria, and acute renal failure. Blood 
cultures are usually positive and serum complement 
levels low, and there may be elevated levels of C-reactive 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
171
proteins, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and 
cryoglobulins. Renal lesions include membranoprolif-
erative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), diffuse proliferative 
glomerulonephritis (DPGN), or mesangioproliferative 
glomerulonephritis, sometimes leading to RPGN. Treat-
ment focuses on eradicating the infection, with most 
patients treated as if they have endocarditis.
Lupus Nephritis
Lupus nephritis is a common and serious complica-
tion of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and most 
severe in African-American female adolescents. Thirty 
to fifty percent of patients will have clinical manifesta-
tions of renal disease at the time of diagnosis, and 60% 
of adults and 80% of children develop renal abnormali-
ties at some point in the course of their disease. Lupus 
nephritis results from the deposition of circulating 
immune complexes, which activate the complement 
cascade leading to complement-mediated damage, leu-
kocyte infiltration, activation of procoagulant factors, 
and release of various cytokines. In situ immune com-
plex formation following glomerular binding of nuclear 
antigens, particularly necrotic nucleosomes, also plays a 
role in renal injury. The presence of antiphospholipid 
antibodies may also trigger a thrombotic microangiopa-
thy in a minority of patients.
The clinical manifestations, course of disease, and 
treatment of lupus nephritis are closely linked to renal 
pathology. The most common clinical sign of renal dis-
ease is proteinuria, but hematuria, hypertension, vary-
ing degrees of renal failure, and active urine sediment 
with red blood cell casts can all be present. Although 
significant renal pathology can be found on biopsy even 
in the absence of major abnormalities in the urinalysis, 
most nephrologists do not biopsy patients until the uri-
nalysis is convincingly abnormal. The extrarenal mani-
festations of lupus are important in establishing a firm 
diagnosis of systemic lupus because, while serologic 
abnormalities are common in lupus nephritis, they are 
not diagnostic. Anti-dsDNA antibodies that fix comple-
ment correlate best with the presence of renal disease. 
Hypocomplementemia is common in patients with 
acute lupus nephritis (70–90%) and declining comple-
ment levels may herald a flare. Although urinary bio-
markers of lupus nephritis are being identified to assist 
in predicting renal flares, renal biopsy is the only reliable 
method of identifying the morphologic variants of lupus 
nephritis.
The World Health Organization (WHO) work-
shop in 1974 first outlined several distinct patterns of 
lupus-related glomerular injury; these were modified 
in 1982. In 2004 the International Society of Nephrol-
ogy in conjunction with the Renal Pathology Soci-
ety again updated the classification. This latest version 
of lesions seen on biopsy (Table 15-3) best defines 
Table 15-3 
Classification for Lupus Nephritis
Class I
Minimal mesangial
Normal histology with 
mesangial deposits
Class II
Mesangial  
proliferation
Mesangial hypercellular-
ity with expansion of the 
mesangial matrix
Class III
Focal nephritis
Focal endocapillary ± 
extracapillary prolifera-
tion with focal subendo-
thelial immune deposits 
and mild mesangial 
expansion
Class IV
Diffuse nephritis
Diffuse endocapillary 
± extracapillary pro-
liferation with diffuse 
subendothelial immune 
deposits and mesangial 
alterations
Class V
Membranous 
nephritis
Thickened basement 
membranes with diffuse 
subepithelial immune 
deposits; may occur 
with class III or IV lesions 
and is sometimes called 
mixed membranous and 
proliferative nephritis
Class VI
Sclerotic nephritis
Global sclerosis of nearly 
all glomerular capillaries
Note: Revised in 2004 by the International Society of Nephrology-
Renal Pathology Society Study Group.
clinicopathologic correlations, provides valuable prog-
nostic information, and forms the basis for modern 
treatment recommendations. Class I nephritis describes 
normal glomerular histology by any technique or nor-
mal light microscopy with minimal mesangial deposits 
on immunofluorescent or electron microscopy. Class II 
designates mesangial immune complexes with mesan-
gial proliferation. Both class I and II lesions are typically 
associated with minimal renal manifestation and normal 
renal function; nephrotic syndrome is rare. Patients with 
lesions limited to the renal mesangium have an excellent 
prognosis and generally do not need therapy for their 
lupus nephritis.
The subject of lupus nephritis is presented under acute 
nephritic syndromes because of the aggressive and impor-
tant proliferative lesions seen in class III–V renal disease. 
Class III describes focal lesions with proliferation or scarring, 
often involving only a segment of the glomerulus 
(Fig. 4-12). Class III lesions have the most varied course. 
Hypertension, an active urinary sediment, and protein-
uria are common with nephrotic-range proteinuria in 
25–33% of patients. Elevated serum creatinine is pres-
ent in 25% of patients. Patients with mild proliferation 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
172
involving a small percentage of glomeruli respond well 
to therapy with steroids alone, and fewer than 5% prog-
ress to renal failure over 5 years. Patients with more 
severe proliferation involving a greater percentage of 
glomeruli have a far worse prognosis and lower remis-
sion rates. Treatment of those patients is the same as 
that for class IV lesions. Most nephrologists believe that 
class III lesions are simply an early presentation of class 
IV disease. Others believe severe class III disease is a dis-
crete lesion also requiring aggressive therapy. Class IV 
describes global, diffuse proliferative lesions involving the 
vast majority of glomeruli. Patients with class IV lesions 
commonly have high anti-DNA antibody titers, low 
serum complement, hematuria, red blood cell casts, 
proteinuria, hypertension, and decreased renal func-
tion; 50% of patients have nephrotic-range proteinuria. 
Patients with crescents on biopsy often have a rapidly 
progressive decline in renal function (Fig. 4-12). With-
out treatment, this aggressive lesion has the worst renal 
prognosis. However, if a remission—defined as a return 
to near-normal renal function and proteinuria ≤330 
mg/dL per day—is achieved with treatment, renal out-
comes are excellent. Current evidence suggests that 
inducing a remission with administration of high-dose 
steroids and either cyclophosphamide or mycopheno-
late mofetil for 2–6 months, followed by maintenance 
therapy with lower doses of steroids and mycopheno-
late mofetil, best balances the likelihood of successful 
remission with the side effects of therapy. There is no 
consensus on the use of high-dose intravenous methyl-
prednisolone versus oral prednisone, monthly intravenous 
cyclophosphamide versus daily oral cyclophosphamide, 
or other immunosuppressants such as cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, rituximab, or azathioprine. Nephrologists 
tend to avoid prolonged use of cyclophosphamide in 
patients of childbearing age without first banking eggs 
or sperm.
The class V lesion describes subepithelial immune 
deposits producing a membranous pattern; a subcate-
gory of class V lesions is associated with proliferative 
lesions and is sometimes called mixed membranous and 
proliferative disease (Fig. 4-11)—this category of injury 
is treated like class IV glomerulonephritis. Sixty per-
cent of patients present with nephrotic syndrome or 
lesser amounts of proteinuria. Patients with lupus 
nephritis class V, like patients with idiopathic membra-
nous nephropathy, are predisposed to renal-vein throm-
bosis and other thrombotic complications. A minority 
of patients with class V will present with hypertension 
and renal dysfunction. There are conflicting data on 
the clinical course, prognosis, and appropriate therapy 
for patients with class V disease, which may reflect 
the heterogeneity of this group of patients. Patients 
with severe nephrotic syndrome, elevated serum cre-
atinine, and a progressive course will probably benefit 
from therapy with steroids in combination with other 
immunosuppressive agents. Therapy with inhibitors of 
the renin-angiotensin system also may attenuate the 
proteinuria. Antiphospholipid antibodies present in 
lupus may result in glomerular microthromboses and 
complicate the course in up to 20% of lupus nephritis 
patients. The renal prognosis is worse even with anti-
coagulant therapy.
Patients with any of the above lesions also can trans-
form to another lesion; hence patients often require 
reevaluation, including repeat renal biopsy. Lupus 
patients with class VI lesions have greater than 90% scle-
rotic glomeruli and end-stage renal disease with intersti-
tial fibrosis. As a group, approximately 20% of patients 
with lupus nephritis will reach end-stage disease, requir-
ing dialysis or transplantation. Systemic lupus tends to 
become quiescent once there is renal failure, perhaps 
due to the immunosuppressant effects of uremia. Renal 
transplantation in renal failure from lupus, usually per-
formed after approximately 6 months of inactive disease, 
results in allograft survival rates comparable to patients 
transplanted for other reasons.
Antiglomerular Basement 
Membrane Disease
Patients who develop autoantibodies directed against 
glomerular basement antigens frequently develop a glo-
merulonephritis termed antiglomerular basement membrane 
(anti-GBM) disease. When they present with lung hem-
orrhage and glomerulonephritis, they have a pulmo-
nary-renal syndrome called Goodpasture’s syndrome. The 
target epitopes for this autoimmune disease lie in the 
quaternary structure of α3 NC1 domain of collagen IV. 
MHC-restricted T cells initiate the autoantibody 
response because humans are not tolerant to the epit-
opes created by this quaternary structure. The epitopes 
are normally sequestered in the collagen IV hexamer 
and can be exposed by infection, smoking, oxidants, 
or solvents. Goodpasture’s syndrome appears in two 
age groups: in young men in their late 20s and in men 
and women in their 60–70s. Disease in the younger age 
group is usually explosive, with hemoptysis, a sudden fall 
in hemoglobin, fever, dyspnea, and hematuria. Hemop-
tysis is largely confined to smokers, and those who pres-
ent with lung hemorrhage as a group do better than 
older populations who have prolonged, asymptomatic 
renal injury; presentation with oliguria is often associated 
with a particularly bad outcome. The performance of an 
urgent kidney biopsy is important in suspected cases of 
Goodpasture’s syndrome to confirm the diagnosis and 
assess prognosis. Renal biopsies typically show focal or
segmental necrosis that later, with aggressive destruction of
the capillaries by cellular proliferation, leads to crescent 
formation in Bowman’s space (Fig. 4-14). As these 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
173
lesions progress, there is concomitant interstitial nephritis 
with fibrosis and tubular atrophy.
The presence of anti-GBM antibodies and comple-
ment is recognized on biopsy by linear immunofluores-
cent staining for IgG (rarely IgA). In testing serum for 
anti-GBM antibodies, it is particularly important that the 
α3 NC1 domain of collagen IV alone be used as the tar-
get. This is because nonnephritic antibodies against the 
α1 NC1 domain are seen in paraneoplastic syndromes 
and cannot be discerned from assays that use whole base-
ment membrane fragments as the binding target. Between 
10 and 15% of sera from patients with Goodpasture’s syn-
drome also contain ANCA antibodies against myeloper-
oxidase. This subset of patients has a vasculitis-associated 
variant, which has a surprisingly good prognosis with 
treatment. Prognosis at presentation is worse if there are 
>50% crescents on renal biopsy with advanced fibrosis, 
if serum creatinine is >5–6 mg/dL, if oliguria is pres-
ent, or if there is a need for acute dialysis. Although fre-
quently attempted, most of these latter patients will not 
respond to plasmapheresis and steroids. Patients with 
advanced renal failure who present with hemoptysis 
should still be treated for their lung hemorrhage, as it 
responds to plasmapheresis and can be lifesaving. Treated 
patients with less severe disease typically respond to 
8–10 treatments of plasmapheresis accompanied by oral 
prednisone and cyclophosphamide in the first 2 weeks. 
Kidney transplantation is possible, but because there 
is risk of recurrence, experience suggests that patients 
should wait for 6 months and until serum antibodies are 
undetectable.
IgA Nephropathy
Berger first described the glomerulonephritis now 
termed IgA nephropathy. It is classically characterized 
by episodic hematuria associated with the deposition of 
IgA in the mesangium. IgA nephropathy is one of the 
most common forms of glomerulonephritis worldwide. 
There is a male preponderance, a peak incidence in the 
second and third decades of life, and rare familial clus-
tering. There are geographic differences in the preva-
lence of IgA nephropathy, with 30% prevalence along 
the Asian and Pacific Rim and 20% in southern Europe, 
compared to a much lower prevalence in northern 
Europe and North America. It was initially hypothe-
sized that variation in detection, in part, accounted for 
regional differences. With clinical care in nephrology 
becoming more uniform, this variation in prevalence 
more likely reflects true differences among racial and 
ethnic groups. 
IgA nephropathy is predominantly a sporadic disease 
but susceptibility to it has been shown uncommonly to 
have a genetic component depending on geography and 
the existence of “founder effects.” Familial forms of IgA 
Glomerular Schematic 2
IgA
NEPHROPATHY
Mesangial deposits
plus more
mesangial cells
nephropathy are more common in northern Italy and 
eastern Kentucky. No single causal gene has been iden-
tified. Clinical and laboratory evidence suggests close 
similarities between Henoch-Schönlein purpura and 
IgA nephropathy. Henoch-Schönlein purpura is distin-
guished clinically from IgA nephropathy by prominent 
systemic symptoms, a younger age (<20 years old), pre-
ceding infection, and abdominal complaints. Deposits of 
IgA are also found in the glomerular mesangium in a 
variety of systemic diseases, including chronic liver dis-
ease, Crohn’s disease, gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma, 
chronic bronchiectasis, idiopathic interstitial pneumo-
nia, dermatitis herpetiformis, mycosis fungoides, lep-
rosy, ankylosing spondylitis, relapsing polychondritis, 
and Sjögren’s syndrome. IgA deposition in these entities 
is not usually associated with clinically significant glo-
merular inflammation or renal dysfunction and thus is 
not called IgA nephropathy.
IgA nephropathy is an immune complex–mediated 
glomerulonephritis defined by the presence of diffuse 
mesangial IgA deposits often associated with mesangial 
hypercellularity. (See Glomerular Schematic 2.) IgM, 
IgG, C3, or immunoglobulin light chains may be codis-
tributed with IgA. IgA deposited in the mesangium is 
typically polymeric and of the IgA1 subclass, the patho-
genic significance of which is not clear. Abnormali-
ties have been described in IgA production by plasma 
cells, particularly secretory IgA; in IgA clearance, pre-
dominantly by the liver; in mesangial IgA clearance and 
receptors for IgA; and in growth factor and cytokine-
mediated events. Currently, however, abnormalities in 
the O-glycosylation of the hinge region of IgA seem 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
174
to best account for the pathogenesis of sporadic IgA 
nephropathy. Despite the presence of elevated serum 
IgA levels in 20–50% of patients, IgA deposition in 
skin biopsies in 15–55% of patients, or elevated levels 
of secretory IgA and IgA-fibronectin complexes, a renal 
biopsy is necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Although 
the immunofluorescent pattern of IgA on renal biopsy 
defines IgA nephropathy in the proper clinical con-
text, a variety of histologic lesions may be seen on light 
microscopy (Fig. 4-8), including DPGN, segmental sclerosis, 
and, rarely, segmental necrosis with cellular crescent formation, 
which typically presents as RPGN.
The two most common presentations of IgA nephro­
pathy are recurrent episodes of macroscopic hematuria 
during or immediately following an upper respiratory 
infection often accompanied by proteinuria or persis-
tent asymptomatic microscopic hematuria. Nephrotic 
syndrome, however, is uncommon. Proteinuria can 
also first appear late in the course of the disease. Rarely 
patients present with acute renal failure and a rap-
idly progressive clinical picture. IgA nephropathy is a 
benign disease for the majority of patients, and 5–30% 
of patients may go into a complete remission, with oth-
ers having hematuria but well preserved renal func-
tion. In the minority of patients who have progressive 
disease, progression is slow, with renal failure seen in 
only 25–30% of patients with IgA nephropathy over 
20–25 years. This risk varies considerably among popu-
lations. Cumulatively, risk factors for the loss of renal 
function identified thus far account for less than 50% 
of the variation in observed outcome but include the 
presence of hypertension or proteinuria, the absence 
of episodes of macroscopic hematuria, male age, older 
age of onset, and extensive glomerulosclerosis or inter-
stitial fibrosis on renal biopsy. Several analyses in large 
populations of patients found persistent proteinuria for 
6 months or longer to have the greatest predictive 
power for adverse renal outcomes.
There is no agreement on optimal treatment. Both 
large studies that include patients with multiple glo-
merular diseases and small studies of patients with IgA 
nephropathy support the use of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in patients with proteinuria or 
declining renal function. Tonsillectomy, steroid therapy, 
and fish oil have all been suggested in small studies to 
benefit select patients with IgA nephropathy. When 
presenting as RPGN, patients typically receive steroids, 
cytotoxic agents, and plasmapheresis.
ANCA Small-Vessel Vasculitis
A group of patients with small-vessel vasculitis (arterioles, 
capillaries, and venules; rarely small arteries) and glomeru-
lonephritis have serum ANCA; the antibodies are of two 
types, anti-proteinase 3 (PR3) or anti-myeloperoxidase 
(MPO); Lamp-2 antibodies have also been reported 
experimentally as potentially pathogenic. ANCA are pro-
duced with the help of T cells and activate leukocytes 
and monocytes, which together damage the walls of 
small vessels. Endothelial injury also attracts more leu-
kocytes and extends the inflammation. Granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), microscopic polyangi-
itis, and Churg-Strauss syndrome belong to this group 
because they are ANCA positive and have a pauci-
immune glomerulonephritis with few immune complexes in 
small vessels and glomerular capillaries. Patients with any 
of these three diseases can have any combination of the 
above serum antibodies, but anti-PR3 antibodies are more 
common in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), 
and anti-MPO antibodies are more common in micro-
scopic polyangiitis or Churg-Strauss. While each of these 
diseases have some unique clinical features, most features 
do not predict relapse or progression, and as a group 
they are generally treated in the same way. Since mortal-
ity is high without treatment, virtually all patients receive 
urgent treatment. Induction therapy usually includes some 
combination of plasmapheresis, methylprednisolone, and 
cyclophosphamide. The benefit of plasmapheresis in this 
setting is uncertain. Monthly “pulse” IV cyclophospha-
mide to induce remission of ANCA-associated vasculitis 
is as effective as daily oral cyclophosphamide and results in 
reduced cumulative adverse events but may be associated 
with increased relapses. Steroids are tapered soon after 
acute inflammation subsides, and patients are maintained 
on cyclophosphamide or azathioprine for up to a year to 
minimize the risk of relapse.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
Patients with this disease classically present with fever, 
purulent rhinorrhea, nasal ulcers, sinus pain, polyarthral-
gias/arthritis, cough, hemoptysis, shortness of breath, 
microscopic hematuria, and 0.5–1 g/24 h of protein-
uria; occasionally there may be cutaneous purpura and 
mononeuritis multiplex. Presentation without renal 
involvement is termed limited granulomatosis with poly-
angiitis (Wegener’s), although some of these patients 
will show signs of renal injury later. Chest x-ray often 
reveals nodules and persistent infiltrates, sometimes with 
cavities. Biopsy of involved tissue will show a small-
vessel vasculitis and adjacent noncaseating granulomas. 
Renal biopsies during active disease demonstrate segmen-
tal necrotizing glomerulonephritis without immune deposits 
(Fig. 4-13). The cause of granulomatosis with polyan-
giitis (Wegener’s) is unknown. In case-controlled stud-
ies there is greater risk associated with exposure to silica 
dust. The disease is also more common in patients with 
α1-antitrypsin deficiency, which is an inhibitor of PR3. 
Relapse after achieving remission is more common in 
patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegen-
er’s) than the other ANCA-associated vasculitis, neces-
sitating diligent follow-up care.
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
175
Microscopic polyangiitis
Clinically, these patients look somewhat similar to those 
with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), except 
they rarely have significant lung disease or destructive 
sinusitis. The distinction is made on biopsy, where the 
vasculitis in microscopic polyangiitis is without granu-
lomas. Some patients will also have injury limited to the 
capillaries and venules.
Churg-Strauss syndrome
When small-vessel vasculitis is associated with peripheral 
eosinophilia, cutaneous purpura, mononeuritis, asthma, 
and allergic rhinitis, a diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome 
is considered. Hypergammaglobulinemia, elevated levels 
of serum IgE, or the presence of rheumatoid factor some-
times accompanies the allergic state. Lung inflammation, 
including fleeting cough and pulmonary infiltrates, often 
precedes the systemic manifestations of disease by years; 
lung manifestations are rarely absent. A third of patients 
may have exudative pleural effusions associated with eosin-
ophils. Small-vessel vasculitis and focal segmental necrotizing 
glomerulonephritis can be seen on renal biopsy, usually absent 
eosinophils or granulomas. The cause of Churg-Strauss 
syndrome is autoimmune, but the inciting factors are 
unknown. Interestingly, some asthma patients treated with 
leukotriene receptor antagonists will develop this vasculitis.
Membranoproliferative 
Glomerulonephritis
MPGN is sometimes called mesangiocapillary glomerulone-
phritis or lobar glomerulonephritis. It is an immune-medi-
ated glomerulonephritis characterized by thickening of 
the GBM with mesangioproliferative changes; 70% of 
patients have hypocomplementemia. MPGN is rare in 
African Americans, and idiopathic disease usually pres-
ents in childhood or young adulthood. MPGN is sub-
divided pathologically into type I, type II, and type III 
disease. Type I MPGN is commonly associated with 
persistent hepatitis C infections, autoimmune diseases 
like lupus or cryoglobulinemia, or neoplastic diseases 
(Table 15-4). Types II and III MPGN are usually idio-
pathic, except in patients with complement factor H 
deficiency, in the presence of C3 nephritic factor and/or in 
partial lipodystrophy producing type II disease, or com-
plement receptor deficiency in type III disease. 
Type I MPGN, the most proliferative of the three 
types, shows mesangial proliferation with lobular seg-
mentation on renal biopsy and mesangial interposition 
between the capillary basement membrane and endothelial 
cells, producing a double contour sometimes called tram-
tracking (Fig. 4-9). (See Glomerular Schematic 3.) 
Subendothelial deposits with low serum levels of C3 are 
typical, although 50% of patients have normal levels of 
Table 15-4 
Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis
Type I Disease (Most Common)
Idiopathic
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Hepatitis C ± cryoglobulinemia
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
Hepatitis B
Cancer: lung, breast, and ovary (germinal)
Type II Disease (Dense Deposit Disease)
Idiopathic
C3 nephritic factor associated
Partial lipodystrophy
Type III Disease
Idiopathic
Complement receptor deficiency
C3 and occasional intramesangial deposits. Low serum C3 
and a dense thickening of the GBM containing ribbons of 
dense deposits and C3 characterize type II MPGN, some-
times called dense deposit disease (Fig. 4-10). Classically, 
the glomerular tuft has a lobular appearance; intramesan-
gial deposits are rarely present, and subendothelial deposits 
are generally absent. Proliferation in type III MPGN is 
less common than the other two types and is often focal; 
mesangial interposition is rare, and subepithelial depos-
its can occur along widened segments of the GBM that 
appear laminated and disrupted.
Type I MPGN is secondary to glomerular deposi-
tion of circulating immune complexes or their in situ 
formation. Types II and III MPGN may be related to 
“nephritic factors,” which are autoantibodies that sta-
bilize C3 convertase and allow it to activate serum C3. 
MEMBRANOPROLIFERATIVE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS TYPE I
Subendothelial
deposits
Widened
mesangial
Macrophage and
mesangial cells
Mesangial
interposition
Glomerular Schematic 3
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
176
Patients with MPGN present with proteinuria, hematu-
ria, and pyuria (30%), systemic symptoms of fatigue and 
malaise that are most common in children with type I 
disease, or an acute nephritic picture with RPGN and 
a speedy deterioration in renal function in up to 25% of 
patients. Low serum C3 levels are common. Fifty per-
cent of patients with MPGN develop end-stage disease 
10 years after diagnosis, and 90% have renal insufficiency 
after 20 years. Nephrotic syndrome, hypertension, and 
renal insufficiency all predict poor outcome. In the pres-
ence of proteinuria, treatment with inhibitors of the renin-
angiotensin system is prudent. Evidence for treatment with 
dipyridamole, Coumadin (warfarin), or cyclophospha-
mide is not strongly established. There is some evidence 
supporting the efficacy of treatment of primary MPGN 
with steroids, particularly in children, as well as reports 
of efficacy with plasma exchange and other immuno-
suppressive drugs. In secondary MPGN, treating the asso-
ciated infection, autoimmune disease, or neoplasms is of 
demonstrated benefit. In particular, pegylated interferon 
and ribavirin are useful in reducing viral load. Although all 
primary renal diseases can recur over time in transplanted 
renal allografts, patients with MPGN are well known to 
be at risk for not only a histologic recurrence but also a 
clinically significant recurrence with loss of graft function.
Mesangioproliferative 
Glomerulonephritis
Mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis is characterized 
by expansion of the mesangium, sometimes associated 
with mesangial hypercellularity; thin, single contoured 
capillary walls; and mesangial immune deposits. Clini-
cally, it can present with varying degrees of proteinuria 
and, commonly, hematuria. Mesangioproliferative disease 
may be seen in IgA nephropathy, Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria, resolving postinfectious glomerulonephritis, and 
class II nephritis from lupus, all of which can have a simi-
lar histologic appearance. With these secondary entities 
excluded, the diagnosis of primary mesangioproliferative glo-
merulonephritis is made in less than 15% of renal biopsies. 
As an immune-mediated renal lesion with deposits of 
IgM, C1q, and C3, the clinical course is variable. Patients 
with isolated hematuria may have a very benign course, 
and those with heavy proteinuria occasionally progress to 
renal failure. There is little agreement on treatment, but 
some clinical reports suggest benefit from use of inhibi-
tors of the renin-angiotensin system, steroid therapy, and 
even cytotoxic agents.
Nephrotic Syndrome
Nephrotic syndrome classically presents with heavy 
proteinuria, minimal hematuria, hypoalbuminemia, 
hypercholesterolemia, edema, and hypertension. If left 
MINIMAL
CHANGE DISEASE
Glomerular Schematic 4
undiagnosed or untreated, some of these syndromes 
will progressively damage enough glomeruli to cause a 
fall in GFR, producing renal failure.
Therapies for various causes of nephrotic syndrome 
are noted under individual disease headings later in 
the chapter. In general, all patients with hypercholes-
terolemia secondary to nephrotic syndrome should be 
treated with lipid-lowering agents because they are at 
increased risk for cardiovascular disease. Edema second-
ary to salt and water retention can be controlled with 
the judicious use of diuretics, avoiding intravascular 
volume depletion. Venous complications secondary to 
the hypercoagulable state associated with nephrotic syn-
drome can be treated with anticoagulants. The losses of 
various serum binding proteins, such as thyroid-binding 
globulin, lead to alterations in functional tests. Finally, 
proteinuria itself is hypothesized to be nephrotoxic, and 
treatment of proteinuria with inhibitors of the renin-
angiotensin system can lower urinary protein excretion.
Minimal Change Disease
Minimal change disease (MCD), sometimes known 
as nil lesion, causes 70–90% of nephrotic syndrome in 
childhood but only 10–15% of nephrotic syndrome 
in adults. Minimal change disease usually presents as a 
primary renal disease but can be associated with several 
other conditions, including Hodgkin’s disease, allergies, 
or use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents; signifi-
cant interstitial nephritis often accompanies cases asso-
ciated with nonsteroidal use. Minimal change disease 
on renal biopsy shows no obvious glomerular lesion 
by light microscopy and is negative for deposits by 
immunofluorescent microscopy, or occasionally shows 
small amounts of IgM in the mesangium (Fig. 4-1). 
(See Glomerular Schematic 4.) Electron microscopy, 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
177
however, consistently demonstrates an effacement of 
the foot process supporting the epithelial podocytes 
with weakening of slit-pore membranes. The patho-
physiology of this lesion is uncertain. Most agree 
there is a circulating cytokine, perhaps related to a T- 
cell response that alters capillary charge and podocyte 
integrity. The evidence for cytokine-related immune 
injury is circumstantial and is suggested by the presence 
of preceding allergies, altered cell-mediated immu-
nity during viral infections, and the high frequency of 
remissions with steroids.
Minimal change disease presents clinically with the 
abrupt onset of edema and nephrotic syndrome accom-
panied by acellular urinary sediment. Average urine 
protein excretion reported in 24 hours is 10 g with 
severe hypoalbuminemia. Less common clinical features 
include hypertension (30% in children, 50% in adults), 
microscopic hematuria (20% in children, 33% in adults), 
atopy or allergic symptoms (40% in children, 30% in 
adults), and decreased renal function (<5% in children, 
30% in adults). The appearance of acute renal failure in 
adults is often seen more commonly in patients with 
low serum albumin and intrarenal edema (nephrosarca) 
that is responsive to intravenous albumin and diuret-
ics. This presentation must be distinguished from acute 
renal failure secondary to hypovolemia. Acute tubular 
necrosis and interstitial inflammation is also reported. 
In children, the abnormal urine principally contains 
albumin with minimal amounts of higher-molecular-
weight proteins, and is sometimes called selective protein-
uria. Although up to 30% of children have a spontaneous 
remission, all children today are treated with steroids; 
only children who are nonresponders are biopsied in 
this setting. Primary responders are patients who have a 
complete remission (<0.2 mg/24 h of proteinuria) after 
a single course of prednisone; steroid-dependent patients 
relapse as their steroid dose is tapered. Frequent relapsers 
have two or more relapses in the 6 months following 
taper, and steroid-resistant patients fail to respond to ste-
roid therapy. Adults are not considered steroid resistant 
until after 4 months of therapy. Ninety to 95% of chil-
dren will develop a complete remission after 8 weeks 
of steroid therapy, and 80–85% of adults will achieve 
complete remission, but only after a longer course of 
20–24 weeks. Patients with steroid resistance may have 
FSGS on repeat biopsy. Some hypothesize that if the 
first renal biopsy does not have a sample of deeper cor-
ticomedullary glomeruli, then the correct early diagnosis 
of FSGS may be missed.
Relapses occur in 70–75% of children after the first 
remission, and early relapse predicts multiple subse-
quent relapses. The frequency of relapses decreases 
after puberty, although there is an increased risk of 
relapse following the rapid tapering of steroids in all 
groups. Relapses are less common in adults but are 
more resistant to subsequent therapy. Prednisone 
Table 15-5
Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
Primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Secondary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
  Viruses: HIV/hepatitis B/parvovirus
  Hypertensive nephropathy
Reflux nephropathy
Cholesterol emboli
Drugs: heroin/analgesics/pamidronate
Oligomeganephronia
Renal dysgenesis
Alport’s syndrome
Sickle cell disease
Lymphoma
Radiation nephritis
Familial podocytopathies
  NPHS1 mutation/nephrin
  NPHS2 mutation/podocin
  TRPC6 mutation/cation channel
  ACTN4 mutation/actinin
  α-Galactosidase A deficiency/Fabry’s disease
  N-acetylneuraminic acid hydrolase deficiency/
nephrosialidosis
is first-line therapy, either given daily or on alter-
nate days. Other immunosuppressive drugs and such 
as cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, and mycopheno-
late mofetil, are saved for frequent relapsers and steroid-
dependent or steroid-resistant patients. Cyclosporine can 
induce remission, but relapse is also common when 
cyclosporine is withdrawn. The long-term prognosis in 
adults is less favorable when acute renal failure or ste-
roid resistance occurs.
Focal Segmental 
Glomerulosclerosis
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) refers to 
a pattern of renal injury characterized by segmental 
glomerular scars that involve some but not all glom-
eruli; the clinical findings of FSGS largely manifest 
as proteinuria. When the secondary causes of FSGS 
are eliminated (Table 15-5), the remaining patients 
are considered to have primary FSGS. The incidence 
of this disease is increasing, and it now represents 
up to one-third of cases of nephrotic syndrome in 
adults and one-half of cases of nephrotic syndrome in 
African Americans, in whom it is seen more com-
monly. The pathogenesis of FSGS is probably multifac-
torial. Possible mechanisms include a T-cell–mediated 
circulating permeability factor, TGF-β–mediated cel-
lular proliferation and matrix synthesis, and podocyte 
abnormalities associated with genetic mutations. Risk 
polymorphisms at the APOL1 locus encoding apolipo-
protein L1 expressed in podocytes substantially explain 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
178
the increased burden of FSGS among African Ameri-
cans with or without HIV-associated disease.
The pathologic changes of FSGS are most prominent 
in glomeruli located at the corticomedullary junction 
(Fig. 4-2), so if the renal biopsy specimen is from super-
ficial tissue, the lesions can be missed, which some-
times leads to a misdiagnosis of MCD. In addition to 
focal and segmental scarring, other variants have been 
described, including cellular lesions with endocapillary 
hypercellularity and heavy proteinuria; collapsing glomeru-
lopathy (Fig. 4-3) with segmental or global glomerular 
collapse and a rapid decline in renal function; a hilar 
stalk lesion (Fig. 4-4) or the glomerular tip lesion (Fig. 4-5), 
which may have a better prognosis. (See Glomerular 
Schematic 5.) 
FSGS can present with hematuria, hypertension, any 
level of proteinuria, or renal insufficiency. Nephrotic-
range proteinuria, African-American race, and renal 
insufficiency are associated with a poor outcome, with 
50% of patients reaching renal failure in 6–8 years. 
FSGS rarely remits spontaneously, but treatment-
induced remission of proteinuria significantly improves 
prognosis. Treatment of patients with primary FSGS 
should include inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin 
system. Based on retrospective studies, patients with 
nephrotic-range proteinuria can be treated with steroids 
but respond far less often and after a longer course of 
therapy than patients with MCD. Proteinuria remits in 
only 20–45% of patients receiving a course of steroids 
over 6–9 months. Limited evidence suggests that the use 
of cyclosporine in steroid-responsive patients helps ensure 
remissions. Relapse frequently occurs after cessation of 
cyclosporine therapy, and cyclosporine itself can lead to 
a deterioration of renal function due to its nephrotoxic 
effects. A role for other agents that suppress the immune 
system has not been established. Primary FSGS recurs in 
25–40% of patients given allografts at end-stage disease, 
leading to graft loss in half of those cases. The treatment 
of secondary FSGS typically involves treating the under-
lying cause and controlling proteinuria. There is no role 
for steroids or other immunosuppressive agents in sec-
ondary FSGS.
Membranous Glomerulonephritis
Membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN), or membra-
nous nephropathy as it is sometimes called, accounts for 
approximately 30% of cases of nephrotic syndrome in 
Afferent
arteriole
Efferent
arteriole
Collapsed
capillary
and scar
Detachment
of cell from
GBM
FOCAL
SCLEROSING
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Proliferation of
subepithelial cells
Glomerular Schematic 5
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
179
adults, with a peak incidence between the ages of 30 
and 50 years and a male to female ratio of 2:1. It is rare 
in childhood and the most common cause of nephrotic 
syndrome in the elderly. In 25–30% of cases, MGN is 
associated with a malignancy (solid tumors of the breast, 
lung, colon), infection (hepatitis B, malaria, schistoso-
miasis), or rheumatologic disorders like lupus or rarely 
rheumatoid arthritis (Table 15-6).
Uniform thickening of the basement membrane 
along the peripheral capillary loops is seen by light 
microscopy on renal biopsy (Fig. 4-7); this thicken-
ing needs to be distinguished from that seen in dia-
betes and amyloidosis. (See Glomerular Schematic 6.) 
Immunofluorescence 
demonstrates 
diffuse 
granu-
lar deposits of IgG and C3, and electron microscopy 
typically reveals electron-dense subepithelial deposits. 
Table 15-6 
Membranous Glomerulonephritis
Primary/idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis
Secondary membranous glomerulonephritis
Infection: hepatitis B and C, syphilis, malaria, schisto-
somiasis, leprosy, filariasis
Cancer: breast, colon, lung, stomach, kidney, esopha-
gus, neuroblastoma
Drugs: gold, mercury, penicillamine, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory agents, probenecid
Autoimmune diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus, 
rheumatoid arthritis, primary biliary cirrhosis, dermati-
tis herpetiformis, bullous pemphigoid, myasthenia gra-
vis, Sjögren’s syndrome, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Other systemic diseases: Fanconi’s syndrome, sickle 
cell anemia, diabetes, Crohn’s disease, sarcoidosis, 
Guillain-Barré syndrome, Weber-Christian disease, 
angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia
While different stages (I–V) of progressive membra-
nous lesions have been described, some published 
analyses indicate that the degree of tubular atrophy or 
interstitial fibrosis is more predictive of progression 
than is the stage of glomerular disease. The presence 
of subendothelial deposits or the presence of tubulo-
reticular inclusions strongly points to a diagnosis of 
membranous lupus nephritis, which may precede the 
extrarenal manifestations of lupus. Work in Heyman 
nephritis, an animal model of MGN, suggests that glo-
merular lesions result from in situ formation of immune 
complexes with megalin receptor–associated protein 
as the putative antigen. This antigen is not found in 
human podocytes, but human antibodies have been 
described against neutral endopeptidase expressed by 
podocytes, hepatitis antigens B/C, Helicobacter pylori 
antigens, and tumor antigens. In a newer study, auto­
antibodies against the M-type phospholipase A2 recep-
tor (PLA2R) circulate and bind to a conformational 
epitope present in the receptor on human podocytes, 
producing in situ deposits characteristic of idiopathic 
membranous nephropathy. Other renal diseases and 
secondary membranous nephropathy do not appear to 
involve such autoantibodies. Eighty percent of patients 
with MGN present with nephrotic syndrome and non-
selective proteinuria. Microscopic hematuria is seen in 
up to 50% of patients but is seen less commonly than 
in IgA nephropathy or FSGS. Spontaneous remissions 
occur in 20–33% of patients and often occur late in the 
course after years of nephrotic syndrome, which make 
treatment decisions difficult. One-third of patients con-
tinue to have relapsing nephrotic syndrome but main-
tain normal renal function, and approximately another 
third of patients develop renal failure or die from the 
complications of nephrotic syndrome. Male gender, 
older age, hypertension, and the persistence of pro-
teinuria are associated with worse prognosis. Although 
thrombotic complications are a feature of all nephrotic 
syndromes, MGN has the highest reported incidences 
of renal vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and 
deep vein thrombosis. Prophylactic anticoagulation is 
controversial but has been recommended for patients 
with severe or prolonged proteinuria in the absence of 
risk factors for bleeding. 
In addition to the treatment of edema, dyslipidemia, 
and hypertension, inhibition of the renin-angiotensin 
system is recommended. Therapy with immunosup-
pressive drugs is also recommended for patients with 
primary MGN and persistent proteinuria (>3.0 g/24 h). 
The choice of immunosuppressive drugs for therapy is 
controversial, but current recommendations based on 
small clinical studies are to treat with steroids and cyclo-
phosphamide, chlorambucil, mycophenolate mofetil, or 
cyclosporine. In patients who relapse or fail to respond 
to this therapy there are case reports of beneficial effects 
MEMBRANOUS
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Foot process
fusion
Subepithelial
deposits
Glomerular Schematic 6
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
180
with the use of rituximab, an anti-CD20 antibody 
directed at B cells, or with synthetic adrenocorticotropic 
hormone.
Diabetic Nephropathy
Diabetic nephropathy is the single most common cause 
of chronic renal failure in the United States, account-
ing for 45% of patients receiving renal replacement 
therapy, and is a rapidly growing problem worldwide. 
The dramatic increase in the number of patients with 
diabetic nephropathy reflects the epidemic increase in 
obesity, metabolic syndrome, and type 2 diabetes mel-
litus. Approximately 40% of patients with type 1 or 
2 diabetes develop nephropathy, but due to the higher 
prevalence of type 2 diabetes (90%) compared to type 1 
(10%), the majority of patients with diabetic nephropa-
thy have type 2 disease. Renal lesions are more common 
in African-American, Native American, Polynesian, and 
Maori populations. Risk factors for the development of 
diabetic nephropathy include hyperglycemia, hyperten-
sion, dyslipidemia, smoking, a family history of diabetic 
nephropathy, and gene polymorphisms affecting the 
activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis.
Within 1–2 years after the onset of clinical diabetes, 
morphologic changes appear in the kidney. Thicken-
ing of the GBM is a sensitive indicator for the presence 
of diabetes but correlates poorly with the presence or 
absence of clinically significant nephropathy. The com-
position of the GBM is altered notably with a loss of 
heparan sulfate moieties that form the negatively charged 
filtration barrier. This change results in increased fil-
tration of serum proteins into the urine, predomi-
nantly negatively charged albumin. The expansion of 
the mesangium due to the accumulation of extracel-
lular matrix correlates with the clinical manifestations 
of diabetic nephropathy (see stages in Fig. 4-20). This 
expansion in mesangial matrix is associated with the 
development of mesangial sclerosis. Some patients also 
develop eosinophilic, PAS+ nodules called nodular 
glomerulosclerosis or Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules. Immuno-
fluorescence microscopy often reveals the nonspecific 
deposition of IgG (at times in a linear pattern) or com-
plement staining without immune deposits on electron 
microscopy. Prominent vascular changes are frequently 
seen with hyaline and hypertensive arteriosclerosis. This 
is associated with varying degrees of chronic glomeru-
losclerosis and tubulointerstitial changes. Renal biop-
sies from patients with type 1 or 2 diabetes are largely 
indistinguishable.
These pathologic changes are the result of a number 
of postulated factors. Multiple lines of evidence support 
an important role for increases in glomerular capillary 
pressure (intraglomerular hypertension) in alterations in 
renal structure and function. Direct effects of hypergly-
cemia on the actin cytoskeleton of renal mesangial and 
vascular smooth-muscle cells as well as diabetes-associated 
changes in circulating factors such as atrial natriuretic fac-
tor, angiotensin II, and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 
may account for this. Sustained glomerular hypertension 
increases matrix production, alterations in the GBM with 
disruption in the filtration barrier (and hence protein-
uria), and glomerulosclerosis. A number of factors have 
also been identified that alter matrix production, includ-
ing the accumulation of advanced glycosylation end 
products, circulating factors including growth hormone, 
IGF-I, angiotensin II, connective tissue growth factor, 
TGF-β, and dyslipidemia.
The natural history of diabetic nephropathy in 
patients with type 1 or 2 diabetes is similar. How-
ever, since the onset of type 1 diabetes is readily iden-
tifiable and the onset of type 2 diabetes is not, a patient 
newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes may have renal 
disease for many years before nephropathy is discov-
ered and presents as advanced diabetic nephropathy. At 
the onset of diabetes, renal hypertrophy and glomeru-
lar hyperfiltration are present. The degree of glomer­
ular hyperfiltration correlates with the subsequent risk 
of clinically significant nephropathy. In the approxi-
mately 40% of patients with diabetes who develop 
diabetic nephropathy, the earliest manifestation is an 
increase in albuminuria detected by sensitive radioim-
munoassay (Table  15-1). Albuminuria in the range of 
30–300 mg/24 h is called microalbuminuria. In patients 
with types 1 or 2 diabetes, microalbuminuria appears 
5–10 years after the onset of diabetes. It is currently rec-
ommended to test patients with type 1 disease for micro-
albuminuria 5 years after diagnosis of diabetes and yearly 
thereafter, and, because the time of onset of type 2 dia-
betes is often unknown, to test type 2 patients at the 
time of diagnosis of diabetes and yearly thereafter.
Patients with small rises in albuminuria increase their 
levels of urinary albumin excretion, typically reaching 
dipstick-positive levels of proteinuria (>300 mg albu-
minuria) 5–10 years after the onset of early albuminuria. 
Microalbuminuria is a potent risk factor for cardiovas-
cular events and death in patients with type 2 diabetes. 
Many patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbu-
minuria succumb to cardiovascular events before they 
progress to proteinuria or renal failure. Proteinuria in 
frank diabetic nephropathy can be variable, ranging 
from 500 mg to 25 g/24 h, and is often associated with 
nephrotic syndrome. More than 90% of patients with 
type 1 diabetes and nephropathy have diabetic retinop-
athy, so the absence of retinopathy in type 1 patients 
with proteinuria should prompt consideration of a diag-
nosis other than diabetic nephropathy; only 60% of 
patients with type 2 diabetes with nephropathy have dia-
betic retinopathy. There is a highly significant correlation 
between the presence of retinopathy and the presence of 
Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules (Fig. 4-20). Also, charac-
teristically, patients with advanced diabetic nephropathy 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
181
have normal to enlarged kidneys, in contrast to other 
glomerular diseases where kidney size is usually 
decreased. Using the above epidemiologic and clinical 
data, and in the absence of other clinical or serologic 
data suggesting another disease, diabetic nephropathy 
is usually diagnosed without a renal biopsy. After the 
onset of proteinuria, renal function inexorably declines, 
with 50% of patients reaching renal failure over another 
5–10 years; thus, from the earliest stages of microalbu-
minuria, it usually takes 10–20 years to reach end-stage 
renal disease. Hypertension may predict which patients 
develop diabetic nephropathy, as the presence of hyper-
tension accelerates the rate of decline in renal function. 
Once renal failure appears, however, survival on dialysis 
is far shorter for patients with diabetes compared to other 
dialysis patients. Survival is best for patients with type 1 
diabetes who receive a transplant from a living related 
donor.
Good evidence supports the benefits of blood sugar 
and blood pressure control as well as inhibition of the 
renin-angiotensin system in retarding the progression 
of diabetic nephropathy. In patients with type 1 dia-
betes, intensive control of blood sugar clearly prevents 
the development or progression of diabetic nephropa-
thy. The evidence for benefit of intensive blood glucose 
control in patients with type 2 diabetes is less certain, 
with current studies reporting conflicting results. Some, 
but not all, trials have reported increased mortality rate 
associated with intensive blood glucose control, and the 
safety of HgbA1C goals less than 7% in patients with 
type 2 diabetes is currently unclear.
Controlling systemic blood pressure decreases renal 
and cardiovascular adverse events in this high-risk 
population. The vast majority of patients with diabetic 
nephropathy require three or more antihypertensive 
drugs to achieve this goal. Drugs that inhibit the renin-
angiotensin system, independent of their effects on 
systemic blood pressure, have been shown in numer-
ous large clinical trials to slow the progression of dia-
betic nephropathy at early (microalbuminuria) and late 
(proteinuria with reduced glomerular filtration) stages, 
independent of any effect they may have on systemic 
blood pressure. Since angiotensin II increases efferent 
arteriolar resistance, and hence glomerular capillary 
pressure, one key mechanism for the efficacy of ACE 
inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) 
is reducing glomerular hypertension. Patients with 
type 1 diabetes for 5 years who develop albuminuria 
or declining renal function should be treated with 
ACE inhibitors. Patients with type 2 diabetes and 
microalbuminuria or proteinuria may be treated with 
ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Less compelling evidence 
supports therapy with a combination of two drugs 
(ACE inhibitors, ARBs, renin inhibitors, or aldoste-
rone antagonists) that suppress several components of 
the renin-angiotensin system.
Glomerular Deposition Diseases
Plasma cell dyscrasias producing excess light chain 
immunoglobulin sometimes lead to the formation of 
glomerular and tubular deposits that cause heavy pro-
teinuria and renal failure; the same is true for the accu-
mulation of serum amyloid A protein fragments seen in 
several inflammatory diseases. This broad group of pro-
teinuric patients have glomerular deposition disease.
Light chain deposition disease
The biochemical characteristics of nephrotoxic light 
chains produced in patients with light chain malig-
nancies often confer a specific pattern of renal injury; 
that of either cast nephropathy (Fig. 4-17), which 
causes renal failure but not heavy proteinuria or amy-
loidosis, or light chain deposition disease (Fig. 4-16), 
which produces nephrotic syndrome with renal failure. 
These latter patients produce kappa light chains that 
do not have the biochemical features necessary to 
form amyloid fibrils. Instead, they self-aggregate and 
form granular deposits along the glomerular capil-
lary and mesangium, tubular basement membrane, 
and Bowman’s capsule. When predominant in glom-
eruli, nephrotic syndrome develops, and about 70% of 
patients progress to dialysis. Light chain deposits are 
not fibrillar and do not stain with Congo red, but they 
are easily detected with anti–light chain antibody using 
immunofluorescence or as granular deposits on elec-
tron microscopy. A combination of the light chain rear-
rangement, self-aggregating properties at neutral pH, 
and abnormal metabolism probably contribute to the 
deposition. Treatment for light chain deposition disease 
is treatment of the primary disease. As so many patients 
with light chain deposition disease progress to renal fail-
ure, the overall prognosis is grim.
Renal amyloidosis
Most renal amyloidosis is either the result of primary 
fibrillar deposits of immunoglobulin light chains known 
as amyloid L (AL) or secondary to fibrillar depos-
its of serum amyloid A (AA) protein fragments. Even 
though both occur for different reasons, their clinico-
pathophysiology is quite similar and will be discussed 
together. Amyloid infiltrates the liver, heart, peripheral 
nerves, carpal tunnel, upper pharynx, and kidney, pro-
ducing restrictive cardiomyopathy, hepatomegaly, mac-
roglossia, and heavy proteinuria sometimes associated 
with renal vein thrombosis. In systemic AL amyloido-
sis, also called primary amyloidosis, light chains produced 
in excess by clonal plasma cell dyscrasias are made into 
fragments by macrophages so they can self-aggregate 
at acid pH. A disproportionate number of these light 
chains (75%) are of the lambda class. About 10% of these 
patients have overt myeloma with lytic bone lesions 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
182
and infiltration of the bone marrow with >30% plasma 
cells; nephrotic syndrome is common, and about 20% of 
patients progress to dialysis. AA amyloidosis is sometimes 
called secondary amyloidosis and also presents as nephrotic 
syndrome. It is due to deposition of β-pleated sheets 
of serum amyloid A protein, an acute phase reactant 
whose physiologic functions include cholesterol trans-
port, immune cell attraction, and metalloprotease acti-
vation. Forty percent of patients with AA amyloid have 
rheumatoid arthritis, and another 10% have ankylos-
ing spondylitis or psoriatic arthritis; the rest derive from 
other lesser causes. Less common in Western countries 
but more common in Mediterranean regions, particu-
larly in Sephardic and Iraqi Jews, is familial Mediterra-
nean fever (FMF). FMF is caused by a mutation in the 
gene encoding pyrin, while Muckle-Wells syndrome, 
a related disorder, results from a mutation in cryopyrin; 
both proteins are important in the apoptosis of leuko-
cytes early in inflammation; such proteins with pyrin 
domains are part of a new pathway called the inflam-
masome. Receptor mutations in tumor necrosis factor 
receptor 1 (TNFR1)-associated periodic syndrome also 
produce chronic inflammation and secondary amyloi-
dosis. Fragments of serum amyloid A protein increase 
and self-aggregate by attaching to receptors for advanced 
glycation end products in the extracellular environment; 
nephrotic syndrome is common, and about 40–60% of 
patients progress to dialysis. AA and AL amyloid fibrils 
are detectable with Congo red or in more detail with 
electron microscopy (Fig. 4-15). Currently developed 
serum free light chain nephelometry assays are useful in 
the early diagnosis and follow-up of disease progression. 
Biopsy of involved liver or kidney is diagnostic 90% of 
the time when the pretest probability is high; abdominal 
fat pad aspirates are positive about 70% of the time, but 
apparently less so when looking for AA amyloid. Amy-
loid deposits are distributed along blood vessels and in 
the mesangial regions of the kidney. The treatment for 
primary amyloidosis is not particularly effective; melpha-
lan and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplan-
tation can delay the course of disease in about 30% of 
patients. Secondary amyloidosis is also relentless unless 
the primary disease can be controlled. Some new drugs 
in development that disrupt the formation of fibrils may 
be available in the future.
Fibrillary-immunotactoid glomerulopathy
Fibrillary-immunotactoid glomerulopathy is a rare 
(<1.0% of renal biopsies) morphologically defined dis-
ease characterized by glomerular accumulation of non-
branching randomly arranged fibrils. Some classify 
amyloid and nonamyloid fibril-associated renal disease 
all as fibrillary glomerulopathies with immunotactoid 
glomerulopathy reserved for nonamyloid fibrillary dis-
ease not associated with a systemic illness. Others define 
fibrillary glomerulonephritis as a nonamyloid fibrillary 
disease with fibrils 12–24 nm and immunotactoid glo-
merulonephritis with fibrils >30 nm. In either case, 
fibrillar/microtubular deposits of oligoclonal or oligo-
typic immunoglobulins and complement appear in the 
mesangium and along the glomerular capillary wall. 
Congo red stains are negative. The cause of this “non-
amyloid” glomerulopathy is mostly idiopathic; reports 
of immunotactoid glomerulonephritis describe an occa-
sional association with chronic lymphocytic leukemia 
or B-cell lymphoma. Both disorders appear in adults 
in the fourth decade with moderate to heavy protein-
uria, hematuria, and a wide variety of histologic lesions, 
including DPGN, MPGN, MGN, or mesangioprolifera-
tive glomerulonephritis. Nearly half of patients develop 
renal failure over a few years. There is no consensus on 
treatment of this uncommon disorder. The disease has 
been reported to recur following renal transplantation in 
a minority of cases.
Fabry’s Disease
Fabry’s disease is an X-linked inborn error of globotriao-
sylceramide metabolism secondary to deficient lysosomal 
α-galactosidase A activity, resulting in excessive intracel-
lular storage of globotriaosylceramide. Affected organs 
include the vascular endothelium, heart, brain, and kid-
neys. Classically, Fabry’s disease presents in childhood in 
males with acroparesthesias, angiokeratoma, and hypohi-
drosis. Over time male patients develop cardiomyopathy, 
cerebrovascular disease, and renal injury, with an aver-
age age of death around 50 years of age. Hemizygotes 
with hypomorphic mutations sometimes present in the 
fourth to sixth decade with single-organ involvement. 
Rarely, dominant-negative α-galactosidase A mutations 
or female heterozygotes with unfavorable X inactiva-
tion present with mild single-organ involvement. Rare 
females develop severe manifestations including renal fail-
ure but do so later in life than males. Renal biopsy reveals 
enlarged glomerular visceral epithelial cells packed with 
small clear vacuoles containing globotriaosylceramide; 
vacuoles may also be found in parietal and tubular epi-
thelia (Fig. 4-18). These vacuoles of electron-dense 
materials in parallel arrays (zebra bodies) are easily seen 
on electron microscopy. Ultimately, renal biopsies reveal 
FSGS. The nephropathy of Fabry’s disease typically pres-
ents in the third decade as mild to moderate proteinuria, 
sometimes with microscopic hematuria or nephrotic 
syndrome. Urinalysis may reveal oval fat bodies and 
birefringent glycolipid globules under polarized light 
(Maltese cross). Renal biopsy is necessary for definitive 
diagnosis. Progression to renal failure occurs by the fourth 
or fifth decade. Treatment with inhibitors of the renin- 
angiotensin system is recommended. Treatment with 
recombinant α-galactosidase A clears microvascular 
endothelial deposits of globotriaosylceramide from the 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
183
kidneys, heart, and skin. The degree of organ involve-
ment at the time when enzyme replacement is initiated 
is crucial. In patients with advanced organ involvement, 
progression of disease occurs despite enzyme replacement 
therapy. Variable responses to enzyme therapy may be 
due to the occurrence of neutralizing antibodies or differ-
ences in uptake of the enzyme. Graft and patient survival 
following renal transplantation in patients with Fabry’s 
are similar to other causes of end-stage renal disease. 
Pulmonary-Renal Syndromes
Several diseases can present with catastrophic hemoptysis 
and glomerulonephritis associated with varying degrees 
of renal failure. The usual causes include Goodpasture’s 
syndrome, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), 
microscopic polyangiitis, Churg-Strauss vasculitis, and, 
rarely, Henoch-Schönlein purpura or cryoglobulinemia. 
Each of these diseases can also present without hemop-
tysis and are discussed in detail in the section “Acute 
Nephritic Syndromes.” (See Glomerular Schematic 7.) 
Pulmonary bleeding in this setting is life threatening and 
often results in airway intubation, and acute renal failure 
requires dialysis. Diagnosis is difficult initially because 
biopsies and serologic testing take time. Treatment with 
plasmapheresis and methylprednisolone is often empirical 
and temporizing until results of testing are available.
Basement Membrane Syndromes
All kidney epithelia, including podocytes, rest on base-
ment membranes assembled into a planar surface through 
the interweaving of collagen IV with laminins, nidogen, 
and sulfated proteoglycans. Structural abnormalities in 
GBM associated with hematuria are characteristic of sev-
eral familial disorders related to the expression of collagen 
IV genes. The extended family of collagen IV contains 
six chains, which are expressed in different tissues at dif-
ferent stages of embryonic development. All epithelial 
basement membranes early in human development are 
composed of interconnected triple-helical protomers 
rich in α1.α1.α2(IV) collagen. Some specialized tissues 
undergo a developmental switch replacing α1.α1.α2(IV) 
protomers with an α3.α4.α5(IV) collagen network; this 
switch occurs in the kidney (glomerular and tubular base-
ment membrane), lung, testis, cochlea, and eye, while 
an α5.α5.α6(IV) network appears in skin, smooth mus-
cle, and esophagus and along Bowman’s capsule in the 
RAPIDLY
PROGRESSIVE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Glomerular Schematic 7
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
184
kidney. This switch probably occurs because the α3.α4.
α5(IV) network is more resistant to proteases and ensures 
the structural longevity of critical tissues. When basement 
membranes are the target of glomerular disease, they pro-
duce moderate proteinuria, some hematuria, and progres-
sive renal failure.
Anti-GBM Disease
Autoimmune disease where antibodies are directed 
against the α3 NC1 domain of collagen IV produces an 
anti-GBM disease often associated with RPGN and/or a 
pulmonary-renal syndrome called Goodpasture’s syndrome. 
Discussion of this disease is covered in the section 
“Acute Nephritic Syndromes.”
Alport’s Syndrome
Classically, patients with Alport’s syndrome develop 
hematuria, thinning and splitting of the GBMs, and mild 
proteinuria (<1–2 g/24 h), which appears late in the 
course, followed by chronic glomerulosclerosis leading 
to renal failure in association with sensorineural deafness. 
Some patients develop lenticonus of the anterior lens 
capsule, “dot and fleck” retinopathy, and, rarely, men-
tal retardation or leiomyomatosis. Approximately 85% 
of patients with Alport’s syndrome have an X-linked 
inheritance of mutations in the α5(IV) collagen chain 
on chromosome Xq22–24. Female carriers have vari-
able penetrance depending on the type of mutation or 
the degree of mosaicism created by X inactivation. Fif-
teen percent of patients have autosomal recessive disease 
of the α3(IV) or α4(IV) chains on chromosome 2q35–37. 
Rarely, some kindred have an autosomal dominant 
inheritance of dominant-negative mutations in α3(IV) 
or α4(IV) chains.
Pedigrees with the X-linked syndrome are quite vari-
able in their rate and frequency of tissue damage lead-
ing to organ failure. Seventy percent of patients have the 
juvenile form with nonsense or missense mutations, read-
ing frame shifts, or large deletions and generally develop 
renal failure and sensorineural deafness by age 30. Patients 
with splice variants, exon skipping, or missense mutations 
of α-helical glycines generally deteriorate after the age of 
30 (adult form) with mild or late deafness. Early severe 
deafness, lenticonus, or proteinuria suggests a poorer 
prognosis. Usually females from X-linked pedigrees have 
only microhematuria, but up to 25% of carrier females 
have been reported to have more severe renal manifes-
tations. Pedigrees with the autosomal recessive form of 
the disease have severe early disease in both females and 
males with asymptomatic parents.
Clinical evaluation should include a careful eye 
examination and hearing tests. However, the absence 
of extrarenal symptoms does not rule out the diagnosis. 
Since α5(IV) collagen is expressed in the skin, some 
X-linked Alport patients can be diagnosed with a skin 
biopsy revealing the lack of the α5(IV) collagen chain 
on immunofluorescent analysis. Other patients with sus-
pected disease require a renal biopsy. Alport’s patients 
early in their disease typically have thin basement mem-
branes on renal biopsy (Fig. 4-19), which thicken over 
time into multilamellations surrounding lucent areas 
that often contain granules of varying density—the so-
called split basement membrane. In any Alport kidney 
there are areas of thinning mixed with splitting of the 
GBM. Tubules drop out, glomeruli scar, and the kidney 
eventually succumbs to interstitial fibrosis. Primary treat-
ment is control of systemic hypertension and use of ACE 
inhibitors to slow renal progression. Although patients 
who receive renal allografts usually develop anti-GBM 
antibodies directed toward the collagen epitopes absent 
in their native kidney, overt Goodpasture’s syndrome is 
rare and graft survival is good.
Thin Basement Membrane Disease
Thin basement membrane disease (TBMD) character-
ized by persistent or recurrent hematuria is not typically 
associated with proteinuria, hypertension, or loss of renal 
function or extrarenal disease. Although not all cases are 
familial (perhaps a founder effect), it usually presents in 
childhood in multiple family members and is also called 
benign familial hematuria. Cases of TBMD have genetic 
defects in type IV collagen, but in contrast to Alport 
behave as an autosomal dominant disorder that in ∼40% 
of families segregates with the COL(IV) α3/COL(IV) 
α4 loci. Mutations in these loci can result in a spectrum 
of disease ranging from TBMD to autosomal dominant 
or recessive Alport’s. The GBM shows diffuse thinning 
compared to normal values for the patient’s age in oth-
erwise normal biopsies (Fig. 4-19). The vast majority of 
patients have a benign course.
Nail-Patella Syndrome
Patients with nail-patella syndrome develop iliac horns 
on the pelvis and dysplasia of the dorsal limbs involv-
ing the patella, elbows, and nails, variably associated 
with neural-sensory hearing impairment, glaucoma, 
and abnormalities of the GBM and podocytes, leading 
to hematuria, proteinuria, and FSGS. The syndrome is 
autosomal dominant, with haploinsufficiency for the 
LIM homeodomain transcription factor LMX1B; pedi-
grees are extremely variable in the penetrance for all 
features of the disease. LMX1B regulates the expression 
of genes encoding α3 and α4 chains of collagen IV, 
interstitial type III collagen, podocin, and CD2AP that 
help form the slit-pore membranes connecting podo-
cytes. Mutations in the LIM domain region of LMX1B 
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
185
associate with glomerulopathy, and renal failure appears 
in as many as 30% of patients. Proteinuria or isolated 
hematuria is discovered throughout life, but usually by 
the third decade, and is inexplicably more common in 
females. On renal biopsy there is lucent damage to the 
lamina densa of the GBM, an increase in collagen III 
fibrils along glomerular capillaries and in the mesan-
gium, and damage to the slit-pore membrane, produc-
ing heavy proteinuria not unlike that seen in congenital 
nephrotic syndrome. Patients with renal failure do well 
with transplantation.
Glomerular-Vascular Syndromes
A variety of diseases result in classic vascular injury to 
the glomerular capillaries. Most of these processes also 
damage blood vessels elsewhere in the body. The group 
of diseases discussed here lead to vasculitis, renal endo-
thelial injury, thrombosis, ischemia, and/or lipid-based 
occlusions.
Atherosclerotic Nephropathy
Aging in the developed world is commonly associated 
with the occlusion of coronary and systemic blood ves-
sels. The reasons for this include obesity, insulin resis-
tance, smoking, hypertension, and diets rich in lipids 
that deposit in the arterial and arteriolar circulation, 
producing local inflammation and fibrosis of small blood 
vessels. When the renal arterial circulation is involved, 
the glomerular microcirculation is damaged, leading to 
chronic nephrosclerosis. Patients with GFRs <60 mL/min 
have more cardiovascular events and hospitalizations 
than those with higher filtration rates. Several aggressive 
lipid disorders can accelerate this process, but most of 
the time atherosclerotic progression to chronic neph-
rosclerosis is associated with poorly controlled hyper-
tension. Approximately 10% of glomeruli are normally 
sclerotic by age 40, rising to 20% by age 60 and 30% 
by age 80. Serum lipid profiles in humans are greatly 
affected by apolipoprotein E polymorphisms; the E4 allele 
is accompanied by increases in serum cholesterol and 
is more closely associated with atherogenic profiles in 
patients with renal failure. Mutations in E2 alleles, par-
ticularly in Japanese patients, produce a specific renal 
abnormality called lipoprotein glomerulopathy associ-
ated with glomerular lipoprotein thrombi and capillary 
dilation.
Hypertensive Nephrosclerosis
Uncontrolled systemic hypertension causes permanent 
damage to the kidneys in about 6% of patients with ele-
vated blood pressure. As many as 27% of patients with 
end-stage kidney disease have hypertension as a primary 
cause. Although there is not a clear correlation between 
the extent or duration of hypertension and the risk of 
end-organ damage, hypertensive nephrosclerosis is five-
fold more frequent in African Americans than whites. 
Risk alleles associated with APOL1, a functional gene 
for apolipoprotein L1 expressed in podocytes, substan-
tially explains the increased burden of end-stage renal 
disease among African Americans. Associated risk fac-
tors for progression to end-stage kidney disease include 
age, sex, race, smoking, hypercholesterolemia, duration 
of hypertension, low birth weight, and preexisting renal 
injury. Kidney biopsies in patients with hypertension, 
microhematuria, and moderate proteinuria demonstrate 
arteriolosclerosis, chronic nephrosclerosis, and interstitial 
fibrosis in the absence of immune deposits (Fig. 4-21). 
Today, based on a careful history, physical examina-
tion, urinalysis, and some serologic testing, the diagnosis 
of chronic nephrosclerosis is usually inferred without a 
biopsy. Treating hypertension is the best way to avoid 
progressive renal failure; most guidelines recommend 
lowering blood pressure to <130/80 mmHg if there is 
preexisting diabetes or kidney disease. In the presence 
of kidney disease, most patients begin therapy with 
two drugs, classically a thiazide diuretic and an ACE 
inhibitor; most will require three drugs. There is strong 
evidence in African Americans with hypertensive neph-
rosclerosis that therapy initiated with an ACE inhibitor 
can slow the rate of decline in renal function indepen-
dent of effects on systemic blood pressure. Malignant 
acceleration of hypertension complicates the course of 
chronic nephrosclerosis, particularly in the setting of 
scleroderma or cocaine use (Fig. 4-24). The hemody-
namic stress of malignant hypertension leads to fibrinoid 
necrosis of small blood vessels, thrombotic microan-
giography, a nephritic urinalysis, and acute renal failure. 
In the setting of renal failure, chest pain, or papilledema, 
the condition is treated as a hypertensive emergency. 
Slightly lowering the blood pressure often produces 
an immediate reduction in GFR that improves as the 
vascular injury attenuates and autoregulation of blood 
vessel tone is restored.
Cholesterol Emboli
Aging patients with clinical complications from athero-
sclerosis sometimes shower cholesterol crystals into the 
circulation—either spontaneously or, more commonly, 
following an endovascular procedure with manipu-
lation of the aorta—or with use of systemic antico-
agulation. Spontaneous emboli may shower acutely or 
shower subacutely and somewhat more silently. Irreg-
ular emboli trapped in the microcirculation produce 
ischemic damage that induces an inflammatory reac-
tion. Depending on the location of the atherosclerotic 
plaques releasing these cholesterol fragments, one may 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
186
see cerebral transient ischemic attacks; livedo reticularis 
in the lower extremities; Hollenhorst plaques in the ret-
ina with visual field cuts; necrosis of the toes; and acute 
glomerular capillary injury leading to focal segmental glo-
merulosclerosis sometimes associated with hematuria, mild 
proteinuria, and loss of renal function, which typically 
progresses over a few years. Occasional patients have 
fever, eosinophilia, or eosinophiluria. A skin biopsy of 
an involved area may be diagnostic. Since tissue fixation 
dissolves the cholesterol, one typically sees only residual, 
biconvex clefts in involved vessels (Fig. 4-22). There 
is no therapy to reverse embolic occlusions, and ste-
roids do not help. Controlling blood pressure and lipids 
and cessation of smoking are usually recommended for 
prevention.
Sickle Cell Disease
Although individuals with SA-hemoglobin are usually 
asymptomatic, most will gradually develop hyposthe-
nuria due to subclinical infarction of the renal medulla, 
thus predisposing them to volume depletion; interest-
ingly, there is an unexpectedly high prevalence of sickle 
trait among dialysis patients who are African American. 
Patients with homozygous SS-sickle cell disease develop 
chronic vasoocclusive disease in many organs. Polymers 
of deoxygenated SS-hemoglobin distort the shape of red 
blood cells. These cells attach to endothelia and obstruct 
small blood vessels, producing frequent, random, and 
painful sickle cell crises over time. Vessel occlusions in 
the kidney produce glomerular hypertension, FSGS, 
interstitial nephritis, and renal infarction associated with 
hyposthenuria, microscopic hematuria, and even gross 
hematuria; some patients also present with MPGN. 
By the second or third decade of life, persistent vaso-
occlusive disease in the kidney leads to varying degrees 
of renal failure, and some patients end up on dialysis. 
Treatment is directed to reducing the frequency of 
painful crises and administering ACE inhibitors in the 
hope of delaying a progressive decline in renal function. 
In sickle cell patients undergoing renal transplantation, 
renal graft survival is comparable to that of African 
Americans in the general transplant population.
Thrombotic Microangiopathies
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic-
uremic syndrome (HUS) represent a spectrum of throm-
botic microangiopathies. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura and hemolytic-uremic syndrome share the gen-
eral features of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 
hemolytic anemia, fever, renal failure, and neurologic 
disturbances. When patients, particularly children, have 
more evidence of renal injury, their condition tends to 
be called HUS. In adults with neurologic disease, it is 
considered to be TTP. In adults there is often a mixture 
of both, which is why they are often called TTP/HUS. 
On examination of kidney tissue there is evidence of 
glomerular capillary endotheliosis associated with platelet 
thrombi, damage to the capillary wall, and formation 
of fibrin material in and around glomeruli (Fig. 4-23). 
These tissue findings are similar to what is seen in pre-
eclampsia/HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, 
and low platelet count syndrome), malignant hyperten-
sion, and the antiphospholipid syndrome. Thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
is also seen in pregnancy; with the use of oral contracep-
tives or quinine; in renal transplant patients given OKT3 
for rejection; in patients taking the calcineurin inhibitors, 
cyclosporine and tacrolimus, or in patients taking the 
antiplatelet agents, ticlopidine and clopidogrel; or fol-
lowing HIV infection.
Although there is no agreement on how much they 
share a final common pathophysiology, two general 
groups of patients are recognized: childhood HUS asso-
ciated with enterohemorrhagic diarrhea and TTP/HUS 
in adults. Childhood HUS is caused by a toxin released 
by Escherichia coli 0157:H7 and occasionally by Shigella 
dysenteriae. This shiga toxin (verotoxin) directly injures 
endothelia, enterocytes, and renal cells, causing apop-
tosis, platelet clumping, and intravascular hemolysis by 
binding to the glycolipid receptors (Gb3). These recep-
tors are more abundant along endothelia in children 
compared to adults. Shiga toxin also inhibits the endo-
thelial production of ADAMTS13. In familial cases of 
adult TTP/HUS, there is a genetic deficiency of the 
ADAMTS13 metalloprotease that cleaves large multi-
mers of von Willebrand’s factor. Absent ADAMTS13, 
these large multimers cause platelet clumping and 
intravascular hemolysis. An antibody to ADAMTS13 
is found in many sporadic cases of adult TTP/HUS, 
but not all; many patients also have antibodies to the 
thrombospondin receptor on selected endothelial cells 
in small vessels or increased levels of plasminogen- 
activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1). Some children with 
complement protein deficiencies express atypical HUS 
(aHUS), which can be treated with liver transplant. 
The treatment of adult TTP/HUS is daily plasmapher-
esis, which can be lifesaving. Plasmapheresis is given 
until the platelet count rises, but in relapsing patients 
it normally is continued well after the platelet count 
improves, and in resistant patients twice-daily exchange 
may be helpful. Most patients respond within 2 weeks 
of daily plasmapheresis. Since TTP/HUS often has an 
autoimmune basis, there is an anecdotal role in relaps-
ing patients for using splenectomy, steroids, immuno-
suppressive drugs, or rituximab, an anti-CD20 antibody. 
Patients with childhood HUS from infectious diarrhea 
are not given antibiotics, as antibiotics are thought to 
accelerate the release of the toxin and the diarrhea is 
usually self-limited. No intervention appears superior to 
supportive therapy in children with postdiarrheal HUS.
 
CHAPTER 15
Glomerular Diseases
187
Infectious Disease–Associated 
Syndromes
A number of infectious diseases will injure the glomeru-
lar capillaries as part of a systemic reaction producing an 
immune response or from direct infection of renal tis-
sue. Evidence of this immune response is collected by 
glomeruli in the form of immune deposits that damage 
the kidney, producing moderate proteinuria and hema-
turia. Some of these infectious diseases represent the 
most common causes of glomerulonephritis in many 
parts of the world.
Post-Streptococcal 
Glomerulonephritis
This form of glomerulonephritis is one of the classic 
complications of streptococcal infection. The discus-
sion of this disease can be found in the section “Acute 
Nephritic Syndromes.”
Subacute Bacterial Endocarditis
Renal injury from persistent bacteremia absent the con-
tinued presence of a foreign body, regardless of cause, is 
treated presumptively as if the patient has endocarditis. 
The discussion of this disease can be found in the sec-
tion “Acute Nephritic Syndromes.”
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Renal disease is an important complication of HIV dis-
ease. The risk of development of end-stage renal disease 
is much higher in HIV-infected African Americans than 
in HIV-infected whites. About 50% of HIV-infected 
patients with kidney disease have HIV-associated 
nephropathy (HIVAN) on biopsy. The lesion in HIVAN 
is FSGS, characteristically revealing a collapsing glomeru-
lopathy (Fig. 4-3) with visceral epithelial cell swelling, 
microcystic dilatation of renal tubules, and tubuloreticu-
lar inclusion. Renal epithelial cells express replicating HIV 
virus, but host immune responses also play a role in the 
pathogenesis. MPGN and DPGN have also been reported 
but more commonly in HIV-infected whites and in 
patients coinfected with hepatitis B or C. HIV-associated 
TTP has also been reported. Other renal lesions include 
DPGN, IgA nephropathy, and MCD. Renal biopsy may 
be indicated to distinguish between these lesions.
HIV patients with FSGS typically present with 
nephrotic-range proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia, 
but unlike patients with other etiologies for nephrotic 
syndrome, they do not commonly have hyperten-
sion, edema, or hyperlipidemia. Renal ultrasound also 
reveals large, echogenic kidneys despite the finding that 
renal function in some patients declines rapidly. Treat-
ment with inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system 
decreases the proteinuria. Effective antiretroviral therapy 
benefits both the patient and the kidney and improves 
survival of HIV-infected patient with chronic kid-
ney disease (CKD) or end-stage renal disease. In HIV-
infected patients not yet on therapy, the presence of 
HIVAN is an indication to initiate therapy. Follow-
ing the introduction of antiretroviral therapy, survival 
on dialysis for HIV-infected patients has improved 
dramatically and is equivalent in patients treated with 
hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. Renal transplants in 
HIV-infected patients without detectable viral loads or 
histories of opportunistic infections have a better sur-
vival benefit over dialysis. Following transplantation, 
patient and graft survival are similar to that in the gen-
eral transplant population despite frequent rejections.
Hepatitis B and C
Typically, infected patients present with microscopic 
hematuria, nonnephrotic or nephrotic-range proteinuria, 
and hypertension. There is a close association between 
hepatitis B infection and polyarteritis nodosa, with vas-
culitis appearing generally in the first 6 months follow-
ing infection. Renal manifestations include renal artery 
aneurysms, renal infarction, and ischemic scars. Alterna-
tively, the hepatitis B carrier state can produce an MGN 
that is more common in children than adults, or MPGN 
that is more common in adults than in children. Renal 
histology is indistinguishable from idiopathic MGN 
or type I MPGN. Viral antigens are found in the renal 
deposits. There are no good treatment guidelines, but 
interferon α-2b and lamivudine have been used to some 
effect in small studies. Children have a good prognosis, 
with 60–65% achieving spontaneous remission within 
4 years. In contrast, 30% of adults have renal insuffi-
ciency and 10% have renal failure 5 years after diagnosis.
Up to 30% of patients with chronic hepatitis C infec-
tion have some renal manifestations. Patients often pres-
ent with type II mixed cryoglobulinemia, nephrotic syn-
drome, microscopic hematuria, abnormal liver function 
tests, depressed C3 levels, anti–hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
antibodies, and viral RNA in the blood. The renal 
lesions most commonly seen, in order of decreasing fre-
quency, are cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis, MGN, and 
type I MPGN. Treatment with pegylated interferon and 
ribavirin is typical to reduce the viral load.
Other Viruses
Other viral infections are occasionally associated with 
glomerular lesions, but cause and effect are not well 
established. These viral infections and their respec-
tive glomerular lesions include cytomegalovirus pro-
ducing MPGN; influenza and anti-GBM disease; 
SECTION IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders  
188
measles-associated endocapillary proliferative glomeru-
lonephritis, with measles antigen in the capillary loops 
and mesangium; parvovirus causing mild proliferative 
or mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis or FSGS; 
mumps and mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis; 
Epstein-Barr virus producing MPGN, diffuse prolifera-
tive nephritis, or IgA nephropathy; dengue hemorrhagic 
fever causing endocapillary proliferative glomerulone-
phritis; and coxsackievirus producing focal glomerulone-
phritis or DPGN.
Syphilis
Secondary syphilis, with rash and constitutional symp-
toms, develops weeks to months after the chancre first 
appears and occasionally presents with the nephrotic 
syndrome from MGN caused by subepithelial immune 
deposits containing treponemal antigens. Other lesions 
have also rarely been described including interstitial 
syphilitic nephritis. The diagnosis is confirmed with 
nontreponemal and treponemal tests for Treponema pal-
lidum. The renal lesion responds to treatment with 
penicillin or an alternative drug, if allergic. Additional 
testing for other sexually transmitted diseases is an 
important part of disease management.
Leprosy
Despite aggressive eradication programs, approximately 
400,000 new cases of leprosy appear annually worldwide. 
The diagnosis is best made in patients with multiple skin 
lesions accompanied by sensory loss in affected areas 
using skin smears showing paucibacillary or multibacillary 
infection (WHO criteria). Leprosy is caused by infection 
with Mycobacterium leprae and can be classified by Ridley-
Jopling criteria into various types: tuberculoid, borderline 
tuberculoid, mid-borderline and borderline lepromatous, 
and lepromatous. Renal involvement in leprosy is related 
to the quantity of bacilli in the body, and the kidney is 
one of the target organs during splanchnic localization. 
In some series, all cases with borderline lepromatous 
and lepromatous types of leprosy have various forms of 
renal involvement including FSGS, mesangioprolifera-
tive glomerulonephritis, or renal amyloidosis; much less 
common are the renal lesions of DPGN and MPGN. 
Treatment with dapsone, rifampicin, and clofazimine can 
eradicate the infection in nearly all patients.
Malaria
There are 300–500 million incident cases of malaria each 
year worldwide, and the kidney is commonly involved. 
Glomerulonephritis is due to immune complexes 
containing malarial antigens that are implanted in the 
glomerulus. In malaria from P. falciparum, mild protein-
uria is associated with subendothelial deposits, mesangial 
deposits, and mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis 
that usually resolve with treatment. In quartan malaria 
from infection with P. malariae, children are more com-
monly affected and renal involvement is more severe. 
Transient proteinuria and microscopic hematuria can 
resolve with treatment of the infection. However, resis-
tant nephrotic syndrome with progression to renal fail-
ure over 3–5 years does happen, as <50% of patients 
respond to steroid therapy. Affected patients with 
nephrotic syndrome have thickening of the glomeru-
lar capillary walls, with subendothelial deposits of IgG, 
IgM, and C3 associated with a sparse membranoprolif-
erative lesion. The rare mesangioproliferative glomerulo-
nephritis reported with P. vivax or P. ovale typically has a 
benign course.
Schistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis affects more than 300 million people 
worldwide and primarily involves the urinary and gas-
trointestinal tracts. Glomerular involvement varies with 
the specific strain of schistosomiasis; Schistosoma man-
soni is most commonly associated with clinical renal 
disease, and the glomerular lesions can be classified: 
Class I is a mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis; class II 
is an extracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis; class III 
is a membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; class IV is a 
focal segmental glomerulonephritis; and class V lesions have 
amyloidosis. Classes I–II often remit with treatment of 
the infection, but classes III and IV lesions are associ-
ated with IgA immune deposits and progress despite 
antiparasitic and/or immunosuppressive therapy.
Other Parasites
Renal involvement with toxoplasmosis infections is 
rare. When it occurs, patients present with nephrotic 
syndrome and have a histologic picture of MPGN. Fifty 
percent of patients with leishmaniasis will have mild to 
moderate proteinuria and microscopic hematuria, but 
renal insufficiency is rare. Acute DPGN, MGN, and 
mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis have all been 
observed on biopsy. Filariasis and trichinosis are caused 
by nematodes and are sometimes associated with glo-
merular injury presenting with proteinuria, hematuria, 
and a variety of histologic lesions that typically resolve 
with eradication of the infection.
 David J. Salant I  Craig E. Gordon 
189
 introduCtion 
 The polycystic kidney diseases are among the most 
common life-threatening inherited diseases worldwide 
and frequently cause kidney failure. Autosomal domi-
nant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is seen pre-
dominantly in adults ( Fig. 16-1 ), whereas autosomal 
recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is mainly a 
disease of childhood. Renal cysts also are seen in several 
other hereditary kidney diseases ( Table 16-1 ), some of 
which may have defects in a common signaling pathway 
with ADPKD and ARPKD. Other inherited tubular 
diseases manifest primarily with alterations in fl uid, elec-
trolyte, acid-base, and mineral balance ( Table 16-2 ). 
 auTOsOMaL dOMInanT POLyCysTIC 
KIdney dIsease 
 Etiology and pathogenesis 
 ADPKD is a systemic disorder resulting from mutations 
in either the  PKD-1 or the  PKD-2 gene. The  PKD-
1 -encoded protein, polycystin-1, is a large receptor-
like molecule, whereas the  PKD-2 gene product, 
polycystin-2, has features of a calcium channel pro-
tein. Both are transmembrane proteins that are present 
throughout all segments of the nephron. They have 
been localized to the luminal surface of tubular cells in 
primary cilia, where they appear to serve as fl ow sen-
sors; on the basal surface in focal adhesion complexes; 
and on the lateral surface in adherens junctions. The 
proteins are thought to function independently, or 
as a complex, to regulate fetal and adult epithelial cell 
gene transcription, apoptosis, differentiation, and cell-
matrix interactions. Disruption of these processes leads 
 POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE AND OTHER 
INHERITED TUBULAR DISORDERS 
 CHaPter 16 
to epithelial dedifferentiation, unregulated proliferation 
and apoptosis, altered cell polarity, disorganization of sur-
rounding extracellular matrix, excessive fl uid secretion, 
and abnormal expression of several genes, including some 
that encode growth factors. Vasopressin-mediated eleva-
tion of cyclic AMP levels in cyst epithelia plays a major 
role in cystogenesis by stimulating cell proliferation 
and fl uid secretion into the cyst lumen through apical 
chloride and aquaporin channels. Cyst formation begins 
in utero from any point along the nephron, although 
<5% of total nephrons are thought to be involved. 
As the cysts accumulate fl uid, they enlarge, separate 
entirely from the nephron, compress the neighboring 
renal parenchyma, and progressively compromise renal 
function. 
 GeneTIC COnsIdeRaTIOns 
ADPKD occurs in 1:400–1:1000 individuals 
worldwide and accounts for ∼4% of end-stage 
renal disease (ESRD) in the United States. 
ADPKD is equally prevalent in all ethnic and racial 
groups. Over 90% of cases are inherited as an autosomal 
dominant trait, with the remainder probably represent-
ing spontaneous mutations. Mutations in the  PKD-1 
gene on chromosome 16 (ADPKD-1) account for 85% 
of cases, and mutations in the  PKD-2 gene on chromo-
some 4 (ADPKD-2) account for the remainder. A few 
families appear to have a defect at a site that is different 
from either of these loci. Direct mutation analysis of 
isolated cysts suggests that there is loss of heterozygosity, 
whereby a somatic mutation in the normal allele of a 
small number of tubular epithelial cells leads to unregu-
lated clonal proliferation of the cells that ultimately 
form the cyst lining. 
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
190
Clinical features
Phenotypic heterogeneity is a hallmark of ADPKD, 
as evidenced by family members who have the same 
mutation but have a different clinical course. Affected 
individuals are often asymptomatic into the fourth or 
fifth decade. Presenting symptoms and signs include 
abdominal discomfort, hematuria, urinary tract infec-
tion, incidental discovery of hypertension, abdominal 
masses, elevated serum creatinine, and cystic kidneys 
on imaging studies (Fig. 16-1A and B). Frequently, the 
diagnosis is made before the onset of symptoms, when 
asymptomatic members in affected families request 
screening. In most patients, renal function declines pro-
gressively over the course of 10–20 years from the time 
of diagnosis, but not everyone with ADPKD devel-
ops ESRD; it occurs in about 60% of these patients 
by age 70. Those with ADPKD-2 tend to have later 
onset and slower progression. Hypertension is com-
mon and often precedes renal dysfunction, perhaps 
mediated by increased activity of the renin-angiotensin 
system. There is only mild proteinuria, and impaired 
urinary concentrating ability manifests early as polyuria 
and nocturia. Risk factors for progressive kidney dis-
ease include younger age at diagnosis, black race, male 
sex, presence of polycystin-1 mutation, and hyperten-
sion. There is a close correlation between the rate of 
kidney expansion, as measured by magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scanning, and the rate of decline in 
kidney function. Dull, persistent flank and abdomi-
nal pain and early satiety are common due to the mass 
effect of the enlarged kidneys or liver. Cyst rupture or 
hemorrhage into a cyst may produce acute flank pain 
or symptoms and signs of localized peritonitis. Gross 
hematuria may result from cyst rupture into the collect-
ing system or from uric acid or calcium oxalate kidney 
stones. Nephrolithiasis occurs in about 20% of patients. 
Urinary tract infection, including acute pyelonephritis, 
occurs with increased frequency in ADPKD. Infection 
in a kidney cyst is a particularly serious complication. 
It is most often due to gram-negative bacteria and pres-
ents with flank pain, fever, and chills. Blood cultures 
are frequently positive, but urine culture may be nega-
tive because infected kidney cysts do not communi-
cate directly with the collecting system. Distinguishing 
between infection and cyst hemorrhage is often chal-
lenging, and the diagnosis relies mainly on clinical and 
bacteriologic findings. Radiologic and nuclear imaging 
studies are generally not helpful.
Numerous extrarenal manifestations of ADPKD high-
light the systemic nature of the disease. Patients with 
ADPKD have a twofold to fourfold increased risk of 
subarachnoid or cerebral hemorrhage from a ruptured 
intracranial aneurysm compared with the general popu-
lation. Saccular aneurysms of the anterior cerebral circu-
lation may be detected in up to 10% of asymptomatic 
patients on magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) 
screening, but most are small, have a low risk of spon-
taneous rupture, and do not merit the risk of interven-
tion. In general, hemorrhage tends to occur before age 
50 years, in patients with a family history of intracranial 
hemorrhage, and in those who have survived a previous 
bleed, have aneurysms >10 mm, and have uncontrolled 
hypertension. Other vascular abnormalities include aortic 
root and annulus dilation. Cardiac valvular abnormalities 
occur in 25% of patients, most commonly mitral valve 
prolapse and aortic regurgitation. Although most val-
vular lesions are asymptomatic, some may progress over 
time and warrant valve replacement. The incidence of 
hepatic cysts is 83% by MRI in patients aged 15–46 years. 
Most patients are asymptomatic with normal liver func-
tion tests, but hepatic cysts may bleed, become infected, 
rupture, and cause pain. Although the frequency of liver 
cysts is equal between the sexes, women are more likely 
to have massive cysts (Fig. 16-1C). Colonic diverticu-
lae are common, with a higher incidence of perforation 
Figure 16-1
Renal ultrasonogram and contrast-enhanced abdomi-
nal CT scan in a 56-year-old woman with autosomal dom-
inant polycystic kidney disease. A. Sonogram of the right 
kidney showing numerous cysts of varying sizes (arrows). 
B. Abdominal CT scan demonstrating bilaterally enlarged 
kidneys with large cysts (arrows). C. Multiple liver cysts 
(arrowheads) and renal cysts (arrow) are seen in an upper 
abdominal image.
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
191
in patients with ADPKD. Abdominal wall and inguinal 
hernias also occur with a higher frequency than in the 
general population.
Diagnosis and screening
Most often, the diagnosis of ADPKD is made from a 
positive family history and imaging studies showing large 
kidneys with multiple bilateral cysts and possibly liver 
cysts (Fig. 16-1). Criteria for the diagnosis of ADPKD 
by ultrasonography in asymptomatic individuals account 
for the later onset of ADPKD-2 and assume that the 
genotype of the individual and family being tested is 
unknown. The presence of three or more cysts in one or 
both kidneys is required to diagnose ADPKD in patients 
aged 15–39 years with a specificity and positive predic-
tive value of 100%; sensitivity varies from 82 to 96% for 
persons aged 15–29 and 30–39 years, respectively. The 
presence of two or more cysts in each kidney is associ-
ated with a sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 100%, 
respectively, in patients aged 40–59 years. In subjects 
older than 60 years, the presence of four or more cysts 
in each kidney is required to diagnose ADPKD because 
of the increased frequency of benign simple cysts, 
Table 16-1
Inherited Cystic Kidney Diseases
Disease (OMIM)
Mode of 
Inheritance
Locus
Gene
Protein
Renal 
Abnormalities
Extrarenal 
Abnormalities
Autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney 
disease (601313, 
173910)
AD
AD
16p13
4q21
PKD1
PKD2
Polycystin-1
Polycystin-2
Cortical and med-
ullary cysts
Cortical and med-
ullary cysts
Cerebral aneurysms; 
liver cysts, other a
Cerebral aneurysms; 
liver cysts, other a
Autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney 
disease (263200)
AR
6p21
PKHD1
Fibrocystin 
(polyductin)
Distal tubule and 
collecting duct 
cysts
Hepatic fibrosis; 
Caroli’s disease
Nephronophthisis I  
(juvenile/ 
adolescent, 
256100)b
AR
2q13
NPHP1
Nephrocystin
Small fibrotic kid-
neys; medullary 
cysts
Retinitis pigmentosa
Nephronophthisis II 
(infantile, 602088)b
AR
9q31
NPHP2 
(INVS)
Inversin
Large kidneys; 
widespread cysts
Situs inversus
Nephronophthisis III 
(juvenile/adolescent, 
604387) b
AR
3q22
NPHP3
Nephrocystin-3
Small fibrotic kid-
neys; medullary 
cysts
Retinitis pigmentosa; 
hepatic fibrosis
Medullary cystic 
kidney disease 
(174000, 603860)
AD
1q21
MCKD1
Unknown
Small fibrotic kid-
neys; medullary 
cysts
None
AD
16p12
MCKD2 
(UMOD)
Uromodulin 
(Tamm- 
Horsfall protein)
Small fibrotic kid-
neys; medullary 
cysts
Hyperuricemia and 
gout
Tuberous sclerosis 
(191100)
AD
9q34
TSC1
Hamartin
Renal cysts; angi-
omyolipomas; 
renal cell carci-
noma
Facial angiofibro-
mas; CNS hamar-
tomas
AD
16p13
TSC2
Tuberin
Renal cysts; 
angiomyolipo-
mas; renal cell 
carcinoma
Facial angiofibro-
mas; CNS hamar-
tomas
Von Hippel-Lindau 
disease (608537)
AD
3p26-p25
VHL
pVHL
Renal cysts; renal 
cell carcinoma
Retinal angiomas; 
CNS hemangio-
blastomas; pheo-
chromocytomas
aSee text for details.
bThe three variants of nephronophthisis listed are the most prevalent of the currently described 11 forms of nephronophthisis. Each variant has 
similar renal abnormalities but varying extrarenal phenotypes.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; OMIM, online Mendelian inheritance in man.
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
192
Table 16-2
Inherited Tubular Disorders
Disease (OMIM)
Mode of 
Inheritance
Locus
Gene
Protein
Renal 
Abnormalities
Extrarenal 
Abnormalities
Bartter’s syndrome
  Type 1 (601678)
AR
15q15
SLC12A1
NKCC2
Salt wasting; 
hypokalemia
  Type 2 (241200)
AR
11q24
KCNJ1
ROMK
Salt wasting; 
hypokalemia
  Type 3 (607364)
AR
1p36
ClCNKb
CLC-Kb
Salt wasting; 
hypokalemia
  Type 4 (602023)
AR
1p31
BSND
Barttin
Salt wasting; 
hypokalemia
Sensorineural 
deafness
  Type 5 (601199)
AD
3q13
CASR
CASR
Salt wasting; 
hypokalemia
Gitelman’s syndrome 
(263800)
AR
16q13
SLC12A3
NCCT
Salt wasting; 
hypokalemia; 
hypomagnesemia
Pseudohypoaldo-
steronism type I 
(264350, 177735)
AR
16p13
16p13
12p13
SCNN1B 
SCNN1G 
SCNN1A
α, β, or γ sub-
unit of ENaC
Hyperkalemia; salt 
wasting
Increased lung 
secretions 
and lung 
infections
AD
4q31
NR3C2
Mineralocorti-
coid receptor 
(type I)
Hyperkalemia; salt 
wasting
Familial hypomagne-
semia with hypercal-
ciuria and nephro-
calcinosis (FHHNC) 
(248250, 248190)
AR
3q27
1p34
CLDN16 
CLDN19
Claudin 16
Claudin 19
Hypomagnesemia; 
nephrocalcinosis
Ocular  
abnormalities 
(claudin 19 
defect only)
Hypomagnesemia 
with secondary 
hypocalcemia (HSH) 
(602014)
AR
9q22
TRPM6
TRPM6
Hypomagnesemia; 
hypocalcemia
Autosomal dominant 
hypomagnesemia 
(154020)
AD
11q23
FXYD2
γ subunit of 
basolateral 
Na/K-ATPase 
of DCT
Hypomagnesemia; 
hypocalciuria
Autosomal dominant 
hypoparathyroidism 
(601199)
AD
3q13
CASR
CASR
Hypocalcemia; 
hypercalciuria; 
hypomagnesemia
Isolated autosomal 
recessive hypomag-
nesemia (611718)
AR
4q25
EGF
EGF
Hypomagnesemia
Liddle’s syndrome 
(177200)
AD
16p13
SCNN1B 
SCNN1G
β and γ sub-
units of ENaC
Hypertension; 
hypokalemia; 
alkalosis
Pseudohypoaldo-
steronism type II 
(Gordon’s syndrome, 
145260)
AD
12p13 
17q21
WNK1 
WNK4
WNK 1 
WNK 4
Hypertension; 
hyperkalemia
Nephrogenic DI type 
1 (304800)
XL
Xq28
AVPR2
AVPR2
Renal concentrat-
ing defect
Nephrogenic DI type 
2 (125800)
AR, AD
12q13
AQP2
AQP2
Renal concentrat-
ing defect
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
193
Table 16-2
Inherited Tubular Disorders (CONTINUED)
Disease (OMIM)
Mode of 
Inheritance
Locus
Gene
Protein
Renal 
Abnormalities
Extrarenal 
Abnormalities
Nephrogenic syn-
drome of inappro-
priate antidiuresis 
(300539)
XL
Xq28
AVPR2
AVPR2
Hyponatremia
Distal renal tubular 
acidosis (267300, 
602722, 259730, 
179800)
AR
2cenq13 
7q33
ATP6V1B1 
ATP6VOA4
H+-ATPase (B1)
H+-ATPase (α4)
Hyperchloremic 
metabolic acido-
sis; nephrocalci-
nosis
Sensorineural 
deafness (B1 
defect only); 
growth retar-
dation
AR
8q22
CA2
CA2
Proximal and dis-
tal RTA
Osteopetrosis, 
short stature, 
mental retar-
dation
AD
17q21
SLC4A1
AE1
Distal RTA
Proximal renal tubular 
acidosis (604278)
AR
4q21
SLC4A4
NBC-1
Moderate hyper-
chloremic meta-
bolic acidosis
Glaucoma; 
band kera-
topathy
Cystinuria (220100)
AR
2p16 
19q13
SLC3A1 
SLC7A9
rBATbo,+AT1
Cystine stones; 
dibasic aminoac-
iduria
Hartnup disease 
(234500)
AR
5p15
SLC6A19
BoAT1
Neutral aminoac-
iduria
Dermatitis,  
ataxia; 
dementia
Dent’s disease 
(300009)
XL
Xp11
CLCN5
CLC-5
Fanconi syn-
drome; nephro-
calcinosis
Osteomalacia; 
rickets
Cystinosis (219800)
AR
17p13
CTNS
Cystinosin
Fanconi syn-
drome; progres-
sive kidney failure
Ocular, muscular, 
liver, gonadal, 
and thyroid 
involvement
Renal glucosuria 
(233100)
AR
16p11
SLC5A2
SGLT2
Glucosuria
Hereditary hypophos-
phatemic rickets 
with hypercalciuria 
(HHRH, 241530)
AR
9q34
SLC34A3
Sodium- 
phosphate 
co-transporter
Hypophosphatemia; 
hypercalciuria
Rickets
Vitamin D–dependent 
rickets type I (VDDR 
I, 264700)
AR
12q14.1
CYP27B1
25-vitamin 
D3-1-α-
hydroxylase
Hypocalcemia
Rickets
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AE1, anion exchanger 1; AR, autosomal recessive; AT1, amino acid transporter; AVPR2, arginine vaso-
pressin receptor 2; CA2, carbonic anhydrase II; CASR, calcium-sensing receptor; CLC-5, chloride channel 5; CLC-Kb, chloride channel Kb; 
DI, diabetes insipidus; ENaC, amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel; NBC, sodium-bicarbonate co-transporter; NCCT, thiazide-sensitive 
Na-Cl co-transporter; NKCC2, Na-K-2Cl co-transporter; OMIM, online Mendelian inheritance in man; rBAT, renal basic amino acid transport gly-
coprotein; ROMK, renal outer medullary potassium channel; SGLT2, sodium/glucose co-transporter;TRPM6, transient receptor potential cation 
channel, subfamily M, member 6; WNK, with no lysine (K); XL, X-linked.
whereas fewer than two renal cysts in at-risk individuals 
aged ≥40 years is sufficient to exclude the disease. Com-
puted tomography (CT) scan and T2-weighted MRI are 
more sensitive for detecting presymptomatic disease in 
young patients. Genetic linkage analysis and mutational 
screening for ADPKD-1 and ADPKD-2 is available for 
equivocal cases, especially when a young adult from an 
affected family is being considered as a potential kidney 
donor. Genetic counseling is essential for those being 
screened. Screening for asymptomatic intracranial aneu-
rysms should be restricted to patients with a personal or 
family history of intracranial hemorrhage and those in 
high-risk occupations. Intervention should be limited to 
aneurysms larger than 10 mm.
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
194
Treatment	
Autosomal Dominant Polycystic 
Kidney Disease
No treatment has been proved to prevent cyst growth 
or the decline in kidney function. Hypertension con-
trol with a target blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg or 
less is recommended according to Joint National Com-
mittee (JNC) VII guidelines. A multidrug approach that 
includes agents to inhibit the renin-angiotensin system 
is frequently required. Studies are investigating the role 
of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and 
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) in slowing growth 
of kidney volume and loss of glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR). Lipid-soluble antimicrobials such as trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones that have good 
cyst penetration are the preferred therapy for infected 
kidney and liver cysts. Pain management occasionally 
requires cyst drainage by percutaneous aspiration, sclero-
therapy with alcohol, or, rarely, surgical drainage. Patients 
with ADPKD appear to have a survival advantage on 
either peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis compared with 
patients with other causes of ESRD. Those undergoing kid-
ney transplantation may require bilateral nephrectomy if the 
kidneys are massively enlarged or have been the site of 
infected cysts. Posttransplantation survival rates are simi-
lar to those of patients with other causes of kidney failure, 
but these patients remain at risk for the extrarenal com-
plications of ADPKD. Studies in animal models of inher-
ited cystic diseases have identified promising therapeutic 
strategies, including vasopressin V2 receptor antagonists 
that suppress cyst growth by lowering intracellular cAMP, 
and inhibitors of cell dedifferentiation and proliferation 
that target the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 
kinase and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). 
Clinical trials of these agents are ongoing.
Autosomal Recessive Polycystic 
Kidney Disease
Genetic Considerations
ARPKD is primarily a disease of infants and chil-
dren. The incidence is 1:20,000 births. The kid-
neys are enlarged, with small cysts, <5 mm, limited 
to the collecting tubules. The ARPKD gene on chromo-
some 6p21, PKHD1, encodes several alternatively spliced 
transcripts (Table 16-1). The largest transcript produces a 
multidomain transmembrane protein termed fibrocystin 
(polyductin) that is found in the cortical and medullary 
collecting ducts and the thick ascending limb of Henle’s 
loop in the kidney as well as in biliary and pancreatic 
duct epithelia. Like the polycystins, fibrocystin has receptor- 
like features and may be involved in cell-cell and 
cell-matrix interactions. Fibrocystin, the polycystins, and 
several proteins involved in animal models of PKD are 
located in association with primary cilia on the tubular 
epithelial cell apical surface; this suggests that they may 
cooperate in a mechanosensory pathway. A large number 
of different mutations have been identified throughout 
PKHD1 and are unique to individual families. Most 
patients are compound heterozygotes. Those with two 
truncating mutations frequently die shortly after birth, 
whereas those who survive beyond the neonatal period 
generally have at least one missense mutation. Mutations 
in PKHD1 have also been identified in about 30% of 
children with congenital hepatic fibrosis (Caroli’s syn-
drome) without evident kidney involvement.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation of ARPKD is highly variable. 
Up to 50% of affected neonates die of pulmonary hypo-
plasia, the result of oligohydramnios from severe intra-
uterine kidney disease. About 80% of those who survive 
the neonatal period are still alive after 10 years; how-
ever, one-third will have developed ESRD. Enlarged 
kidneys may be detected soon after birth as bilateral 
abdominal masses. Impaired urinary concentrating abil-
ity and metabolic acidosis ensue as tubular function 
deteriorates. Hypertension often occurs in the first few 
years of life. Kidney function deteriorates progressively 
from childhood into early adult life. Longer-term survi-
vors frequently develop complications of portal hyper-
tension from periportal fibrosis.
Diagnosis
Ultrasonography reveals large, echogenic kidneys. The 
diagnosis can be made in utero after 24 weeks of ges-
tation in severe cases, but cysts generally become vis-
ible only after birth. The absence of renal cysts in either 
parent on ultrasonography helps distinguish ARPKD 
from ADPKD in older patients. The wide range of dif-
ferent mutations and the large size of the gene compli-
cate molecular diagnosis, although prenatal diagnosis is 
possible by gene linkage to the PKHD1 locus in families 
with a previous confirmed ARPKD birth.
Treatment	
Autosomal Recessive Polycystic 
Kidney Disease
There is no specific therapy for ARPKD. Improvements 
in neonatal intensive care, blood pressure manage-
ment, dialysis, and kidney transplantation have led 
to survival into adulthood. Complications of hepatic 
fibrosis may necessitate liver transplantation. Future 
therapies may target aberrant cell signaling mecha-
nisms, as in ADPKD.
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
195
Nephronophthisis
Genetics and pathogenesis
Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is the most common genetic 
cause of ESRD in childhood and adolescence. Eleven 
distinct genetic mutations with autosomal recessive 
inheritance have been identified to date and produce 
different renal and extrarenal manifestations of NPHP 
(Table 16-1). Although their precise functions are 
unclear, the defective protein products, named neph-
rocystins and inversin, localize to the primary cilium 
and associated basal body of renal epithelial cells, simi-
lar to the polycystins and fibrocystin. NPHP is classified 
into infantile, juvenile, and adolescent forms based on 
the age of ESRD onset. In juvenile NPHP, the most 
common form, the kidneys are shrunken and histology 
shows tubular atrophy, thickening of tubular basement 
membranes, diffuse interstitial fibrosis, and microscopic 
medullary cysts. In the infantile form, the kidneys are 
large with histology similar to that of the juvenile form 
except that medullary cysts are more prominent and 
develop earlier.
Clinical features
In juvenile NPHP symptoms typically appear after 
1 year of age. Impaired tubular function causes salt 
wasting and defective urinary concentration and acidi-
fication. Patients may present with polyuria, polydipsia, 
volume depletion, or systemic acidosis. Hypertension 
is usually absent due to salt wasting. Progressive kidney 
failure and volume depletion lead to growth retarda-
tion. On average, ESRD occurs by age 3 in the infan-
tile form, age 13 in the juvenile form, and age 19 in 
the adolescent form. Up to 15% of patients with juve-
nile NPHP have extrarenal manifestations (Table 16-1), 
most commonly retinitis pigmentosa (Senior-Loken 
syndrome). Other abnormalities include blindness from 
amaurosis, oculomotor apraxia, cerebellar ataxia (Jou-
bert syndrome), polydactyly, mental retardation, hepatic 
fibrosis, and ventricular septal defect. Situs inversus is 
seen in some cases of infantile NPHP, consistent with 
mutation in INVS (NPHP2), a gene critical for left-
right patterning in the embryo.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of NPHP should be considered in patients 
with a family history of kidney disease, early-onset pro-
gressive renal failure, and a bland urine sediment with 
minimal proteinuria. Ultrasonography reveals small hyper-
echoic kidneys in juvenile NPHP and large kidneys with 
cysts in the infantile form.
Treatment	
Nephronophthisis
There is no specific therapy to prevent loss of kidney func-
tion in NPHP. Salt and water replacement are required for 
patients with salt wasting and polyuria. Therapy should 
include sodium bicarbonate or citrate for acidosis, man-
agement of chronic kidney disease, and timely institution 
of dialysis and kidney transplantation. NPHP does not 
recur in transplanted kidneys.
Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease
Genetic Considerations
The medullary cystic kidney diseases (MCKDs) 
generally present in young adults. Two genetic loci 
have been defined, both with autosomal dominant 
transmission (Table 16-1). The locus for MCKD1 has 
been mapped to chromosome 1q21. Mutations in the 
uromodulin gene (UMOD) that encodes the Tamm-
Horsfall mucoprotein on chromosome 16p12 have been 
identified in MCKD2.
Clinical features
As with NPHP, patients with MCKD have atrophic kid-
neys with diffuse interstitial fibrosis, cysts restricted to the 
renal medulla, salt wasting, and polyuria. Disease onset is 
later than in NPHP. Consequently, there is no growth 
retardation, salt wasting is milder, and ESRD occurs later, 
usually between ages 20 and 70. There are no extrarenal 
manifestations in MCKD1, but most patients with MCKD2 
have severe hyperuricemia and precocious onset of gout.
Diagnosis
MCKD should be considered in young adults with a 
family history suggesting dominant inheritance of kidney 
disease who present with progressive renal failure, bland 
urinalysis with little or no proteinuria, and small, dense 
kidneys with medullary cysts on radiographic imaging. 
The presence of hyperuricemia and gout is a further clue 
to the diagnosis of MCKD2, which can be confirmed by 
mutation analysis of UMOD.
Treatment	
Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease
There is no specific therapy for MCKD. Allopurinol is 
indicated for patients with gout and is reasonable for 
those with asymptomatic hyperuricemia, although there 
is no evidence that it prevents progressive renal fail-
ure in MCKD2. Dialysis and transplantation outcomes 
appear to be favorable. The disease does not recur in 
transplanted kidneys.
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
196
Tuberous Sclerosis
Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is an autosomal dominant dis-
order that affects 1 in 6000 people. It results from 
mutations in either the TSC1 gene encoding hamar-
tin or the TSC2 gene encoding tuberin (Table 16-1). 
Hamartin and tuberin form a complex that is thought 
to negatively regulate cell growth and proliferation 
through inhibition of mTOR. The presence of either 
mutation produces uncontrolled proliferation in numer-
ous tissues, including the kidneys, skin, central nervous 
system, and heart. The kidneys are affected in 80% of 
patients. Renal TS occurs in three forms: renal angio-
myolipomas, renal cysts, and renal cell carcinoma. Angi-
omyolipomas are the most common renal abnormality. 
They occur bilaterally, are often multiple, and are usu-
ally asymptomatic; however, they may cause spontane-
ous bleeding, flank pain, hematuria, and life-threatening 
retroperitoneal hemorrhage. Large lesions, >4 cm, are 
more likely to be symptomatic and may require trans-
catheter arterial embolization or surgical excision. Cysts 
are usually asymptomatic and are not evident on imag-
ing studies until adulthood. Rarely, cysts may be large 
and numerous, sometimes leading to ESRD and pro-
ducing a clinical scenario that can be confused with 
ADPKD, especially if there are few other systemic 
manifestations of TS. Multicentric renal cell carcinomas 
occur with increased frequency in TS. Patients with TS 
should be screened for renal involvement at initial diag-
nosis with ultrasonography or CT. Those with cysts or 
angiomyolipomas require regular imaging to monitor 
for the development of renal cell carcinoma.
Von Hippel-Lindau Disease
Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a rare autosomal 
dominant disease characterized by abnormal angiogen-
esis with benign and malignant tumors that affect mul-
tiple tissues. The disease is inherited as a mutation in 
one allele of the VHL tumor-suppressor gene. Somatic 
mutation of the normal allele leads to retinal angio-
mas, central nervous system (CNS) hemangioblastomas, 
pheochromocytomas and multicentric clear cell cysts, 
hemangiomas, and adenomas of the kidney. The kid-
neys are affected in three-quarters of patients, and half 
of these patients develop clear cell carcinomas in the renal 
cysts. It is noteworthy that VHL mutations also account 
for 60% of spontaneous clear cell carcinomas of the 
kidney. The mean age of diagnosis of renal cell carci-
noma in VHL disease is 44 years, and 70% of patients 
who survive to age 60 develop renal cell carcinoma. 
The high risk of renal cell carcinoma mandates periodic 
surveillance (usually yearly in adults) by CT or MRI. 
Routine screening and awareness of the natural history 
of lesions has enabled renal-sparing approaches to dis-
ease management. Tumors <3 cm in size require careful 
monitoring for growth, whereas partial nephrectomy is 
indicated in those >3 cm in the absence of metastasis. 
Nonsurgical renal-sparing strategies, including percu-
taneous radio frequency ablation and selective arterial 
embolization, have shown promise in short-term trials.
Medullary Sponge Kidney
Pathology and clinical features
Medullary sponge kidney (MSK) is a relatively common 
benign condition of unknown cause characterized by ecta-
sia of the papillary collecting ducts of one or both kidneys. 
Urinary stasis in the dilated ducts, hypocitraturia, and occa-
sionally incomplete distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) 
contribute to the formation of small calcium-containing 
calculi. Most cases are asymptomatic or are discovered 
during investigation of hematuria. Symptomatic patients 
typically present as young adults with renal colic and neph-
rolithiasis or recurrent urinary tract infections; however, 
MSK also may affect children. Most cases are sporadic, 
although MSK has been found rarely in association with 
other congenital anomalies of the urinary tract and with con- 
genital hepatic ductal ectasia (Caroli’s disease).
Diagnosis
MSK is characteristically seen as hyperdense papillae 
with clusters of small stones on renal ultrasonography or 
abdominal x-ray (Fig. 16-2). The classical “paintbrush-
like” features of MSK, representing the ectatic col-
lecting ducts, are best seen on intravenous urography. 
However, this procedure has been supplanted by con-
trast-enhanced, high-resolution helical CT with digital 
reconstruction (Fig. 16-2).
Treatment	
Medullary Sponge Kidney
No treatment is necessary in asymptomatic individuals, 
aside from maintaining high fluid intake to reduce the 
risk of nephrolithiasis. Recurrent stone formation should 
prompt a metabolic evaluation and treatment as in any 
stone former (Chap. 9). In patients with hypocitraturia 
and incomplete dRTA, treatment with potassium citrate 
helps prevent new stone formation. Urinary tract infec-
tions should be treated promptly.
Hereditary Disorders of Sodium, 
Potassium, and Magnesium 
Handling Without Hypertension
Inherited forms of hypochloremic metabolic alkalo-
sis and hypokalemia without hypertension are due 
to genetic mutations of various ion transporters and 
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
197
channels of the thick ascending limb of Henle’s loop 
(TAL) and distal convoluted tubule (DCT) (Table 16-2 
and Fig. 16-3). In 1962 Bartter described two patients 
with a syndrome of metabolic alkalosis, hypovolemia, 
and failure to thrive associated with juxtaglomerular 
apparatus hyperplasia, hyperaldosteronism, and normal 
blood pressure. Subsequently, Gitelman identified a 
similar but milder syndrome accompanied by hypomag-
nesemia from urinary magnesium wasting and present-
ing in later childhood and adolescence. These disorders 
are now known to occur sporadically or result from 
genetically heterogeneous loss-of-function autosomal 
recessive mutations that cause salt-losing tubulopathy.
Bartter’s Syndrome and  
Gitelman’s Syndrome
Genetics and pathogenesis
Bartter’s syndrome may result from mutations affecting 
any of five ion transport proteins in the TAL. The pro-
teins affected include the apical loop diuretic–sensitive 
sodium-potassium-chloride 
co-transporter 
NKCC2 
(type 1), the apical potassium channel ROMK (type 2), 
and the basolateral chloride channel ClC-Kb (type 3). 
Bartter’s type 4 results from mutations in barttin, an 
essential subunit of ClC-Ka and ClC-Kb that enables 
transport of the chloride channels to the cell surface. 
Barttin is also expressed in the inner ear; this accounts 
for the deafness invariably associated with Bartter’s 
type 4. A Bartter-like phenotype (type 5) with associ-
ated hypocalcemia has been described in patients with 
autosomal dominant gain-of-function mutations in the 
extracellular calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR). Unreg-
ulated activation of this G protein–coupled recep-
tor inhibits sodium reabsorption in the TAL. The 
TAL transporters function in an integrated manner to 
maintain both the electrical potential difference and 
the sodium gradient between the lumen and the cell 
(Fig. 16-3). Loss of the lumen-positive electrical 
transport potential that normally drives the paracellu-
lar reabsorption of sodium, calcium, and magnesium 
causes NaCl wasting, hypercalciuria, and mild hypo-
magnesemia. As expected, the clinical syndrome mim-
ics the effects of chronic ingestion of a loop diuretic.
Gitelman’s syndrome is due to mutations in the thia-
zide-sensitive Na-Cl co-transporter, NCCT, in the 
DCT. Defects in NCCT in Gitelman’s syndrome 
impair sodium and chloride reabsorption in the DCT 
(Fig. 16-3) and thus resemble the effects of thiazide 
Figure 16-2
Radiographs of medullary sponge kidney disease. A. Plain 
x-ray film of a patient with a history of recurrent nephrolithia-
sis showing clusters of stones in the papillae (arrows). B–E. 
CT scan of an 18-year-old male patient investigated for per-
sistent microscopic hematuria. B and C. CT without contrast 
showing a few small stones in the papillae (arrows). D and 
E. Contrast-enhanced CT of the same region shown in B. In 
addition to the stone (arrow), a blush of contrast is seen filling 
the ectatic collecting ducts (arrowheads).
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
198
diuretics. It remains unclear how this defect leads to 
severe magnesium wasting.
In both Bartter’s and Gitelman’s syndromes, hypo-
volemia from impaired sodium and chloride reab-
sorption in either the TAL or the DCT activates the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). The 
consequent hyperaldosteronism, together with increased 
distal flow and sodium delivery, stimulates increased 
sodium reabsorption in the collecting tubules via the 
epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). This promotes 
increased potassium and hydrogen ion secretion, caus-
ing hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Additionally, 
in Bartter’s syndrome, RAAS activation causes increased 
levels of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and marked over-
production of renal prostaglandins (PGE2), and this 
exacerbates the polyuria and electrolyte abnormalities.
Clinical features
Bartter’s syndrome
Bartter’s syndrome is a rare disease that most often pres-
ents in the neonatal period or early childhood with 
polyuria, polydipsia, salt craving, and growth retarda-
tion. Blood pressure is normal or low. Metabolic abnor-
malities include hypokalemia, hypochloremic metabolic 
alkalosis, decreased urinary concentrating and diluting 
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
199
ability, hypercalciuria with nephrocalcinosis, mild hypo-
magnesemia, and increased urinary prostaglandin excre-
tion. Hyperprostaglandin E syndrome is a particularly 
severe form of Bartter’s syndrome in which neonates 
present with pronounced volume depletion and failure 
to thrive, as well as fever, vomiting, and diarrhea from 
PGE2 overproduction. In the antenatal period, fetal 
polyuria may cause maternal polyhydramnios and pre-
mature labor. Sensorineural deafness occurs in patients 
with barttin gene mutations (type 4). Patients with 
severe Bartter’s syndrome who survive early childhood 
may develop chronic kidney disease from nephrocal-
cinosis or from tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis 
from severe persistent hypokalemia. Patients with Bart-
ter’s syndrome type 3 have a phenotype intermediate 
between those of Bartter’s and Gitelman’s syndromes, 
consistent with mutation of the ClC-Kb chloride chan-
nel in both the TAL and the DCT with preservation of 
the ClC-Ka chloride channel in the TAL. This disease 
occurs predominantly in African-American patients and 
resembles most closely the classic syndrome described 
by Bartter. Onset is generally later in childhood, patients 
have mild or no nephrocalcinosis, and prostaglandin 
excretion is normal.
Gitelman’s syndrome
Gitelman’s syndrome is more common than Bartter’s 
syndrome and has a generally milder clinical course with 
a later age of presentation. It is characterized by promi-
nent neuromuscular symptoms and signs, including 
fatigue, weakness, carpopedal spasm, cramps, and tetany.
Diagnosis
Hypokalemia and hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis 
without hypertension are more often due to surreptitious 
vomiting or diuretic abuse than to Bartter’s or Gitelman’s 
syndrome. In contrast to Bartter’s and Gitelman’s syn-
dromes, urinary chloride levels are very low in patients 
with surreptitious vomiting. Diuretic abuse can be diag-
nosed by screening the urine for the offending agents. 
Gitelman’s syndrome is distinguished from most forms of 
Bartter’s syndrome by the presence of severe hypomag-
nesemia and hypocalciuria.
Treatment	
Bartter’s Syndrome and Gitelman’s 
Syndrome
Both conditions require lifelong therapy with potassium 
and magnesium supplements and liberal salt intake. 
High doses of spironolactone or amiloride treat the 
hypokalemia, alkalosis, and magnesium wasting. Nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduce the poly-
uria and salt wasting in Bartter’s syndrome but are inef-
fective in Gitelman’s syndrome. They may be lifesaving in 
hyperprostaglandin E syndrome and can be given in the 
form of a COX-2 inhibitor to avoid the gastrointestinal 
side effects of long-term high-dose NSAIDs. In Gitelman’s 
syndrome, magnesium repletion is essential to correct 
the hypokalemia and control muscle weakness, tetany, 
and metabolic alkalosis; however, it may prove difficult in 
patients wasting large amounts of magnesium.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism Type 1
Patients with type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism pres-
ent with severe renal salt wasting and hyperkalemia. 
Although these findings resemble mineralocorticoid defi-
ciency, plasma renin activity and aldosterone levels are 
elevated. Defective salt handling is the result of autosomal 
recessive loss-of-function mutations of the α, β, or γ sub-
unit of the ENaC or autosomal dominant mutations of 
one allele of the mineralocorticoid receptor (Table 16-2 
and Fig. 16-3). The autosomal recessive form is a mul-
tisystem disorder with a severe phenotype, often mani-
festing in the neonatal period with renal salt wasting, 
vomiting, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, acidosis, and fail-
ure to thrive. Impaired channel activity in the skin and 
lungs can produce excess sodium and chloride loss in 
sweat, excess fluid in the airways, and a propensity for 
lower respiratory tract infections that mimic cystic fibro-
sis. In contrast, the autosomal dominant form has a more 
benign course that is limited mainly to renal salt wasting 
and hyperkalemia. Aggressive salt replacement and man-
agement of hyperkalemia can lead to survival into adult-
hood, and symptoms may become less severe with time, 
especially in the dominant form. In the latter, high-dose 
fludrocortisone or carbenoxolone provides additional 
benefit by increasing mineralocorticoid activity and partly 
restoring the functional defect in the mutant receptor.
Magnesium Wasting Disorders
In addition to Gitelman’s syndrome, several hereditary dis-
orders cause urinary magnesium wasting (Table 16-2 and 
Fig. 16-3). These disorders include autosomal recessive 
familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and neph-
rocalcinosis (FHHNC), autosomal recessive hypomag-
nesemia with secondary hypocalcemia (HSH), autosomal 
dominant hypomagnesemia, autosomal dominant hypo-
parathyroidism, and isolated autosomal recessive hypomag-
nesemia. Common clinical features are the early onset of 
spasms, tetany, and seizures as well as associated or second-
ary disturbances in calcium homeostasis.
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria 
and nephrocalcinosis
FHHNC is the first example of a disorder attribut-
able to a defective protein involved in paracellular ion 
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
200
transport. CLDCN16 encodes claudin 16 (previously 
known as paracellin-1), a member of the claudin family 
of proteins that are involved in tight junction formation. 
Claudin 16 is expressed in the TAL of Henle’s loop and 
the DCT. Claudin 16 is thought to be an essential com-
ponent of the paracellular pathway for Mg, and Ca to a 
lesser extent, reabsorption in the TAL. Clinical mani-
festations begin in infancy and include hypomagnesemia 
that is refractory to oral supplementation, hypercalciuria, 
and nephrocalcinosis. Recurrent urinary tract infections 
and nephrolithiasis have also been observed. Patients 
with mutations of claudin 19 have a similar phenotype 
but also manifest ocular defects, including corneal calci-
fications and chorioretinitis.
Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia
Hypomagnesemia in HSH results from a defect in the 
TRPM6 channel, a member of the transient recep-
tor potential (TRP) family of cation transport channels. 
TRPM6 is expressed in intestinal epithelia and the DCT 
and is thought to mediate transepithelial magnesium 
transport. Symptoms are attributable to hypomagnese-
mia with secondary impairment of parathyroid function 
and hypocalcemia. Seizures and muscle spasms occur in 
infancy, and restoration of magnesium and calcium levels 
requires high doses of oral magnesium supplementation.
Other hereditary hypomagnesemic disorders
Mutations of the sodium-potassium-ATPase γ subunit 
can cause an autosomal dominant hypomagnesemia. 
Activating mutations of the CaSR in autosomal domi-
nant hypoparathyroidism primarily manifest as hypocal-
cemia, but hypomagnesemia has been reported in 50% 
of these patients. Mutations in epidermal growth factor 
(EGF) result in isolated autosomal recessive hypomag-
nesemia due to impaired activation of the EGF receptor 
and consequent failure to activate TRPM6.
Hereditary Tubular Disorders 
Causing Hypertension Due to  
Salt Retention
Liddle’s Syndrome
Liddle’s syndrome mimics a state of aldosterone excess 
by the presence of early and severe hypertension, often 
accompanied by hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, but 
plasma aldosterone and renin levels are low. This disorder 
is due to unregulated sodium reabsorption by an over-
active ENaC in the cortical collecting duct (Fig. 16-3). 
Deletional mutations of the intracellular domain of the 
β or γ subunit of ENaC (Table 16-2) prevent binding 
of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 that normally targets 
the channel for proteasomal degradation. This results 
in an inability to downregulate the number of chan-
nels despite a high intracellular sodium concentration. 
Increased potassium and hydrogen ion secretion follow 
the lumen-negative electrical potential that results from 
chloride-independent sodium reabsorption. Amiloride or 
triamterene blocks ENaC and, combined with salt restric-
tion, provides effective therapy for the hypertension and 
hypokalemia.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism 
Type II (Familial Hyperkalemic 
Hypertension; Gordon’s Syndrome)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II is a rare autosomal 
dominant disease that manifests in adolescence or early 
adulthood with thiazide-responsive low-renin hyper-
tension, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis with nor-
mal renal function. Mutations have been identified in 
the WNK kinases 1 and 4 that lead to increased activ-
ity of the thiazide-sensitive sodium chloride channel, 
NCCT. This causes hypertension from enhanced salt 
reabsorption in the DCT and impaired distal secretion 
of potassium and hydrogen ion, all of which can be cor-
rected with thiazide diuretics.
Inherited Disorders of  
Water Handling
Hereditary Nephrogenic  
Diabetes Insipidus
Hereditary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a 
rare monogenic disease that usually presents in infancy 
with severe vasopressin-resistant polyuria, dehydration, 
failure to thrive, and dilute urine despite the presence of 
hypernatremia.
Genetics and pathogenesis
Vasopressin [antidiuretic hormone (ADH)]-stimulated 
water reabsorption in the collecting duct is mediated by 
the type 2 vasopressin receptor (V2R) on the basal surface 
of principal cells. Activation of the adenylyl cyclase–cAMP 
pathway phosphorylates vesicle-associated aquaporin-2 
(AQP2) water channels and stimulates their inser-
tion into the apical plasma membrane. Water enters the 
cells from the tubular lumen through AQP2 and exits 
along an osmotic gradient into the hypertonic medulla 
and vasa rectae via basal AQP3/4 channels (Fig. 16-3). 
X-linked mutations of AVPR2, the gene that encodes 
V2R, account for about 90% of cases of hereditary NDI, 
such that the expression of the receptor on the cell sur-
face is impaired. The remaining cases are due to various 
autosomal recessive or dominant mutations of AQP2 that 
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
201
cause the water channels to be retained within the cytosol 
(Table 16-2). The effect of these mutations is an inabil-
ity to concentrate the urine and conserve water despite 
high plasma levels of vasopressin. Penetrance is variable in 
heterozygous female carriers of X-linked NDI, and some 
have a moderate concentrating defect that may be exacer-
bated in pregnancy due to placental vasopressinase.
Clinical features
Whereas NDI in adults is most often acquired from 
lithium therapy, hypercalcemia, and partial chronic uri-
nary obstruction, hereditary NDI typically presents in 
infancy. Unlike other polyuric syndromes such as Bart-
ter’s and Gitelman’s syndromes, conservation of electro-
lytes is normal, and hypernatremia is entirely from the 
loss of water. Recurrent episodes of dehydration and 
hypernatremia can lead to seizures and mental retar-
dation. Although renal function is otherwise normal, 
chronically high urine flow causes dilation of the ure-
ters and bladder and may cause bladder dysfunction and 
obstructive uropathy.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis in infants and children with hereditary 
NDI is usually apparent from the family history and clini-
cal presentation. The diagnosis can be confirmed by the 
presence of high plasma levels of vasopressin in the face 
of polyuria and hypotonic urine. This may be especially 
useful in adults with partial NDI to distinguish the poly-
uric state from central diabetes insipidus or psychogenic 
polydipsia. Genetic screening for mutations in AVPR2 
and AQP2 is available in research centers and can be per-
formed to identify affected infants from families at risk of 
NDI to begin treatment and avoid dehydration and its 
consequences.
Treatment	
Hereditary Nephrogenic Diabetes 
Insipidus
Early diagnosis and treatment with abundant water intake 
have enabled many patients to live to adulthood with 
normal mental and physical development. Exogenous 
vasopressin is ineffective, and because these patients 
can excrete up to 20 L of urine per day, maintaining 
adequate water intake is challenging. Thiazide diuretics 
and salt restriction can reduce urine output by inducing 
a state of mild volume contraction, thereby promoting 
increased proximal reabsorption of isotonic fluid and 
inhibiting the delivery of free water to the collecting 
duct. A combination thiazide-amiloride formulation will 
avoid thiazide-induced hypokalemia, and indomethacin 
may further reduce urine output by inhibiting prosta-
glandin synthesis.
Nephrogenic Syndrome of 
Inappropriate Antidiuresis
Activating mutations of the V2R result in hyponatremia, 
inappropriately elevated urinary osmolality, and unde-
tectable arginine vasopressin (AVP) levels in affected 
males. This syndrome results from missense mutations 
of AVPR2 on the X chromosome, which cause consti-
tutive activation of V2R and inappropriate water reab-
sorption. Heterozygous female carriers may be at risk of 
hyponatremia when exposed to large volumes of hypo-
tonic fluids.
Inherited Renal Tubular Acidosis
Non-anion-gap (hyperchloremic) metabolic acidosis 
from proximal tubular bicarbonate wasting or impaired 
distal net acid excretion may be a primary (sporadic or 
inherited) tubular disorder or may be acquired second-
ary to a variety of conditions (Chap. 5). There are three 
forms of renal tubular acidosis (RTA). Types 1 and 2 
may be acquired or primary, whereas the most common 
form, type 4 RTA, usually is acquired in association 
with moderate renal dysfunction and is characterized by 
hyperkalemia.
Type 1 (Distal) RTA
Clinical features and diagnosis
In distal RTA the kidneys are unable to acidify the urine 
to pH <5.5 in the presence of systemic metabolic acidosis 
or after acid loading as a result of impaired hydrogen ion 
secretion or bicarbonate reabsorption in the distal neph-
ron. Other features include hypokalemia, hypocitraturia, 
hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and/or nephrolithiasis. 
Chronic untreated acidosis may cause rickets or osteoma-
lacia. Inheritance of primary dRTA includes autosomal 
dominant and autosomal recessive forms with a broad 
spectrum of clinical expression. Autosomal recessive 
dRTA most often presents in infancy with severe acido-
sis, failure to thrive, impaired growth, and impaired kid-
ney function from nephrocalcinosis. Many patients with 
autosomal dominant dRTA, and some with recessive 
disease, are asymptomatic, and RTA is discovered inci-
dentally in adolescence or adulthood during evaluation 
for kidney stones. In the absence of systemic acidosis, the 
diagnosis of incomplete dRTA is suggested by hypoci-
traturia and hypercalciuria and can be confirmed by fail-
ure of the urine to acidify to pH <5.5 after acid loading.
Genetics and pathophysiology
Primary dRTA may be hereditary or sporadic with 
autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant forms. 
Several kindreds with autosomal recessive dRTA have 
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
202
been identified in Southeast Asia and in areas of the 
world where parental consanguinity is high. The cel-
lular basis for dRTA lies in dysfunction at the level of 
the α type intercalated cell of the cortical collecting 
duct (Fig. 16-3). Mutations affecting subunits of the 
H+-ATPase proton pump on the luminal surface impair 
hydrogen ion secretion and account for most forms 
of autosomal recessive dRTA and are often associated 
with early-onset sensorineural hearing loss (Table 16-2). 
Autosomal dominant dRTA results from mutations involv-
ing the chloride-bicarbonate exchanger, AE1, on the baso-
lateral membrane. Anion exchange by the mutant AE1 
is normal, but aberrant targeting of AE1 from the basal 
to the apical plasma membrane is believed to cause 
bicarbonate loss into the urine instead of reabsorption. 
Bi-allelic mutations of AE1 may impair transport activity 
and account for some cases of recessive disease (Table 16-2). 
A syndrome of osteopetrosis, short stature, and mental 
retardation, so-called marble-brain disease with dRTA, 
is due to mutations in carbonic anhydrase II. Urinary 
potassium wasting and defective urinary concentration 
are characteristic of dRTA. Calcium is released from 
bone in the process of buffering of acid and results in 
hypercalciuria. Enhanced proximal citrate absorption 
accounts for hypocitraturia and, together with hypercal-
ciuria, predisposes to nephrocalcinosis and formation of 
calcium phosphate stones.
Treatment	
Type 1 (Distal) RTA
Early initiation of alkali replacement at doses equiva-
lent to 1–3 mmol/kg per day of bicarbonate in divided 
doses will usually correct the acidosis, hypokalemia, 
and hypocitraturia, maintaining growth and prevent-
ing bone disease in early-onset dRTA. Citrate is gener-
ally tolerated better than sodium bicarbonate and can 
be given as the potassium or sodium salt, depending 
on the severity of hypokalemia. In patients who present 
later with kidney stones, large fluid intake and sufficient 
alkali to restore normal acid-base balance correct the 
hypocitraturia and reduce hypercalciuria, thereby inhib-
iting the formation of new stones.
Type 2 (Proximal) RTA
Proximal RTA (pRTA) is the result of impaired bicar-
bonate reabsorption in the proximal tubule, where the 
bulk of filtered bicarbonate is recovered (Fig. 16-3). It 
is most often secondary to various autoimmune, drug-
induced, infiltrative, or other tubulopathies (Chap. 5) 
or results from tubular injury from inherited diseases 
in which endogenous metabolites accumulate and pro-
duce tubular injury. Such inherited disorders include 
Wilson’s disease, cystinosis, tyrosinemia, galactosemia, 
hereditary fructose intolerance, glycogen storage disease 
type I, and Lowe’s syndrome. In this situation pRTA 
is only one of several abnormalities that constitute Fan-
coni syndrome. Other features are hyperphosphaturia, 
hyperuricosuria, hypercalciuria, nonselective aminoac-
iduria, and glycosuria. In addition to hyperchloremic 
acidosis, rickets and osteomalacia are the predominant 
effects of Fanconi syndrome.
A rare infantile form of primary pRTA with isolated 
proximal tubular bicarbonate wasting is due to homo-
zygous mutations of the proximal tubule basolateral 
sodium-bicarbonate co-transporter NBC1 (Table 16-2). 
This co-transporter is the main mechanism by which 
bicarbonate moves from the proximal tubule cell back 
into the blood. Other manifestations include short stat-
ure and mental retardation. An ocular phenotype that 
includes bilateral glaucoma, cataracts, and band kera-
topathy reflects a role of NBC1 in maintaining normal 
fluid balance in the eye and clarity of the lens.
Treatment	
Type 2 (Proximal) RTA
It is difficult to restore normal acid-base balance in 
patients with pRTA despite large amounts of alkali. This 
is the case because they continue to waste bicarbon-
ate (fractional excretion >15%) until the serum level 
falls below a threshold, usually about 15–17 mmol/L, at 
which time bicarbonate is completely reabsorbed dis-
tally and the urine is maximally acidified with pH <5.5. 
When the serum bicarbonate concentration is raised 
above the threshold with alkali therapy, bicarbonate 
wasting recurs and causes hypokalemia as potassium 
is secreted to maintain luminal electroneutrality. Thus, 
treatment of pRTA requires 5–15 mmol/kg per day of 
bicarbonate together with supplemental potassium.
Other Monogenic Disorders  
of Proximal Tubular Function 
(Fig. 16-3)
Cystinuria
Cystinuria is an autosomal recessive disorder of cystine 
and dibasic amino acid (ornithine, arginine, and lysine) 
transport in the proximal tubule and intestinal epithe-
lial cells. With a prevalence of about 1 in 10,000, it 
represents one of the more common heritable diseases. 
Impaired tubular absorption leads to high concentra-
tions of cystine, which is insoluble in the acid envi-
ronment of the renal tubules. Clinical severity varies 
from asymptomatic cystine crystalluria in heterozygous 
carriers to the frequent passage of gravel and cystine 
stones, ureteral obstruction, recurrent urinary infec-
tions, formation of staghorn calculi, and progressive 
kidney failure in homozygotes. The median onset of 
 
CHAPTER 16
Polycystic Kidney Disease and Other Inherited Tubular Disorders
203
nephrolithiasis is 12 years. The disease is due to muta-
tions in one of two genes, SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 
(Table 16-2). SLC3A1 encodes rBAT, a high-affinity, 
sodium-independent transporter for dibasic amino acids. 
The protein product of SLC7A9, b0,+AT, is a catalytic 
subunit that associates with rBAT to form the active 
transporter. Diagnosis of cystinuria is established by a 
positive family history, the finding of hexagonal cystine 
crystals on urinalysis, and 24-h urinary cystine excretion 
that exceeds 400 mg (normal is less than 30 mg/d).
Treatment	
Cystinuria
The mainstay of treatment is hydration to achieve a 
urine output of 2.5 L/d or more to reduce urine cys-
tine concentration to <300 mg/L, together with urine 
alkalinization to pH 7.0–7.5 with potassium citrate, and 
sodium restriction. Cystine is an oxidized dimer that 
is formed by linking two cysteine residues via a disul-
fide bond between the -SH groups. Thus, in intractable 
cases, thiol derivatives such as penicillamine, tiopronin, 
and captopril may be added as chelation therapy to dis-
sociate the cystine molecule into more soluble disulfide 
compounds. Various stone removal and urinary drain-
age procedures are often required.
Hartnup Disease
Hartnup disease is an autosomal recessive condition 
caused by a defect in intestinal and renal transport of 
neutral amino acids. The major clinical manifestations are 
cerebellar ataxia and a pellagra-like skin rash. Other than 
aminoaciduria, the kidneys are unaffected. The defec-
tive gene, SLC6A19, encodes a sodium-dependent and 
chloride-independent neutral amino acid transporter 
(BoAT1), which is expressed predominantly in the small 
intestine and proximal tubule of the kidney (Table 16-2). 
Amino acids such as tryptophan that are retained in the 
intestinal lumen are converted to indole compounds that 
are toxic to the CNS. Abnormal tryptophan metabolism 
also leads to a niacin deficiency that accounts for the skin 
manifestations. Symptoms are aggravated by a protein-
deficient diet and are alleviated with a high-protein diet 
and nicotinamide supplements.
Dent’s Disease
Dent’s disease and X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis are 
unusual forms of Fanconi syndrome due to X-linked 
mutations of the gene encoding CLC-5, a voltage-
gated chloride channel (Table 16-2). The disorders are 
characterized by childhood onset of low-molecular-
weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, 
and nephrolithiasis. Rickets or osteomalacia occurs 
in 25% of patients, and progressive renal failure from 
interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and glomeruloscle-
rosis commonly develops in adulthood. CLC-5 serves 
to maintain the electrical gradient and acid environ-
ment established in proximal tubular cell endosomes by 
proton-ATPase, which is necessary for the degradation 
of low-molecular-weight proteins normally filtered by 
the glomerulus. Defects in CLC-5 appear to disrupt this 
process and lead to tubular cell dysfunction.
Treatment	
Dent’s Disease
Treatment is directed at controlling hypercalciuria by 
dietary salt restriction and thiazide diuretics, which 
favor calcium reabsorption. Restriction of dietary cal-
cium is not recommended.
Cystinosis
Cystinosis is a rare multisystem autosomal recessive 
disease caused by mutations of cystinosin, a hydrogen 
ion–driven transporter responsible for exporting cys-
tine from lysosomes. Accumulation of insoluble cystine 
leads to crystal formation in proximal tubular cells and 
other organs. Cystinosis occurs in infantile (nephro-
pathic), adolescent, and adult forms. The nephropathic 
form is the most common, with clinical signs develop-
ing between 3 and 6 months of age, including Fanconi 
syndrome, salt and water wasting, growth retardation, 
rickets, vomiting, constipation, and unexplained fever. 
End-stage renal disease occurs by age 10 in the infantile 
form of the disease but after age 15 in the intermedi-
ate form. Extrarenal manifestations result from cystine 
accumulation in organs and include photophobia and 
blindness, muscular weakness from carnitine deficiency, 
hepatomegaly, hypothyroidism, delayed pubertal devel-
opment, and late-onset neurologic disease. The adult 
form of cystinosis is largely asymptomatic except for 
photophobia. The diagnosis is made by measuring ele-
vated cystine content of peripheral blood leukocytes.
Treatment	
Cystinosis
Treatment includes replacement of fluid and electro-
lyte losses related to Fanconi syndrome and polyuria.  
l-Carnitine 
supplementation 
is 
recommended 
to 
achieve normal plasma carnitine levels. Cysteamine 
provides a direct treatment of the disease that converts 
cystine to cysteine, which can exit the lysosome. Cyste-
amine should be started promptly upon the diagnosis 
of cystinosis as it preserves kidney function, prevents 
hypothyroidism, and improves growth. Kidney trans-
plantation is the treatment of choice for ESRD as cysti-
nosis does not recur in transplanted kidneys, but the 
extrarenal manifestations persist and may progress.
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
204
Renal Glucosuria
Isolated glucosuria in the presence of a normal blood 
glucose concentration is due to mutations in SLC5A2, 
the gene that encodes the high-capacity sodium- 
glucose co-transporter SGLT2 in the proximal renal 
tubule (Table 16-2). Subjects with this disorder are usu-
ally asymptomatic and do not have other features of 
proximal tubular dysfunction. Depending on the sever-
ity of the defect, the tubular maximum for glucose re-
absorption may fall well within normal blood glucose 
levels and lead to >50 g/d of glucosuria. Such patients 
may have polyuria from osmotic diuresis.
Renal Phosphate Wasting
Renal phosphate wasting resulting in hypophosphate-
mia, and rickets or osteomalacia may be part of a gen-
eralized disorder of proximal tubular function, as in 
Fanconi syndrome, or an isolated phenomenon. Iso-
lated phosphaturia is most often due to the inhibi-
tion of renal tubular phosphate reabsorption by one or 
another phosphaturic hormone, with FGF-23 playing 
a major role. An exception is hereditary hypophospha-
temic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH), an autoso-
mal recessive disorder due to mutations in SLC34A3, the 
gene encoding the proximal tubule sodium-phosphate 
co-transporter, NPT-2c (Table 16-2). Defective phosphate 
reabsorption causes renal phosphate wasting and stunted 
growth from rickets. The low serum phosphorus lev-
els stimulate 1-hydroxylation of vitamin D, which 
increases intestinal calcium absorption, suppresses 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion, and results in 
hypercalciuria. High levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 
help distinguish HHRH from hormonal causes of 
hyperphosphaturia. Treatment is directed at phosphate 
repletion.
Vitamin D–Dependent Rickets
Vitamin D–dependent rickets exists in two forms that 
manifest with hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, ele-
vated PTH levels, and the skeletal abnormalities of 
rickets and osteomalacia. Tetany may be present in 
severe cases. Vitamin D–dependent rickets type I is 
an autosomal recessive disease that results from muta-
tions in CYP27B1, the gene that encodes 25(OH)D3-
1α-hydroxylase, an enzyme in the proximal tubule that
catalyzes the hydroxylation and activation of 25(OH)D3
into 1,25(OH)2D3 (Table 16-2). It can be treated 
with physiologic replacement doses of 1,25(OH)2D3. 
In contrast, autosomal recessive vitamin D–depen-
dent rickets type II is due to end organ resistance to 
1,25(OH)2D3 as a result of mutations in the vitamin D 
receptor.
 Laurence H. Beck I  David J. Salant 
205
 Infl ammation or fi brosis of the renal interstitium and 
atrophy of the tubular compartment are common con-
sequences of diseases that target the glomeruli or vas-
culature. Distinct from these secondary phenomena, 
however, are a group of disorders that primarily affect 
the tubules and interstitium, with relative sparing of the 
glomeruli and renal vessels. Such disorders are conve-
niently divided into acute and chronic tubulointerstitial 
nephritis (TIN) ( Table 17-1 ). 
 Acute TIN most often presents with acute renal 
failure ( Chap. 10 ). The acute nature of this group of 
disorders may be caused by aggressive infl ammatory 
infi ltrates that lead to tissue edema, tubular cell injury, 
and compromised tubular fl ow, or by frank obstruc-
tion of the tubules with casts, cellular debris, or crys-
tals. There is sometimes fl ank pain due to distention of 
the renal capsule. Urinary sediment is often active with 
leukocytes and cellular casts, but depends on the exact 
nature of the disorder in question. 
 The clinical features of chronic TIN are more indo-
lent and may manifest with disorders of tubular func-
tion, including polyuria from impaired concentrating 
ability (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), defective proxi-
mal tubular reabsorption leading to features of Fanconi 
syndrome [glycosuria, phosphaturia, aminoaciduria, 
hypokalemia, and type II renal tubular acidosis (RTA) 
from bicarbonaturia], or non-anion-gap metabolic aci-
dosis and hyperkalemia (type IV RTA) due to impaired 
ammoniagenesis, as well as progressive azotemia [rising 
creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN)]. There is 
often modest proteinuria (rarely >2 g/d) attributable to 
decreased tubular reabsorption of fi ltered proteins; how-
ever, nephrotic-range albuminuria may occur in some 
conditions due to the development of secondary focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). Renal ultrasonog-
raphy may reveal changes of “medical renal disease,” 
such as increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma 
with loss of corticomedullary differentiation, promi-
nence of the renal pyramids, and cortical scarring in 
some conditions. The predominant pathology in chronic 
TIN is interstitial fi brosis with patchy mononuclear cell 
infi ltration and widespread tubular atrophy, luminal dila-
tion, and thickening of tubular basement membranes. 
Because of the nonspecifi c nature of the histopathol-
ogy, biopsy specimens rarely provide a specifi c diagnosis. 
Thus, diagnosis relies on careful analysis of history, drug 
or toxin exposure, associated symptoms, and imaging 
studies. 
 aCuTe inTersTiTial nePhriTis 
 In 1897 Councilman reported on eight cases of acute 
interstitial nephritis (AIN) in the Medical and Surgical 
Reports of the Boston City Hospital; three as a postin-
fectious complication of scarlet fever and two from 
diphtheria. Later, he described the lesion as “an acute 
infl ammation of the kidney characterized by cellular 
and fl uid exudation in the interstitial tissue, accompa-
nied by, but not dependant on, degeneration of the 
epithelium; the exudation is not purulent in character, 
and the lesions may be both diffuse and focal.” Today 
AIN is far more often encountered as an allergic reac-
tion to a drug ( Table 17-1 ). Immune-mediated AIN 
may also occur as part of a known autoimmune syn-
drome, but in some cases there is no identifi able cause 
despite features suggestive of an immunological etiol-
ogy ( Table 17-1 ). 
 allerGiC interstitial nephritis 
 Although biopsy-proven AIN accounts for no more than 
∼15% of cases of unexplained acute renal failure, this is 
likely a substantial underestimate of the true incidence. 
 TUBULOINTERSTITIAL DISEASES OF 
THE KIDNEY 
 ChaPTer 17 
206
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
This is because potentially offending medications are 
more often identified and empirically discontinued in 
a patient noted to have a rising serum creatinine, with-
out the benefit of a renal biopsy to establish the diag-
nosis of AIN.
Clinical features
The classic presentation of AIN, namely, fever, rash, 
peripheral eosinophilia, and oliguric renal failure occur-
ring after 7–10 days of treatment with methicillin or 
another β-lactam antibiotic, is the exception rather than 
the rule. More often, patients are found incidentally to 
have a rising serum creatinine or present with symptoms 
attributable to acute renal failure (Chap. 10). Atypi-
cal reactions can occur; most notably nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced AIN, in which 
fever, rash and eosinophilia are rare, but acute renal fail-
ure with heavy proteinuria is common. A particularly 
severe and rapid-onset AIN may occur upon reintroduc-
tion of rifampin after a drug-free period. More insidious 
reactions to the agents listed in Table 17-1 may lead to 
progressive tubulointerstitial damage. Examples include 
proton pump inhibitors and, rarely, sulfonamide and 
5-aminosalicylate (mesalazine and sulfasalazine) deriva-
tives and antiretrovirals.
Diagnosis
Finding otherwise unexplained renal failure with or 
without oliguria and exposure to a potentially offending 
agent usually points to the diagnosis. Peripheral blood 
eosinophilia adds supporting evidence but is present in 
only a minority of patients. Urinalysis reveals pyuria 
with white blood cell casts and hematuria. Urinary 
eosinophils are neither sensitive nor specific for AIN; 
therefore, testing is not recommended. Renal biopsy is 
generally not required for diagnosis but reveals exten-
sive interstitial and tubular infiltration of leukocytes, 
including eosinophils.
Treatment	
Allergic Interstitial Nephritis
Discontinuation of the offending agent often leads to 
reversal of the renal injury. However, depending on the 
duration of exposure and degree of tubular atrophy and 
interstitial fibrosis that has occurred, the renal damage 
may not be completely reversible. Glucocorticoid ther-
apy may accelerate renal recovery, but does not appear 
to impact long-term renal survival. It is best reserved 
for those cases with severe renal failure in which dialy-
sis is imminent or if renal function continues to deterio-
rate despite stopping the offending drug (Fig. 17-1 and 
Table 17-2).
Table 17-1
Classification of the Causes of 
Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney
Acute Tubulointerstitial Disorders
Acute Interstitial Nephritis
  Therapeutic agents
•  Antibiotics (β-lactams, sulfonamides, quinolones, vancomycin, 
erythromycin, minocycline, rifampin, ethambutol, acyclovir)
•  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, COX-2 inhibitors
•  Diuretics (rarely thiazides, loop diuretics, triamterene)
•  Anticonvulsants (phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine,  
phenobarbital)
•  Miscellaneous (proton pump inhibitors, H2 blockers, captopril, 
mesalazine, indinavir, allopurinol)
  Infection
•  Bacteria (Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Legionella, 
Salmonella, Brucella, Yersinia, Corynebacterium diphtheriae)
•  Viruses (EBV, CMV, hantavirus, polyomavirus, HIV)
•  Miscellaneous (Leptospira, Rickettsia, Mycoplasma)
  Autoimmune
•  Tubulointerstitial nephritis with uveitis (TINU)
•  Sjögren’s syndrome
•  Systemic lupus erythematosus
•  Granulomatous interstitial nephritis
•  IgG4-related systemic disease
•  Idiopathic autoimmune interstitial nephritis
  Acute obstructive disorders
•  Light chain cast nephropathy (“myeloma kidney”)
•  Acute phosphate nephropathy
•  Acute urate nephropathy
Chronic Tubulointerstitial Disorders
•  Vesicoureteral reflux/reflux nephropathy
•  Sickle cell disease
•  Chronic exposure to toxins or therapeutic agents
• Analgesics, especially those containing phenacetin
• Lithium
• Heavy metals (lead, cadmium)
• Aristolochic acid (Chinese herbal and Balkan endemic 
nephropathies)
• Calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine, tacrolimus)
Metabolic Disturbances
•  Hypercalcemia and/or nephrocalcinosis
•  Hyperuricemia
•  Prolonged hypokalemia
•  Hyperoxaluria
•  Cystinosis (see Chap. 16)
Cystic and Hereditary Disorders (see Chap. 16)
•  Polycystic kidney disease
•  Nephronophthisis
•  Adult medullary cystic disease
•  Medullary sponge kidney
Miscellaneous
•  Aging
•  Chronic glomerulonephritis
•  Chronic urinary tract obstruction
•  Ischemia and vascular disease
•  Radiation nephritis (rare)
Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; COX, cyclooxygenase; EBV, 
Epstein-Barr virus.
 
CHAPTER 17
Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney 
207
SjöGren’s Syndrome
Sjögren’s syndrome is a systemic autoimmune disor-
der that primarily targets the exocrine glands, espe-
cially the lacrimal and salivary glands, and thus results in 
symptoms, such as dry eyes and mouth, that constitute 
the “sicca syndrome”. Tubulointerstitial nephritis with a 
predominant lymphocytic infiltrate is the most common 
renal manifestation of Sjögren’s syndrome and can be 
associated with distal RTA, nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
dus, and moderate renal failure. Diagnosis is strongly 
supported by positive serologic testing for anti-Ro (SS-
A) and anti-La (SS-B) antibodies. A large proportion of 
patients with Sjögren’s syndrome also have polyclonal 
hypergammaglobulinemia. Treatment is initially with 
glucocorticoids, although patients may require main-
tenance therapy with azathioprine or mycophenolate 
mofetil to prevent relapse (Fig. 17-1 and Table 17-2).
Tubulointerstitial Nephritis With 
Uveitis (TINU)
TINU is a systemic autoimmune disease of unknown 
etiology. It accounts for fewer than 5% of all cases of 
AIN, affects females three times more often than males, 
and has a median age of onset of 15 years. Its hallmark 
feature, in addition to a lymphocyte-predominant inter-
stitial nephritis (Fig. 17-2), is a painful anterior uve-
itis, often bilateral and accompanied by blurred vision 
and photophobia. Diagnosis is often confounded by the 
fact that the ocular symptoms precede or accompany 
the renal disease in only one-third of cases. Additional 
extrarenal features include fever, anorexia, weight loss, 
Continue observation
ARF with features of AIN
Improvement
Withdraw offending agent
Supportive care and close
observation
No improvement in 1 week
OR rapid progression
Classic allergic AIN
Atypical features
Corticosteroids
Renal biopsy
Fibrosis
Classic AIN
Conservative
Corticosteroids
Immunosuppressive drugs
Granulomatous or other immune IN
Table 17-2
Indications for Corticosteroids and 
Immunosuppressives in Interstitial Nephritis
Absolute Indications
• Sjögren’s syndrome
• Sarcoidosis
• SLE interstitial nephritis
• Adults with TINU
• Idiopathic and other granulomatous interstitial nephritis
Relative Indications
• Drug-induced or idiopathic AIN with:
Rapid progression of renal failure
Diffuse infiltrates on biopsy
Impending need for dialysis
Delayed recovery
• Children with TINU
• Postinfectious AIN with delayed recovery (?)
Abbreviations: AIN, acute interstitial nephritis; SLE, systemic lupus 
erythematosus; TINU, tubulointerstitial nephritis with uveitis.
Source: Modified from S Reddy, DJ Salant: Ren Fail 20:829, 1998.
Figure 17-1
Algorithm for the treatment of allergic and other 
immune-mediated acute interstitial nephritis (AIN). ARF, 
acute renal failure. See text for immunosuppressive drugs 
used for refractory or relapsing AIN. (Modified from S Reddy, 
DJ Salant: Ren Fail 20:829, 1998.)
208
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
abdominal pain, and arthralgia. The presence of such 
symptoms as well as elevated creatinine, sterile pyuria, 
mild proteinuria, features of the Fanconi syndrome, 
and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate should 
raise suspicion for this disorder. Serologies suggestive 
of the more common autoimmune diseases are usu-
ally negative, and TINU is often a diagnosis of exclu-
sion after other causes of uveitis and renal disease, such 
as Sjögren’s syndrome, Behçet’s disease, sarcoidosis, and 
systemic lupus erythematosus, have been considered. 
Clinical symptoms are typically self-limited in children, 
but are more apt to follow a relapsing course in adults. 
The renal and ocular manifestations generally respond 
well to oral glucocorticoids, although maintenance 
therapy with agents such as methotrexate, azathioprine, 
or mycophenolate may be necessary to prevent relapses 
(Fig. 17-1 and Table 17-2).
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
An interstitial mononuclear cell inflammatory reac-
tion often accompanies the glomerular lesion in 
most cases of class III or IV lupus nephritis (Chap. 15), 
and deposits of immune complexes can be identified 
in tubule basement membranes in about 50%. Occa-
sionally, however, the tubulointerstitial inflammation 
predominates and may manifest with azotemia and type 
IV RTA rather than features of glomerulonephritis.
Granulomatous Interstitial 
Nephritis
Some patients may present with features of AIN but 
follow a protracted and relapsing course. Renal biopsy 
in such patients reveals a more chronic inflamma-
tory infiltrate with granulomas and multinucleated 
giant cells. Most often, no associated disease or cause is 
found; however, some of these cases may have or sub-
sequently develop the pulmonary, cutaneous, or other 
systemic manifestations of sarcoidosis such as hypercal-
cemia. Most patients experience some improvement 
in renal function if treated early with glucocorticoids 
before the development of significant interstitial fibrosis 
and tubular atrophy (Table 17-2). Other immunosup-
pressive agents may be required for those who relapse 
frequently upon steroid withdrawal (Fig. 17-1). Tuber-
culosis should be ruled out before starting treatment 
because this too is a rare cause of granulomatous inter-
stitial nephritis.
IgG4-Related Systemic Disease
A form of AIN characterized by a dense inflammatory 
infiltrate containing IgG4-expressing plasma cells can 
occur as a part of a recently described syndrome known 
as IgG4-related systemic disease. Autoimmune pancre-
atitis, sclerosing cholangitis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and 
a chronic sclerosing sialadenitis (mimicking Sjögren’s 
syndrome) may variably be present as well. Fibrotic 
lesions that form pseudotumors in the affected organs 
soon replace the initial inflammatory infiltrates and 
often lead to biopsy or excision for fear of true malig-
nancy. Although the involvement of IgG4 in the patho-
genesis is not understood, glucocorticoids have been 
successfully used as first-line treatment in this group of 
disorders, once they are correctly diagnosed.
Idiopathic AIN
Some patients present with typical clinical and his-
tologic features of AIN but have no evidence of drug 
exposure or clinical or serologic features of an autoim-
mune disease. The presence in some cases of autoanti-
bodies to a tubular antigen, similar to that identified in 
rats with an induced form of interstitial nephritis, sug-
gests that an autoimmune response may be involved. 
Like TINU and granulomatous interstitial nephritis, 
idiopathic AIN is responsive to glucocorticoid therapy 
but may follow a relapsing course requiring mainte-
nance treatment with another immunosuppressive agent 
(Fig. 17-1 and Table 17-2).
G
T
*
Figure 17-2
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) in a patient who pre-
sented with acute iritis, low-grade fever, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate of 103, pyuria and cellular casts 
on urinalysis, and a newly elevated serum creatinine of 
2.4 mg/dL. Both the iritis and AIN improved after intravenous 
methylprednisolone. This PAS-stained renal biopsy shows a 
mononuclear cell interstitial infiltrate (asterisks) and edema 
separating the tubules (T) and a normal glomerulus (G). 
Some of the tubules contain cellular debris and infiltrating 
inflammatory cells. The findings in this biopsy are indistin-
guishable from those that would be seen in a case of drug-
induced AIN. PAS, periodic acid–Schiff.
 
CHAPTER 17
Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney 
209
Infection-Associated AIN
AIN may also occur as a local inflammatory reaction to 
microbial infection (Table 17-1) and should be distin-
guished from acute bacterial pyelonephritis (Chap. 20). 
Acute bacterial pyelonephritis does not generally cause 
acute renal failure unless it affects both kidneys or causes 
septic shock. Presently, infection-associated AIN is most 
often seen in immunocompromised patients, particularly 
renal transplant recipients with reactivation of polyoma-
virus BK (Chaps. 13 and 14).
Crystal Deposition Disorders  
and Obstructive Tubulopathies
Acute renal failure may occur when crystals of various 
types are deposited in tubular cells and interstitium or 
when they obstruct tubules. Oliguric acute renal failure, 
often accompanied by flank pain from tubular obstruction, 
may occur in patients treated with sulfadiazine for toxo-
plasmosis, indinavir for HIV, and intravenous acyclovir 
for severe herpesvirus infections. Urinalysis reveals “sheaf 
of wheat” sulfonamide crystals, individual or parallel clus-
ters of needle-shaped indinavir crystals, or red-green 
birefringement needle-shaped crystals of acyclovir. This 
adverse effect is generally precipitated by hypovolemia and 
is reversible with saline volume repletion and drug with-
drawal. Distinct from the obstructive disease, a frank AIN 
from indinavir crystal deposition has also been reported.
Acute tubular obstruction is also the cause of oligu-
ric renal failure in patients with acute urate nephropathy. It 
typically results from severe hyperuricemia from tumor 
lysis syndrome in patients with lympho- or myeloprolif-
erative disorders treated with cytotoxic agents, but also 
may occur spontaneously before the treatment has been 
initiated. Uric acid crystallization in the tubules and 
collecting system leads to partial or complete obstruc-
tion of the collecting ducts, renal pelvis, or ureter. 
A dense precipitate of birefringent uric acid crystals is 
found in the urine, usually in association with microscopic 
or gross hematuria. Prophylactic allopurinol reduces the 
risk of uric acid nephropathy but is of no benefit once 
tumor lysis has occurred. Once oliguria has developed, 
attempts to increase tubular flow and solubility of uric 
acid with alkaline diuresis may be of some benefit; how-
ever, emergent treatment with hemodialysis or rasburi-
case, a recombinant urate oxidase, is usually required to 
rapidly lower uric acid levels and restore renal function.
Calcium oxalate crystal deposition in tubular cells and 
interstitium may lead to permanent renal dysfunction 
in patients who survive ethylene glycol intoxication, in 
patients with enteric hyperoxaluria from ileal resection or 
small-bowel bypass surgery, and in patients with heredi-
tary hyperoxaluria (Chap. 9). Acute phosphate nephropa-
thy is an uncommon but serious complication of oral 
Phospho-soda used as a laxative or for bowel preparation 
for colonoscopy. It is the result of calcium phosphate 
crystal deposition in tubules and interstitium and occurs 
especially in subjects with underlying renal impairment 
and hypovolemia. Consequently, Phospho-soda should 
be avoided in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Light Chain Cast Nephropathy
Patients with multiple myeloma may develop acute 
renal failure in the setting of hypovolemia, infection, or 
hypercalcemia or after exposure to NSAIDs or radio-
graphic contrast media. The diagnosis of light chain cast 
nephropathy (LCCN)—commonly known as myeloma 
kidney—should be considered in patients who fail to 
recover when the precipitating factor is corrected or in 
any elderly patient with otherwise unexplained acute 
renal failure.
In this disorder, filtered monoclonal immunoglobu-
lin light chains (Bence-Jones proteins) form intratubular 
aggregates with secreted Tamm-Horsfall protein in the 
distal tubule. Casts, in addition to obstructing the tubular 
flow in affected nephrons, incite a giant cell or foreign 
body reaction and can lead to tubular rupture, resulting 
in interstitial fibrosis (Fig. 17-3). Although LCCN gen-
erally occurs in patients with known multiple myeloma 
and a large plasma cell burden, the disorder should also 
be considered as a possible diagnosis in patients who 
have known monoclonal gammopathy even in the 
absence of frank myeloma. Filtered monoclonal light 
chains may also cause less pronounced renal manifesta-
tions in the absence of obstruction, due to direct tox-
icity to proximal tubular cells and intracellular crystal 
Figure 17-3
Histologic appearance of myeloma cast nephropathy. A 
hematoxylin-eosin-stained kidney biopsy shows many atro-
phic tubules filled with eosinophilic casts (consisting of Bence-
Jones protein), which are surrounded by giant cell reactions. 
(Courtesy of Dr. Michael N. Koss, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine; with permission.)
210
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
formation. This may result in isolated tubular disorders 
such as RTA or the full Fanconi syndrome.
Diagnosis
Clinical clues to the diagnosis include anemia, bone pain, 
hypercalcemia, and an abnormally narrow anion gap due 
to hypoalbuminemia and hypergammaglobulinemia. Uri-
nary dipsticks detect albumin but not immunoglobulin 
light chains; however, laboratory detection of increased 
amounts of protein in a spot urine specimen and a neg-
ative dipstick result are highly suggestive that the urine 
contains Bence-Jones protein. Serum and urine should 
both be sent for protein electrophoresis and for immuno-
fixation for the detection and identification of a potential 
monoclonal band. A sensitive method is now clinically 
available to detect urine and serum free light chains.
Treatment	
Light Chain Cast Nephropathy
The goals of treatment are to correct precipitating fac-
tors such as hypovolemia and hypercalcemia, discontinue 
potential nephrotoxic agents, and treat the underlying 
plasma cell dyscrasia; plasmapheresis to remove light 
chains is of questionable value for LCCN.
Lymphomatous Infiltration  
of the Kidney
Interstitial infiltration by malignant B lymphocytes is a 
common autopsy finding in patients dying of chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; 
however, this is usually an incidental finding. Rarely, 
such infiltrates may cause massive enlargement of the 
kidneys and oliguric acute renal failure. Although high-
dose glucocorticoids and subsequent chemotherapy 
often results in recovery of renal function, the prognosis 
in such cases is generally poor.
Chronic Tubulointerstitial 
Diseases
Improved occupational and public health measures, 
together with the banning of over-the-counter phenace-
tin-containing analgesics, has led to a dramatic decline in 
the incidence of chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN) from 
heavy metal—particularly lead and cadmium—exposure 
and analgesic nephropathy in North America. Today, 
CIN is most often the result of renal ischemia or second-
ary to a primary glomerular disease (Chap. 15). Other 
important forms of CIN are the result of developmental 
anomalies or inherited diseases such as reflux nephropa-
thy or sickle cell nephropathy and may not be recognized 
until adolescence or adulthood. Whereas it is impossible 
to reverse damage that has already occurred, further dete-
rioration may be prevented or at least slowed in such cases 
by treating glomerular hypertension, a common denomi-
nator in the development of secondary FSGS and progres-
sive loss of functioning nephrons. Therefore, awareness 
and early detection of patients at risk may prevent them 
from developing end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
Vesicoureteral Reflux and Reflux 
Nephropathy
Reflux nephropathy is the consequence of vesicoureteral 
reflux (VUR) or other urologic anomalies in early child-
hood. It was previously called chronic pyelonephritis because 
it was believed to result from recurrent urinary tract infec-
tions (UTIs) in childhood. VUR stems from abnormal 
retrograde urine flow from the bladder into one or both 
ureters and kidneys because of mislocated and incompe-
tent ureterovesical valves (Fig. 17-4). Although high-
pressure sterile reflux may impair normal growth of the 
kidneys, when coupled with recurrent UTIs in early 
childhood, the result is patchy interstitial scarring and 
tubular atrophy. Loss of functioning nephrons leads to 
hypertrophy of the remnant glomeruli and eventual sec-
ondary FSGS. Reflux nephropathy often goes unnoticed 
until early adulthood when chronic kidney disease is 
detected during routine evaluation or during pregnancy. 
Affected adults are frequently asymptomatic, but may give 
a history of prolonged bed-wetting or recurrent UTIs dur-
ing childhood, and exhibit variable renal insufficiency, 
hypertension, mild to moderate proteinuria, and unre-
markable urine sediment. When both kidneys are affected, 
the disease often progresses inexorably over several years to 
end-stage kidney disease, despite the absence of ongoing 
urinary infections or reflux. A single affected kidney may 
go undetected, except for the presence of hypertension. 
Renal ultrasound in adults characteristically shows asym-
metric, small kidneys with irregular outlines, thinned corti-
ces, and regions of compensatory hypertrophy (Fig. 17-4).
Treatment	
Vesicoureteral Reflux and Reflux 
Nephropathy
Maintenance of a sterile urine in childhood has been 
shown to limit scarring of the kidneys. Surgical reim-
plantation of the ureters into the bladder to restore com-
petency is indicated in young children with persistent 
high-grade reflux but is ineffective and is not indicated 
in adolescents or adults after scarring has occurred. 
Aggressive control of blood pressure with an angioten-
sin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin 
receptor blocker (ARB) and other agents is effective in 
reducing proteinuria and may significantly forestall fur-
ther deterioration of renal function.
 
CHAPTER 17
Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney 
211
Sickle Cell Nephropathy
The pathogenesis and clinical manifestations of sickle 
cell nephropathy are described in Chap. 18. Evidence 
of tubular injury may be evident in childhood and early 
adolescence in the form of polyuria due to decreased 
concentrating ability or type IV renal tubular acidosis 
years before there is significant nephron loss and pro-
teinuria from secondary FSGS. Early recognition of 
A
   
B
C
Figure 17-4
Radiographs of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) and reflux 
nephropathy. A. Voiding cystourethrogram in a 7-month-old 
baby with bilateral high-grade VUR evidenced by clubbed 
calyces (arrows) and dilated tortuous ureters (U) enter-
ing the bladder (B). B. Abdominal CT scan (coronal plane 
reconstruction) in a child showing severe scarring of the 
lower portion of the right kidney (arrow). C. Sonogram of the 
right kidney showing loss of parenchyma at the lower pole 
due to scarring (arrow) and hypertrophy of the mid-region 
(arrowhead). (Courtesy of Dr. George Gross, University of 
Maryland Medical Center; with permission.)
these subtle renal abnormalities or development of 
microalbuminuria in a child with sickle cell disease may 
warrant consultation with a nephrologist and/or ther-
apy with low-dose ACEIs. Papillary necrosis may result 
from ischemia due to sickling of red cells in the rela-
tively hypoxemic and hypertonic medullary vasculature 
and present with gross hematuria and ureteric obstruc-
tion by sloughed ischemic papillae (Table 17-3).
212
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
Tubulointerstitial Abnormalities 
Associated With Glomerulonephritis
Primary glomerulopathies are often associated with 
damage to tubules and interstitium. This may occasion-
ally be due to the same pathologic process affecting the 
glomerulus and tubulointerstitium, as is the case with 
immune-complex deposition in lupus nephritis. More 
often, however, chronic tubulointerstitial changes occur 
as a secondary consequence of prolonged glomerular 
dysfunction. Potential mechanisms by which glomeru-
lar disease might cause tubulointerstitial injury include 
proteinuria-mediated damage to the epithelial cells, acti-
vation of tubular cells by cytokines and complement, or 
reduced peritubular blood flow leading to downstream 
tubulointerstitial ischemia, especially in the case of glom-
eruli that are globally obsolescent due to severe glo-
merulonephritis. It is often difficult to discern the initial 
cause of injury by renal biopsy in a patient who presents 
with advanced renal disease in this setting.
Analgesic Nephropathy
Analgesic nephropathy results from the long-term use 
of compound analgesic preparations containing phen-
acetin (banned in the United States since 1983), aspirin, 
and caffeine. In its classic form, analgesic nephropathy 
is characterized by renal insufficiency, papillary necro-
sis (Table 17-3) attributable to the presumed concen-
tration of the drug to toxic levels in the inner medulla, 
and a radiographic constellation of small, scarred kid-
neys with papillary calcifications best appreciated by 
computed tomography (Fig. 17-5). Patients may also 
have polyuria due to impaired concentrating ability and 
non-anion-gap metabolic acidosis from tubular damage. 
Shedding of a sloughed necrotic papilla can cause gross 
hematuria and ureteric colic due to ureteral obstruction. 
Individuals with end-stage kidney disease as a result of 
analgesic nephropathy are at increased risk of a urothe-
lial malignancy compared to patients with other causes 
of renal failure. Recent cohort studies in individuals with 
normal baseline renal function suggest that the moder-
ate chronic use of current analgesic preparations avail-
able in the United States, including acetaminophen and 
NSAIDs, does not seem to cause the constellation of 
findings known as analgesic nephropathy, although vol-
ume-depleted individuals and those with chronic kidney 
disease are at higher risk of NSAID-related renal toxic-
ity. Nonetheless, it is recommended that heavy users of 
acetaminophen and NSAIDs be screened for evidence of 
renal disease.
Chinese Herbal Nephropathy and 
Balkan Nephropathy
Nontraditional (alternative or herbal) medications can also 
lead to progressive tubulointerstitial disease. In Chinese 
herbal nephropathy, first described in young women tak-
ing Chinese herbal preparations as part of a weight-loss 
regimen, one of the offending agents has been identi-
fied as aristolochic acid, a botanical product and known 
rodent carcinogen from the plant Aristolochia. This chem-
ical, after prolonged exposure, produces renal intersti-
tial fibrosis with a relative paucity of cellular infiltrates. 
The urine sediment is bland, with rare leukocytes and 
only mild proteinuria. Anemia may be disproportion-
ately severe relative to the level of renal dysfunction. Like 
analgesic nephropathy, Chinese herbal nephropathy has 
been associated with a long-term increased risk of bladder 
and ureteral malignancies. There is recent evidence that 
Balkan endemic nephropathy, a chronic tubulointerstitial 
nephritis found primarily in towns along the tributaries 
of the Danube River, may also be linked to aristolochic 
acid as a result of contamination of local grain prepara-
tions. Although other environmental factors for Balkan 
endemic nephropathy, such as the mycotoxin ochra-
toxin A or water-soluble hydrocarbons leached from the 
coal deposits in the area, have been proposed as causative 
agents, current evidence appears to be strongest for aris-
tolochic acid. It has been proposed that Chinese herbal 
nephropathy and Balkan endemic nephropathy be collec-
tively known as aristolochic acid nephropathy.
Figure 17-5
Radiologic appearance of analgesic nephropathy. A non-
contrast CT scan shows an atrophic left kidney with papillary 
calcifications in a garland pattern. (Reprinted by permission 
from Macmillan Publishers, Ltd., MM Elseviers et al: Kidney 
International 48:1316, 1995.)
Table 17-3
Major Causes of Papillary Necrosis
Analgesic nephropathy
Sickle cell nephropathy
Diabetes with urinary tract infection
Prolonged NSAID use (rare)
Abbreviation: NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
 
CHAPTER 17
Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney 
213
Lithium-Associated Nephropathy
The use of lithium salts for the treatment of manic-
depressive illness may have several renal sequelae, the 
most common of which is nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
dus manifesting as polyuria and polydipsia. Lithium 
accumulates in principal cells of the collecting duct by 
entering through the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), 
where it inhibits glycogen synthase kinase 3β and down-
regulates vasopressin-regulated aquaporin water channels. 
Less frequently, chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis devel-
ops after prolonged (greater than 10–20 years) lithium 
use and is most likely to occur in patients that have 
experienced repeated episodes of toxic lithium lev-
els. Findings on renal biopsy include interstitial fibrosis 
and tubular atrophy that are out of proportion to the 
degree of glomerulosclerosis or vascular disease, a sparse 
lymphocytic infiltrate, and small cysts or dilation of the 
distal tubule and collecting duct that are highly charac-
teristic of this disorder. The degree of interstitial fibro-
sis correlates both with duration and cumulative dose of 
lithium. Individuals with lithium-associated nephropa-
thy are typically asymptomatic, with minimal protein-
uria, few urinary leukocytes, and normal blood pressure. 
Some patients develop more severe proteinuria due to 
secondary FSGS, which may contribute to further loss 
of renal function.
Treatment	
Lithium-Associated Nephropathy
Renal function should be followed regularly in patients 
taking lithium, and caution should be exercised in 
patients with underlying renal disease. The use of 
amiloride to inhibit lithium entry via ENaC has been 
effective to prevent and treat lithium-induced neph-
rogenic diabetes insipidus, but it is not clear if it will 
prevent lithium-induced CIN. Once lithium-associated 
nephropathy is detected, the discontinuation of lithium 
in an attempt to forestall further renal deterioration can 
be problematic, as lithium is an effective mood stabilizer 
that is often incompletely substituted by other agents. 
Furthermore, despite discontinuation of lithium, chronic 
renal disease in such patients is often irreversible and 
can slowly progress to end-stage kidney disease. The 
most prudent approach is to monitor lithium levels fre-
quently and adjust dosing to avoid toxic levels (prefer-
ably <1 meq/L). This is especially important as lithium 
is cleared less effectively as renal function declines. In 
those cases that develop significant proteinuria, ACEI or 
ARB treatment should be initiated.
CALCINEURIN-Inhibitor Nephrotoxicity
The calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) immunosuppressive 
agents cyclosporine and tacrolimus can cause both acute 
and chronic renal injury. Acute forms can result from 
vascular causes such as vasoconstriction or the develop-
ment of thrombotic microangiopathy, or can be due to 
a toxic tubulopathy. Chronic CNI-induced renal injury 
is typically seen in solid organ (including heart-lung and 
liver) transplant recipients and manifests with a slow but 
irreversible reduction of glomerular filtration rate, with 
mild proteinuria and arterial hypertension. Hyperkale-
mia is a relatively common complication and is caused, 
in part, by tubular resistance to aldosterone. The his-
tologic changes in renal tissue include patchy intersti-
tial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, often in a “striped” 
pattern. In addition, the intrarenal vasculature often 
demonstrates hyalinosis, and focal glomerulosclero-
sis can be present as well. Similar changes may occur 
in patients receiving CNIs for autoimmune diseases, 
although the doses are generally lower than those used 
for organ transplantation. Dose reduction or CNI 
avoidance appears to mitigate the chronic tubuloint-
erstitial changes, but may increase the risk of rejection 
and graft loss.
Heavy Metal (Lead) Nephropathy
Heavy metals, such as lead or cadmium, can lead to a 
chronic tubulointerstitial process after prolonged expo-
sure. The disease entity is no longer commonly diag-
nosed, because such heavy metal exposure has been 
greatly reduced due to the known health risks from lead 
and the consequent removal of lead from most com-
mercial products and fuels. Nonetheless, occupational 
exposure is possible in workers involved in the manu-
facture or destruction of batteries, removal of lead paint, 
or manufacture of alloys and electrical equipment (cad-
mium) in countries where industrial regulation is less 
stringent. In addition, ingestion of moonshine whiskey 
distilled in lead-tainted containers has been one of the 
more frequent sources of lead exposure.
Early signs of chronic lead intoxication are attribut-
able to proximal tubule dysfunction, particularly hyper-
uricemia as a result of diminished urate secretion. The 
triad of “saturnine gout,” hypertension, and renal insuf-
ficiency should prompt a practitioner to ask specifically 
about lead exposure. Unfortunately, evaluating lead 
burden is not as straightforward as ordering a blood test; 
the preferred methods involve measuring urinary lead 
after infusion of a chelating agent or by radiographic 
fluoroscopy of bone. Several recent studies have shown 
an association between chronic low-level lead expo-
sure and decreased renal function, although either of 
these two factors may have been the primary event. In 
those patients who have CIN of unclear origin and an 
elevated total body lead burden, repeated treatments 
of lead chelation therapy have been shown to slow the 
decline in renal function.
214
Section IV
Glomerular and Tubular Disorders
Metabolic Disorders
Disorders leading to excessively high or low levels of 
certain electrolytes and products of metabolism can also 
lead to chronic kidney disease if untreated.
Chronic Uric Acid Nephropathy
The constellation of pathologic findings that represent 
gouty nephropathy are very uncommon nowadays and 
are more of historical interest than clinical importance, 
as gout is typically well managed with allopurinol and 
other agents. However, there is emerging evidence 
that hyperuricemia is an independent risk factor for the 
development of chronic kidney disease, perhaps through 
endothelial damage. The complex interactions of hyper-
uricemia, hypertension, and renal failure are still incom-
pletely understood.
Presently, gouty nephropathy is most likely to be 
encountered in patients with severe tophaceous gout 
and prolonged hyperuricemia from a hereditary dis-
order of purine metabolism (Chap. 8). Histologically, 
the distinctive feature of gouty nephropathy is the pres-
ence of crystalline deposits of uric acid and monoso-
dium urate salts in the kidney parenchyma. These 
deposits not only cause intrarenal obstruction but also 
incite an inflammatory response, leading to lympho-
cytic infiltration, foreign-body giant cell reaction, and 
eventual fibrosis, especially in the medullary and papil-
lary regions of the kidney. Since patients with gout fre-
quently suffer from hypertension and hyperlipidemia, 
degenerative changes of the renal arterioles may con-
stitute a striking feature of the histologic abnormality, 
out of proportion to the other morphologic defects. 
Clinically, gouty nephropathy is an insidious cause of 
chronic kidney disease. Early in its course, glomerular 
filtration rate may be near normal, often despite mor-
phologic changes in medullary and cortical interstitium, 
proteinuria, and diminished urinary concentrating abil-
ity. Treatment with allopurinol and urine alkalinization 
is generally effective in preventing uric acid nephroli-
thiasis and the consequences of recurrent kidney stones; 
however, gouty nephropathy may be intractable to such 
measures. Furthermore, the use of allopurinol in asymp-
tomatic hyperuricemia has not been consistently shown 
to improve renal function.
Hypercalcemic Nephropathy
Chronic hypercalcemia, as occurs in primary hyper-
parathyroidism, sarcoidosis, multiple myeloma, vitamin 
D intoxication, or metastatic bone disease, can cause 
tubulointerstitial disease and progressive renal failure. 
The earliest lesion is a focal degenerative change in renal 
epithelia, primarily in collecting ducts, distal tubules, and 
loops of Henle. Tubular cell necrosis leads to nephron 
obstruction and stasis of intrarenal urine, favoring local 
precipitation of calcium salts and infection. Dilation and 
atrophy of tubules eventually occurs, as does interstitial 
fibrosis, mononuclear leukocyte infiltration, and inter-
stitial calcium deposition (nephrocalcinosis). Calcium 
deposition may also occur in glomeruli and the walls of 
renal arterioles.
Clinically, the most striking defect is an inability to 
maximally concentrate the urine, due to reduced col-
lecting duct responsiveness to AVP and defective trans-
port of sodium and chloride in the loop of Henle. 
Reductions in both glomerular filtration rate and renal 
blood flow can occur, both in acute and in prolonged 
hypercalcemia. Eventually, uncontrolled hypercalcemia 
leads to severe tubulointerstitial damage and overt renal 
failure. Abdominal x-rays may demonstrate nephrocal-
cinosis as well as nephrolithiasis, the latter due to the 
hypercalciuria that often accompanies hypercalcemia.
Treatment consists of reducing the serum calcium 
concentration toward normal and correcting the primary 
abnormality of calcium metabolism. Renal dysfunction 
of acute hypercalcemia may be completely reversible. 
Gradual progressive renal insufficiency related to chronic 
hypercalcemia, however, may not improve even with 
correction of the calcium disorder.
Hypokalemic Nephropathy
Patients with prolonged and severe hypokalemia from 
chronic laxative or diuretic abuse, surreptitious vomit-
ing, or primary aldosteronism may develop a reversible 
tubular lesion characterized by vacuolar degeneration 
of proximal and distal tubular cells. Eventually, tubular 
atrophy and cystic dilation accompanied by interstitial 
fibrosis may ensue, leading to irreversible chronic kid-
ney disease. Timely correction of the hypokalemia will 
prevent further progression, but persistent hypokalemia 
can cause ESRD.
Global Perspective
The causes of acute and chronic interstitial 
nephritis vary widely across the globe. Analgesic 
nephropathy continues to be seen in countries 
where phenacetin-containing compound analgesic prepa-
rations are readily available. Adulterants in unregulated 
herbal and traditional medicaments pose a threat of toxic 
interstitial nephritis, as exemplified by aristolochic acid 
contamination of herbal slimming preparations. Contam-
ination of food sources with toxins, such as the recent 
outbreak of nephrolithiasis and acute renal failure from 
 
CHAPTER 17
Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney 
215
melamine contamination of infant milk formula, poses a 
continuing risk. Likewise, Balkan endemic nephropathy 
appears likely to be the result of aristolochic acid contam-
ination of grain preparations. While industrial exposure 
to lead and cadmium has largely disappeared as a cause of 
chronic interstitial nephritis in developed nations, it 
remains a risk for nephrotoxicity in countries where such 
exposure is less well controlled. Conversely, the wide-
spread use of proton pump inhibitors for gastroesophageal 
reflux disease (GERD) and Phospho-soda prior to 
screening colonoscopy has introduced a new spectrum of 
drug-induced kidney diseases to wealthier nations.
Acknowledgment
We are grateful to Drs. Alan Yu and Barry Brenner, authors 
of “Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney” in the 17th 
edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, for contri-
butions to this chapter.
This page intentionally left blank 
Section V
Renal Vascular 
Disease
 stephen c. Textor 
I  nelson leung 
218
 The renal vasculature is unusually complex with rich 
arteriolar fl ow to the cortex in excess of metabolic 
requirements, consistent with its primary function as a 
fi ltering organ. After delivering blood to cortical glom-
eruli, the postglomerular circulation supplies deeper 
medullary segments that support energy-dependent 
solute transport at multiple levels of the renal tubule. 
These postglomerular vessels carry less blood, and 
high oxygen consumption leaves the deeper medullary 
regions at the margin of hypoxemia. Vascular disorders 
that commonly threaten the blood supply of the kidney 
include large vessel atherosclerosis, fi bromuscular dis-
eases, and embolic, infl ammatory, and primary hemato-
logic disorders that produce microvascular injury. 
 Atherosclerosis AnD KiDney 
circulAtion 
 microVaScular diSeaSe 
 The glomerular capillary endothelium shares suscep-
tibility to oxidative stress, pressure injury, and infl am-
mation with other vascular territories. Rates of urinary 
albumin excretion (UAE) are predictive of systemic ath-
erosclerotic disease events. Increased UAE may develop 
years before cardiovascular events. UAE and the risk 
of cardiovascular events are both reduced with phar-
macologic therapy such as statins. Experimental studies 
demonstrate functional changes and rarefaction of renal 
microvessels under conditions of accelerated atheroscle-
rosis and/or compromise of proximal perfusion pres-
sures with large vessel disease  ( Fig. 18-1 ). 
 macroVaScular diSeaSe 
 Large-vessel renal artery occlusive disease can result from 
extrinsic compression of the vessel, fi bromuscular dys-
plasias, or, most commonly, from atherosclerotic disease. 
Any disorder that reduces perfusion pressure to the 
kidney can activate mechanisms that tend to restore 
renal pressures at the expense of developing systemic 
hypertension. Because restoration of perfusion pres-
sures can reverse these pathways, renal artery stenosis is 
considered a specifi cally treatable “secondary” cause of 
hypertension. 
 Renal artery stenosis is common and often has only 
minor hemodynamic effects. Fibromuscular dysplasia 
(FMD) is reported in 3–5% of normal subjects present-
ing as potential kidney donors without hypertension. 
It may present clinically with hypertension in younger 
individuals (between age 15 and 50), most often 
women. FMD does not often threaten kidney function, 
but sometimes produces total occlusion and can be asso-
ciated with renal artery aneurysms. Atherosclerotic renal 
artery stenosis (ARAS) is common in the general pop-
ulation (6.8% of a community-based sample above age 
65), a prevalence that increases with age and for patients 
with other vascular conditions such as coronary artery 
disease (18–23%) and/or peripheral aortic or lower 
extremity disease (more than 30%). If untreated, ARAS 
progresses in nearly 50% of cases over a 5-year period, 
sometimes to total occlusion. Intensive treatment of 
arterial blood pressure and statin therapy appear to slow 
these rates and improve clinical outcomes. 
 Critical levels of stenosis lead to a reduction in perfu-
sion pressure that activates the renin-angiotensin system, 
reduces sodium excretion, and activates sympathetic 
adrenergic pathways. These events lead to systemic 
hypertension characterized by angiotensin dependence 
in the early stages, widely varying pressures, loss of cir-
cadian blood pressure (BP) rhythms, and accelerated tar-
get organ injury, including left ventricular hypertrophy 
and renal fi brosis. Renovascular hypertension can be 
treated with agents that block the renin-angiotensin sys-
tem and other drugs that modify these pressor pathways. 
It can also be treated with restoration of renal blood 
fl ow by either endovascular or surgical revascularization. 
 VASCULAR INJURY TO THE KIDNEY 
 chApter 18 
 
CHAPTER 18
Vascular Injury to the Kidney
219
In most cases, patients require continued antihyperten-
sive drug therapy because revascularization alone rarely 
lowers BP to normal.
ARAS and systemic hypertension tend to affect 
both the poststenotic and contralateral kidneys, reduc-
ing overall glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in ARAS. 
When kidney function is threatened by large vessel dis-
ease primarily, it has been labeled ischemic nephropathy. 
Unlike FMD, ARAS develops in patients with other 
risk factors for atherosclerosis and is commonly super-
imposed upon preexisting small vessel disease in the 
kidney resulting from hypertension, aging, and diabetes. 
Nearly 85% of patients considered for renal revascular-
ization have stage 3–5 chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
with GFR below 60 mL/min per 1.73 m2. The pres-
ence of ARAS is a strong predictor of morbidity- and 
mortality-related cardiovascular events, independent of 
whether renal revascularization is undertaken.
Diagnostic approaches to renal artery stenosis depend 
partly on the specific issues to be addressed. Noninvasive 
characterization of the renal vasculature may be achieved 
by several techniques summarized in (Table 18-1). 
Although activation of the renin-angiotensin system is 
a key step in developing renovascular hypertension, it is 
transient. Levels of renin activity are therefore subject to 
timing, the effects of drugs and sodium intake, and do not 
reliably predict the response to vascular therapy. Renal 
artery velocities by Doppler ultrasound above 200 cm/s 
generally predict hemodynamically important lesions 
(above 60% vessel lumen occlusion), although treatment 
trials require velocity above 300 cm/s to avoid false 
positives. The renal resistive index has predictive value 
regarding the viability of the kidney. It remains opera-
tor and institution dependent, however. Captopril- 
enhanced renography has a strong negative predictive 
value when entirely normal. Magnetic resonance angiog-
raphy (MRA) is now less often used, as gadolinium con-
trast has been associated with nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. 
Contrast-enhanced CT with vascular reconstruction pro-
vides excellent vascular images and functional assessment, 
but carries a small risk of contrast toxicity.
Treatment	
 Renal Artery Stenosis
While restoring renal blood flow and perfusion seems 
intuitively beneficial for high-grade occlusive lesions, 
revascularization procedures also pose hazards and 
expense. Patients with FMD are commonly younger 
females with otherwise normal vessels and a long life 
expectancy. These patients often respond well to per-
cutaneous renal artery angioplasty. If blood pressure 
can be controlled to goal levels and kidney function 
remains stable in patients with ARAS, it may be argued 
that medical therapy with follow-up for disease pro-
gression is equally effective. Prospective trials up to 
now fail to identify compelling benefits for interven-
tional procedures regarding short-term results of blood 
pressure and renal function, although long-term stud-
ies regarding cardiovascular outcomes such as stroke, 
Normal
MV proliferation
(early atherosclerosis)
MV rarefaction
(chronic renal ischemia)
Cortex
Medulla
Figure 18-1
Examples of micro-CT images from vessels defined by 
radiopaque casts injected into the renal vasculature. 
These illustrate the complex, dense cortical capillary network 
supplying the kidney cortex that can either proliferate or suc-
cumb to rarefaction under the influence of atherosclerosis 
and/or occlusive disease. Changes in blood supply are fol-
lowed by tubulointerstitial fibrosis and loss of kidney function. 
MV, microvascular (From LO Lerman, AR Chade: Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hyper 18:160, 2009, with permission.)
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
220
congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, and end-
stage renal failure are not yet complete. Medical ther-
apy should include blockade of the renin-angiotensin 
system, attainment of goal blood pressures, cessation of 
tobacco, statins, and aspirin.
Techniques of renal revascularization are improv-
ing. With experienced operators, major complica-
tions develop in about 9% of cases, including renal 
artery dissection, capsular perforation, hemorrhage, 
and occasional atheroembolic disease. Although not 
common, atheroembolic disease can be catastrophic 
and accelerate both hypertension and kidney failure, 
exactly the events that revascularization is intended 
to prevent. Although renal blood flow usually can be 
restored by endovascular stenting, recovery of renal 
function is limited to about 25% of cases, with no 
change in 50%, and some deterioration evident in oth-
ers. When hypertension is refractory to effective ther-
apy, revascularization offers real benefits. Table 18-2 
summarizes currently accepted guidelines for consider-
ing renal revascularization.
Table 18-1
Summary of Imaging Modalities for Evaluating the Kidney Vasculature
Perfusion Studies to Assess Differential Renal Blood Flow
Captopril renography  
with technetium 99m 
mertiatide (99mTc MAG3)
Captopril-mediated fall in 
filtration pressure ampli-
fies differences in renal 
perfusion
Normal study excludes renovas-
cular hypertension
Multiple limitations in patients 
with advanced atherosclerosis 
or creatinine >2.0 mg/dL  
(177 μmol/L)
Nuclear imaging with  
technetium mertiatide or 
technetium-labeled  
pentetic acid (DTPA) to  
estimate fractional flow 
to each kidney
Estimates fractional flow to 
each kidney
Allows calculation of single- 
kidney glomerular filtration rate
Results may be influenced by 
other conditions, e.g., obstruc-
tive uropathy
Vascular Studies to Evaluate the Renal Arteries
Duplex ultrasonography
Shows the renal arter-
ies and measures flow 
velocity as a means of 
assessing the severity of 
stenosis
Inexpensive; widely available
Heavily dependent on opera-
tor’s experience; less useful 
than invasive angiography for 
the diagnosis of fibromuscular 
dysplasia and abnormalities in 
accessory renal arteries
Magnetic resonance  
angiography
Shows the renal arteries 
and perirenal aorta
Not nephrotoxic, but concerns for 
gadolinium toxicity exclude use 
in GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2; pro-
vides excellent images
Expensive; gadolinium excluded 
in renal failure, unable to visual-
ize stented vessels
Computed tomographic 
angiography
Shows the renal arteries 
and perirenal aorta
Provides excellent images; stents 
do not cause artifacts
Expensive, moderate volume of 
contrast required, potentially 
nephrotoxic
Intra-arterial angiography
Shows location and sever-
ity of vascular lesion
Considered “gold standard” for 
diagnosis of large vessel dis-
ease, usually performed simulta-
neously with planned intervention
Expensive, associated hazard of 
atheroemboli, contrast toxicity, 
procedure-related complica-
tions, e.g., dissection
Abbrevations: DTPA, diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (pentetic acid); GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
Atheroembolic Renal Disease
Emboli to the kidneys arise most frequently as a result 
of cholesterol crystals breaking free of atherosclerotic 
vascular plaque and lodging in downstream microves-
sels. Most clinical atheroembolic events follow angio-
graphic procedures, often of the coronary vessels. 
It has been argued that nearly all vascular interven-
tional procedures lead to plaque fracture and release 
of microemboli, but clinical manifestations develop 
only in a fraction of these. The incidence of clinical 
atheroemboli has been increasing with more vascular 
procedures and longer life spans. Atheroembolic renal 
disease is suspected in more than 3% of end-stage renal 
disease (ESRD) in elderly subjects and is likely under-
diagnosed. It is more frequent in males with history of 
diabetes, hypertension, and ischemic cardiac disease. 
Atheroemboli in the kidney are strongly associated 
with aortic aneurysmal disease and renal artery steno-
sis. Most clinical cases can be associated with precipi-
tating events, such as angiography, vascular surgery, 
anticoagulation with heparin, thrombolytic therapy, 
 
CHAPTER 18
Vascular Injury to the Kidney
221
or trauma. Clinical manifestations of this syndrome 
commonly develop between 1 and 14 days after an 
inciting event and may continue to develop for weeks 
thereafter. Systemic embolic disease manifestations, such 
as fever, abdominal pain, and weight loss are present in 
less than half of patients, although cutaneous manifesta-
tions including livedo reticularis, and localized toe gan-
grene may be more common. Worsening hypertension 
and deteriorating kidney function are common, some-
times reaching a malignant phase. Progressive renal fail-
ure can occur and require dialytic support. These cases 
often develop after a stuttering onset over many weeks 
and have an ominous prognosis. Mortality rate after 
1 year reaches 38%, and although some may eventually 
recover sufficiently to no longer require dialysis, many 
do not.
Beyond the clinical manifestations above, laboratory 
findings include rising creatinine, eosinophilia (60–80%), 
elevated sedimentation rate, and hypocomplementemia 
(15%). Establishing this diagnosis can be difficult and is 
often by exclusion. Definitive diagnosis depends upon 
kidney biopsy demonstrating microvessel occlusion 
with cholesterol crystals that leave a “cleft” in the ves-
sel. Biopsies obtained from patients undergoing surgical 
revascularization of the kidney indicate that silent cho-
lesterol emboli are frequently present before any further 
manipulation is performed.
No effective therapy is available for atheroembolic 
disease once it has developed. Withdrawal of antico-
agulation is recommended. Late recovery of kidney 
function after supportive measures sometimes occurs, 
and statin therapy may improve outcome. The role 
of embolic protection devices in the renal circulation 
is unclear, but a few prospective trials have failed to 
demonstrate major benefits. These devices are limited 
to distal protection during the endovascular proce-
dure and offer no protection from embolic debris after 
removal.
Thromboembolic Renal Disease
Thrombotic occlusion of renal vessels or branch arter-
ies can lead to declining renal function and hyperten-
sion. It is difficult to diagnose and is often overlooked, 
especially in elderly patients. Thrombosis can develop 
as a result of local vessel abnormalities, such as local 
dissection, trauma, or inflammatory vasculitis. While 
hypercoagulability conditions sometimes present as 
renal artery thrombosis, this is rare. It can also derive 
from distant embolic events, e.g., the left atrium in 
patients with atrial fibrillation or from fat emboli origi-
nating from traumatized tissue, most commonly large 
bone fractures. Cardiac sources include vegetations 
from subacute bacterial endocarditis. Systemic emboli 
to the kidneys may also arise from the venous circu-
lation if right-to-left shunting occurs, e.g., through a 
patent foramen ovale.
Clinical manifestations vary depending upon the 
rapidity of onset and extent of occlusion. Acute arte-
rial thrombosis may produce flank pain, fever, leukocy-
tosis, nausea, and vomiting. If kidney infarction results, 
enzymes such as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) rise to 
extreme levels. If both kidneys are affected, renal func-
tion will decline precipitously with a drop in urine 
output. If a single kidney is involved, renal functional 
changes may be minor. Hypertension related to sudden 
release of renin from ischemic tissue can develop rap-
idly, so long as some viable tissue in the “peri-infarct” 
border zone remains. If the infarct zone demarcates pre-
cisely, the rise in blood pressure and renin activity may 
resolve. Diagnosis of renal infarction may be established 
by vascular imaging with MR, CT angiography, or 
arteriography (Figs. 18-2A and B).
Table 18-2
Clinical Factors Favoring Medical Therapy 
and Revascularization or Surveillance for 
Renal Artery Stenosis
Factors Favoring Medical Therapy and 
Revascularization for Renal Artery Stenosis
• Progressive decline in GFR during treatment of systemic 
hypertension
• Failure to achieve adequate blood pressure control with 
optimal medical therapy (medical failure)
• Rapid or recurrent decline in the GFR in association with 
a reduction in systemic pressure
• Decline in the GFR during therapy with ACE inhibitors or 
ARBs
• Recurrent congestive heart failure in a patient in whom 
the adequacy of left ventricular function does not 
explain a cause
Factors Favoring Medical Therapy and Surveillance of 
Renal Artery Disease
• Controlled blood pressure with stable renal function 
(e.g., stable renal insufficiency)
• Stable renal artery stenosis without progression on sur-
veillance studies (e.g., serial duplex ultrasound)
• Very advanced age and/or limited life expectancy
• Extensive comorbidity that make revascularization too 
risky
• High risk for or previous experience with atheroembolic 
disease
• Other concomitant renal parenchymal diseases that 
cause progressive renal dysfunction (e.g., interstitial 
nephritis, diabetic nephropathy)
Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARBs, angio-
tensin receptor blockers; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
222
Management of Arterial Thrombosis 
of the Kidney
Options for interventions of newly detected arterial 
occlusion include surgical reconstruction, anticoagulation, 
thrombolytic therapy, endovascular procedures, and sup-
portive care, particularly antihypertensive drug therapy. 
Application of these methods depends upon the patient’s 
overall condition, the precipitating factors (e.g., local 
trauma or systemic illness), the magnitude of renal tissue 
and function at risk, and the likelihood of recurrent events 
in the future. For unilateral disease, e.g., arterial dissection 
with thrombosis, supportive care with anticoagulation 
may suffice. Acute, bilateral occlusion is potentially cata-
strophic, producing anuric renal failure. Depending upon 
the precipitating event, surgical or thrombolytic therapies 
can sometimes restore kidney viability.
Microvascular Injury and 
Hypertension
Arteriolonephrosclerosis
“Malignant” hypertension
Although BP rises with age, it has long been recog-
nized that some individuals develop rapidly progressive 
BP elevations with target organ injury including reti-
nal hemorrhages, encephalopathy, and declining kidney 
function. Placebo arms during the controlled trials of 
hypertension therapy identified progression to severe 
levels in 20% of subjects over 5 years. If untreated, 
patients with target organ injury including papilledema 
and declining kidney function suffered mortality rates in 
excess of 50% over 6–12 months, hence the designation 
“malignant.” Postmortem studies of such patients iden-
tified vascular lesions, designated “fibrinoid necrosis,” 
with breakdown of the vessel wall, deposition of eosino-
philic material including fibrin, and a perivascular cellu-
lar infiltrate. A separate lesion was identified in the larger 
interlobular arteries in many patients with hyperplastic 
proliferation of the vascular wall cellular elements, depo-
sition of collagen, and separation of layers, designated 
the “onionskin” lesion. For many of these patients, fibri-
noid necrosis led to obliteration of glomeruli and loss 
of tubular structures. Progressive kidney failure ensued 
and without dialysis support led to early mortality in 
untreated malignant-phase hypertension. These vascu-
lar changes could develop with pressure-related injury 
from a variety of hypertensive pathways, including but 
not limited to activation of the renin-angiotensin system, 
and severe vasospasm associated with catecholamine 
release. Occasionally endothelial injury is sufficient to 
induce microangiopathic hemolysis as discussed below.
Antihypertensive therapy is the mainstay of ther-
apy for malignant hypertension. With effective BP 
reduction, manifestations of vascular injury including 
A
   
B
Figure 18-2
A. CT angiogram illustrating loss of circulation to the 
upper pole of the right kidney in a patient with fibromus-
cular disease and a renal artery aneurysm. Activation of 
the renin-angiotensin system produced rapidly develop-
ing hypertension. B. Angiogram illustrating high-grade renal 
artery stenosis affecting the left kidney. This lesion is often 
part of widespread atherosclerosis and sometimes is an 
extension of aortic plaque. This lesion develops in older indi-
viduals with preexisting atherosclerotic risk factors.
 
CHAPTER 18
Vascular Injury to the Kidney
223
microangiopathic hemolysis and renal dysfunction 
can improve over time. Whereas mortality in series 
reported before the era of drug therapy suggested that 
1-year mortality rates exceeded 90%, current survival 
over 5 years exceeds 50%.
Malignant hypertension is less common in Western 
countries, although it persists in parts of the 
world where medical care and antihypertensive 
drug therapy are less available. It most commonly devel-
ops in patients with treated hypertension who neglect to 
take medications, or who may use vasospastic drugs, 
such as cocaine. Renal abnormalities typically include 
rising serum creatinine, occasionally hematuria and pro-
teinuria. Biochemical findings may include evidence of 
hemolysis (anemia, schistocytes, and reticulocytosis) and 
changes associated with kidney failure. African-American 
males are more likely to develop rapidly progressive 
hypertension and kidney failure than are whites in the 
United States. Genetic polymorphisms (MYH9) that are 
common in the African-American population and pre-
dispose to subtle focal sclerosing glomerular disease may 
be responsible, with hypertension developing secondary 
to renal disease in this instance.
“Hypertensive nephrosclerosis”
Based on experience with malignant hypertension and 
epidemiologic evidence linking BP with long-term risks of 
kidney failure, it has long been assumed that lesser degrees 
of hypertension induce less severe but prevalent changes 
in kidney vessels and loss of kidney function. As a result, a 
large portion of patients reaching ESRD without a specific 
etiologic diagnosis are assigned the designation “hyperten-
sive nephrosclerosis.” Pathologic examination commonly 
identifies afferent arteriolar thickening with deposition of 
homogeneous eosinophilic material (hyaline arteriolosclerosis) 
associated with narrowing of vascular lumina. Clinical 
manifestations include retinal vessel changes associated 
with hypertension (arteriolar narrowing, crossing changes), 
left ventricular hypertrophy, and elevated blood pressure. 
The role of these vascular changes in kidney function is 
unclear. Postmortem and biopsy samples from normoten-
sive kidney donors demonstrate similar vessel changes asso-
ciated with aging, dyslipidemia, and glucose intolerance. 
While BP reduction does slow progression of proteinuric 
kidney diseases and is warranted to reduce the excessive 
cardiovascular risks associated with CKD, antihypertensive 
therapy does not alter the course of kidney dysfunction 
identified specifically as hypertensive nephrosclerosis.
Thrombotic Microangiopathy
Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) refers to injured 
endothelial cells that are thickened, swollen, or 
detached mainly from arterioles and capillaries. Platelet 
and hyaline thrombi causing partial or complete occlu-
sion are integral to the histopathology. TMA is the his-
tologic result of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia 
(MAHA), which consumes platelets and erythrocytes 
and is characterized by thrombocytopenia and schisto-
cytes. In the kidney, TMA is characterized by swelling 
of the endocapillary cells (endotheliosis), fibrin thrombi, 
platelet plugs, arterial intimal fibrosis, and membranop-
roliferative changes. In severe cases, the fibrin thrombi 
may extend into the arteriolar vascular pole produc-
ing glomerular collapse and sometimes cortical necro-
sis. Secondary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis may 
be seen in individuals who recover from acute TMA. 
Diseases that present with this lesion include thrombotic 
thrombocytopenia (TTP), hemolytic-uremia syndrome 
(HUS), malignant hypertension, scleroderma renal cri-
sis, antiphospholipid syndrome, preeclampsia/HELLP 
(hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count) 
syndrome, HIV infection, and radiation nephropathy.
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome (HUS)/
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic 
Purpura (TTP)
HUS and TTP are the prototypes of MAHA. Whether 
they represent a spectrum of the same disease or two 
distinct entities continues to be debated. Histologically, 
the diseases are inseparable, but they differ regarding epi-
demiology and pathophysiology. Typical HUS usually 
affects children (most under the age of 5) and is preceded 
by hemorrhagic diarrhea. Typical TTP affects individu-
als in their thirties and forties. Neurologic symptoms are 
more common in TTP and have significant morbidity 
and mortality rates if not treated with plasma exchange, 
while plasma exchange is ineffective in most HUS. The 
argument is strengthened with the discovery of a disinte-
grin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 
1 motif member 13 (ADAMTS13), a von Willebrand 
factor (vWF) cleaving protease that is either absent or 
inactive in TTP but not in HUS. However, neurologic 
symptoms can occur in HUS, and low ADAMTS13 
activity has been identified in HUS cases. Furthermore, 
plasma infusion/exchange is effective in some HUS. As 
a result, the distinction between the two is blurred, and 
they are often identified simply as HUS/TTP.
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome
There are at least four variants of HUS. The most com-
mon is D+ HUS referring to its association with bacte-
rial gastroenteritis. This typically affects young children 
(<5 years), but adults are also susceptible. More than 80% 
of cases are preceded within a week by diarrhea, often 
bloody. Gastrointestinal symptoms include abdominal 
pain, cramping, and vomiting. Fever is typically absent. 
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
224
Neurologic symptoms are common and may include 
lethargy, encephalopathy, seizures, and even cerebral 
infarction. The pathogenic agent linked to D+ HUS is 
the shiga toxin, also referred to as verotoxin. This toxin 
is produced by certain strains of Escherichia coli and Shi-
gella dysenteriae. In the United States and Europe, the 
most common shiga-toxigenic E. coli (STEC) strain is 
the 0157:H7. Other strains such as 0157/H−, 0111:H−, 
026:H11/H−, and 0145:H28 can also produce shiga 
toxin. Once shiga toxin enters the circulation, it binds 
to neutrophils and preferentially localizes in the kidney, 
where it causes damage to the endothelial cells. This 
results in platelet aggregation, which initiates the micro-
angiopathic process. Another bacterium associated with 
HUS is Streptococcus pneumoniae. This bacterium produces 
a neuraminidase that cleaves the N-acetyl neuraminic 
acid moieties that cover the Thomsen-Friedenreich anti-
gen on platelets and endothelial cells. Exposure of this 
normally cryptic antigen to preformed IgM results in 
severe MAHA.
Another variant produces atypical HUS (aHUS), 
caused by congenital complement dysregulation rather 
than a toxin. These patients have low C3 levels, a char-
acteristic of alternative pathway activation. The most 
common cause is a deficiency of factor H, which has 
been linked to families with aHUS. Factor H com-
petes with factor B to prevent the formation of C3b,Bb 
and acts as a cofactor for factor I, which proteolytically 
degrades C3b. More than 70 mutations of the factor H 
gene have been identified. Most are missense mutations 
that produce normal levels of factor H with abnormali-
ties mainly in the C-terminus region, which affect its 
binding to C3b. Other mutations result in low or com-
plete absence of the protein. Deficiencies in other com-
plement regulatory proteins such as factor I, factor B, 
membrane cofactor protein or MCP (CD46), C3, com-
plement factor H–related protein 1 (CFHR1), CFHR3, 
and CFHR5 have also been described. Finally, an auto-
immune variant of HUS has been discovered. Deficient 
for CFHR protein and factor H autoantibody–positive 
(DEAP), HUS occurs when an autoantibody is formed 
against factor H. DEAP-HUS is often associated with a 
deletion of an 84-kb fragment of the chromosome that 
encodes for CFHR1 and CFHR3. The autoantibody 
blocks the binding of factor H to C3b and surface-
bound C3 convertase.
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic 
Purpura
Traditionally TTP is characterized by the pentad (hemo-
lytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, neurologic symptoms, 
fever, and renal failure). Classic TTP is differenti-
ated from HUS by neurologic involvement. However, 
in practice, differentiation between TTP and HUS 
is unreliable due to overlap in clinical manifestations. 
TTP has been linked with the absence of or marked 
decreased activity in the metalloprotease ADAMTS13 
specific for vWF, although this is not universally present. 
Even complete absence of ADAMTS13 alone does not 
produce TTP. Most often, an additional trigger (such as 
infection, surgery, pancreatitis, or pregnancy) initiates 
clinical TTP.
Data from the Oklahoma TTP/HUS Registry reveal 
an incidence rate of 11.3 per 106 patients. The median 
age of the patients was 40 years. Higher frequency was 
noted among blacks, with an incidence more than nine 
times higher than non-blacks. Women have nearly 
three times the incidence, similar to the demograph-
ics for systemic lupus erythematosus. If untreated, TTP 
has a mortality rate exceeding 90%. Even with modern 
therapy, 20% of the patients die within the first month 
from complications of microvascular thrombosis.
Several subtypes of TTP have been described. The 
classic form is acquired or idiopathic TTP, which usu-
ally follows an infection or malignancy, or an intense 
inflammatory reaction such as pancreatitis. This vari-
ant typically occurs with deficiency of ADAMTS13 
or its activity and is the result of an autoantibody. The 
autoantibody (IgG or IgM) can either increase clear-
ance of ADAMTS13 or inhibit its activity. A hereditary 
form with congenital deficiency of ADAMTS13 is seen 
in patients with Upshaw-Schulman syndrome charac-
terized by MAHA and thrombocytopenia. TTP in these 
patients can start within the first weeks of life, but in 
others, may not start until several years of age. Environ-
mental and genetic factors are thought to influence the 
development of TTP. Plasma transfusion is effective as a 
prevention and treatment during the TTP episodes.
Drug-induced TTP/TMA is a recognized complica-
tion of chemotherapeutic agents, immunosuppressive 
agents, antiplatelet agents, and quinine. Two mecha-
nisms are responsible for drug-induced TMA. With 
chemotherapeutic agents (mitomycin C, gemcitabine, 
etc.) and immunosuppressive agents (cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, and sirolimus), endothelial damage is the 
main cause of the MAHA. This process is usually dose 
dependent. Alternatively, drugs can induce autoanti-
bodies that produce TMA. Suppression of ADAMTS13 
activity and formation of an autoantibody has been 
detected in patients exposed to ticlopidine. Quinine 
appears to induce autoantibodies against granulocytes, 
lymphocytes, endothelial cells, and platelet glycoprotein 
IbB/IX or IIb/IIIa complexes but not to ADAMTS13. 
Quinine-associated TTP is more common in women. 
Autoantibody-associated TTP can occur after a single 
dose in patients who had previous exposure to the drug. 
Most patients developing TTP from clopidogrel do not 
have either autoantibodies or decreased ADAMTS13 
activity. Drugs that inhibit vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) sometimes produce TMA. The mecha-
nism is not fully understood.
 
CHAPTER 18
Vascular Injury to the Kidney
225
Treatment of HUS/TTP should be based on the 
pathophysiologic pathways that are identified. Auto-
antibody-mediated TTP and DEAP HUS should 
be treated with plasma exchange or plasmapheresis. 
In addition to removing the autoantibodies, plasma 
exchange replaces ADAMTS13. Twice-daily plasma ex- 
changes, vincristine, and rituximab occasionally have 
been found to be effective in refractory cases. Plasma 
infusion is usually sufficient for congenital TTP such 
as Upshaw-Schulman syndrome. Plasma exchange 
should be considered if larger volumes of plasma are 
necessary. TTP secondary to drug-induced autoanti-
bodies responds well to plasma exchange, while drugs 
that cause endothelial damage may not. D+ HUS 
should be treated with supportive measures. Plasma 
exchange has not been found to be effective. Antimo-
tility agents and antibiotics increase the incidence of 
HUS and should be avoided. Conversely, plasma infu-
sion/exchange may be beneficial in aHUS by replet-
ing complement regulatory proteins. Antibiotics and 
washed red cells should be given in neuraminidase-
associated HUS. Plasma and whole blood should be 
avoided since they contain IgM, which would exac-
erbate the MAHA. The coexistence of factor H and 
ADAMTS13 deficiency can exacerbate TTP and make 
it less responsive to plasma infusion, illustrating the 
complexity of managing these disorders.
Transplantation-Associated 
Thrombotic Microangiopathy (TA-TMA)
TA-TMA can develop after hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT) with an incidence of 8.2%. 
Etiologic factors include conditioning regimens, immu-
nosuppression, infections, and graft-versus-host disease. 
Other risk factors include female sex, age, and human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-mismatched donor grafts. 
TA-TMA usually occurs within the first 100 days after 
HSCT. Table 18-3 lists definitions of TA-TMA cur-
rently used for clinical trials. A firm diagnosis may be 
difficult because thrombocytopenia, anemia, and renal 
insufficiency are common in the posttransplant period. 
TA-TMA carries a high mortality rate (75% within 
3 months). Plasma exchange is beneficial in less than 
50% of patients, most of whom have more than 5% 
ADAMTS13 activity. Calciuria inhibitors should be 
discontinued, and substitution with daclizumab [anti-
body to the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor] is recom-
mended. Treatment with rituximab and defibrotide 
may also be helpful.
HIV-Related TMA
TMA is mainly a complication encountered before 
widespread use of highly active retroviral therapy for 
HIV. It is seen in patients with advanced AIDS and 
low CD4 count, although it occasionally can be the 
first manifestation of HIV infection. The presence of 
MAHA thrombocytopenia and renal failure are sug-
gestive, but renal biopsy is required to establish the 
diagnosis since HIV is associated with several other 
renal diseases. The median platelet count is 77,000/μL 
with a range of 10,000 to 160,000/μL, which may 
prohibit a renal biopsy in some patients. Cytomega-
lovirus (CMV) coinfection may also be a risk factor. 
The mechanism of injury is unclear, but HIV may 
induce apoptosis in endothelial cells. Plasma exchange 
is effective and is recommended in conjunction with 
antiviral therapy.
Radiation Nephropathy
Radiation can produce microangiopathic injury after 
either local or total body irradiation. The kidney is 
one of the most radiosensitive organs, and injury can 
result with as little as 4–5 Gy exposure. It is charac-
terized by renal insufficiency, proteinuria, and hyper-
tension usually presenting 6 months or longer after 
radiation exposure. Renal biopsy reveals classic TMA 
in the kidney with damage to glomerular, tubular, and 
vascular cells. Systemic evidence for MAHA is rare. 
Because of its high incidence after allogeneic HSCT, it 
is often referred to as bone marrow transplant (BMT) 
nephropathy. No specific therapy is available, although 
some evidence supports treatment with renin-angiotensin 
system blockade.
Table 18-3
Criteria for Establishing Microangiopathic 
Kidney Injury Associated With Hematopoietic 
Stem Cell Transplantation
International Working 
Group
Blood and Marrow 
Transplant Clinical 
Trials Network Toxicity 
Committee
>4% schistocytes in the 
blood
RBC fragmentation and at 
least 2 schistocytes per 
high-power field
De novo, prolonged, or 
progressive thrombocy-
topenia
Concurrent increase in LDH 
above baseline
A sudden and persistent 
increase in LDH
Negative direct and indirect 
Coombs test
Decrease in hemoglobin or 
increased RBC transfu-
sion requirement
Concurrent renal and/or  
neurologic dysfunction 
without other explanations
Decrease in haptoglobin 
concentration
Note: These features underscore the need to identify pathways 
of hemolysis and thrombocytopenia that accompany deterioration of 
kidney function.
Abbreviations: LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell.
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
226
Scleroderma (Progressive  
Systemic Sclerosis)
Scleroderma commonly affects the kidney, with 52% 
of subjects with widespread scleroderma having renal 
involvement sometime during the follow-up period. Of 
these, 19% were due to scleroderma renal crisis (SRC). 
Other renal manifestations in scleroderma include tran-
sient (prerenal) or medication-related forms of acute 
kidney injury [e.g., d-penicillamine, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or cyclosporine]. SRC 
occurs in patients with diffuse systemic sclerosis (12 vs. 
2% in limited systemic sclerosis). SRC is the most severe 
manifestation, characterized by accelerated hypertension, 
a rapid decline in renal function, nephrotic proteinuria, 
and hematuria. Retinopathy and encephalopathy may 
accompany the hypertension. Salt and water retention 
with microvascular injury can lead to pulmonary edema. 
Other manifestations include myocarditis, pericarditis, 
and arrhythmias, which denote an especially poor prog-
nosis. Although MAHA is present in over half of the 
patients, coagulopathy is rare.
The renal lesion in SRC is characterized by arcu-
ate artery intimal and medial proliferation with lumi-
nal narrowing. This lesion is described as onionskinning 
and can be accompanied by glomerular collapse due to 
reduced blood flow. Histologically it is indistinguish-
able from malignant hypertension. Fibrinoid necrosis 
and thrombosis are common. Before the availability of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, the 
mortality rate for SRC at 1 month was greater than 
90%. Introduction of renin-angiotensin system blockade 
has lowered the mortality rate to 30% at 3 years. Nearly 
two-thirds of patients with SRC require dialysis sup-
port. Half of those needing dialysis as a result of SRC 
will recover renal function (median time = 1 year). Glo-
merulonephritis and vasculitis associated with antineu-
trophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) and systemic 
lupus erythematosus have been described in patients 
with scleroderma. An association has been found with 
antinuclear antibodies’ (ANAs) speckled pattern and 
anti-RNA polymerase antibodies (I and III). Anti-U3-
RNP may identify young patients at risk for SRC. 
Anticentromere antibody (ACA), however, is a nega-
tive predictor of SRC. Because of the overlap between 
SRC and other autoimmune disorders, a renal biopsy is 
recommended for patients with atypical renal involve-
ment, especially if hypertension is absent.
Treatment with ACE inhibition is the first-line therapy 
unless contraindicated. The goal of therapy is to reduce 
systolic blood pressure by 20 mmHg and diastolic by 
10 mmHg every 24 hours until blood pressure is normal-
ized. Additional antihypertensive therapy may be added 
once the ACE inhibition is maximized. Both ACE inhibi-
tors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists are effective, 
although published data show that treatment is superior 
with ACE inhibitors. ACE inhibition alone does not pre-
vent SRC, although it reduces the role of hypertension. 
Intravenous iloprost has been used in Europe for blood 
pressure management and improvement of renal perfusion. 
Kidney transplantation is not recommended for 2 years 
after the start of dialysis, since delayed recovery may occur.
Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS)
Antiphospholipid syndrome can be either primary or 
secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus. It is char-
acterized by systemic thrombosis (arterial and venous) 
and fetal morbidity mediated by antiphospholipid anti-
bodies (aPLs). The aPLs are mainly anticardiolipin 
(aCL) antibodies, which can be IgG, IgM, or IgA, 
lupus anticoagulant (LA), and anti-β-2 glycoprotein 
I antibodies (antiβ2GPI). Patients with both aCL and 
antiβ2GPI appear to have the highest risk of thrombo-
sis. The vascular compartment within the kidney is the 
main site of renal involvement. Arteriosclerosis is com-
monly present in the arcuate and intralobular arteries. 
In the intralobular arteries, fibrous intimal hyperplasia 
characterized by intimal thickening secondary to intense 
myofibroblastic intimal cellular proliferation with extra-
cellular matrix deposition is frequently seen along with 
onionskinning. Arterial and arteriolar fibrous and fibro-
cellular occlusions are present in over two-thirds of the 
biopsies. Cortical necrosis and focal cortical atrophy 
may result from vascular occlusion. TMA is commonly 
present in the renal biopsies, although signs of MAHA 
and platelet consumption are usually absent. TMA is 
especially common in the catastrophic variant of APS. 
In patients with secondary antiphospholipid syndrome 
(APS), other glomerulopathies may be present includ-
ing membranous nephropathy, minimal change disease, 
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, and pauci-immune 
crescentic glomerulonephritis.
Large vessels can be involved in APS and may form 
the proximal nidus near the ostium for thrombosis of the 
renal artery. Renal vein thrombosis can occur and should 
be suspected in patients with lupus anticoagulant LA who 
develop nephrotic range proteinuria. Progression to end-
stage renal disease can occur, and thrombosis may form in 
the vascular access and the renal allografts. Hypertension 
is common. Treatment entails lifelong anticoagulation. 
Glucocorticoids may be beneficial in accelerated hyper-
tension. Immunosuppression and plasma exchange may 
be helpful for catastrophic episodes of APS, but them-
selves do not reduce recurrent thrombosis.
Hellp Syndrome
HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low plate-
lets) syndrome is a dangerous complication of pregnancy. 
Occurring in 0.5–0.9% of all pregnancies and 10–20% of 
cases with severe preeclampsia, it has a mortality rate that 
 
CHAPTER 18
Vascular Injury to the Kidney
227
ranges between 7.4 and 34%. Most commonly occurring 
in the third trimester, 10% of cases occur before week 27 
and 30% postpartum. Although most consider HELLP to 
be a severe form of preeclampsia, nearly 20% are not pre-
ceded by preeclampsia. HELLP patients have increased 
inflammatory markers [C-reactive protein (CRP), IL-
1Ra, and IL-6] as compared to preeclampsia alone.
Renal failure occurs in half of patients with HELLP, 
although the etiology is not well understood. Limited 
data suggest renal failure is the result of a combination 
of preeclampsia and acute tubular necrosis from HELLP. 
Renal histologic findings are those of TMA with endo-
thelial cell swelling and occlusion of the capillary lumens, 
but luminal thrombi are typically absent. However, 
thrombi become more common in severe eclamp-
sia and HELLP. Although renal failure is common, the 
organ that defines this syndrome is the liver. Subcapsular 
hepatic hematomas sometimes produce spontaneous rup-
ture of the liver and can be a life-threatening complica-
tion. Neurologic complications such as strokes, cerebral 
infarcts, cerebral and brainstem hemorrhage, and cere-
bral edema are other major potentially life-threatening 
complications. Nonfatal complications include placental 
abruption, permanent vision loss due to Purtscher-like 
(hemorrhagic and vasoocclusive vasculopathy) retinopa-
thy, pulmonary edema, bleeding, and fetal demise.
The HELLP syndrome shares many features with 
other forms of MAHA. Distinguishing the specific dis-
orders is complicated by the fact that both aHUS and 
TTP flares can be triggered by pregnancy. Patients with 
antiphospholipid syndrome have a higher risk of HELLP. 
A history of episodes of MAHA before pregnancy is 
helpful. Serum levels of ADAMTS13 activity is reduced 
(30–60%) in HELLP but not to the levels seen in TTP 
(<5%). Some authors suggest using the LDH-to-AST 
ratio for diagnosis. Patients with HELLP and preeclamp-
sia have an LDH-to-AST ratio of 13 to 1 versus 29 to 1 
in patients without preeclampsia. Other markers such as 
antithrombin III (decreased in HELLP but not in TTP) 
and d-dimer (elevated in HELLP but not in TTP) may 
aid in the diagnosis. HELLP syndrome resolves sponta-
neously in most cases after delivery, although a portion 
of HELLP occurs postpartum. Glucocorticoids may 
decrease inflammatory markers, although two random-
ized, controlled trials failed to confirm beneficial effects. 
Plasma exchange should be considered if the hemolysis is 
refractory to glucocorticoids and/or delivery, especially if 
TTP had not been ruled out.
Sickle Cell Nephropathy
Renal complications in sickle cell disease (SCD) result 
from occlusion of the vasa recta in the renal medulla. 
The low partial pressure of oxygen and high osmolar-
ity predispose to hemoglobin S polymerization and 
erythrocyte sickling. Sequelae include hyposthenuria, 
hematuria, and papillary necrosis. The kidney responds 
by increasing blood flow and GFR mediated by pros-
taglandins. This dependence on prostaglandins may 
explain why patients with SCD experience greater 
reduction of GFR by NSAIDs than others. The glom-
eruli are typically enlarged. Intracapillary fragmentation 
and phagocytosis of sickled erythrocytes are thought to 
be responsible for the membranoproliferative glomer-
ulonephritis-like lesion, and focal segmental glomeru-
losclerosis is sometimes seen. Proteinuria is present in 
20–30% of the patients, and nephrotic range proteinuria 
is associated with renal failure. ACE inhibitors reduce 
proteinuria, although data are lacking on prevention of 
renal failure. Patients with SCD are also more prone 
to acute renal failure. The cause is thought to reflect 
microvascular occlusion associated with nontraumatic 
rhabdomyolysis, high fever, infection, and generalized 
sickling. Chronic kidney disease is present in 12–20% of 
patients. Despite the frequency of renal disease, hyper-
tension is uncommon in patients with SCD.
Renal Vein Thrombosis
Renal vein thrombosis (RVT) can either present with 
flank pain, tenderness, hematuria, rapid decline in renal 
function, and proteinuria or it can be silent. Occasionally, 
RVT is identified during workup for pulmonary embo-
lism. The left renal vein is more commonly involved and 
two-thirds of cases are bilateral. Etiologies can be divided 
into three broad categories: endothelial damage, venous 
stasis, and hypercoagulable states. Homocystinuria, endo-
vascular intervention, and surgery can produce vascular 
endothelial damage. Dehydration, which is more com-
mon in males, is a common cause of stasis in the pediatric 
population. Stasis also can result from compression and 
kinking of the renal veins from retroperitoneal processes 
such as retroperitoneal fibrosis and abdominal neoplasms. 
Thrombosis can occur throughout the renal circulation 
with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. RVT can also 
be secondary to nephrotic syndrome, particularly mem-
branous nephropathy. Other hypercoagulable states asso-
ciated with RVT include proteins C and S, antithrombin 
deficiency, factor V Leiden, disseminated malignancy, 
and oral contraceptives.
Diagnostic screening can be performed with Dop-
pler ultrasound, which is more sensitive than ultrasound 
alone. The most sensitive test is CT angiography, which 
is nearly 100% sensitive. MR angiography is another 
option but is more expensive and requires sedation in 
pediatric patients. Treatment for RVT is anticoagu-
lation and therapy for the underlying cause. Endovas-
cular thrombolysis may be considered in severe cases. 
Occasionally nephrectomy may be undertaken for life- 
threatening complications. Vena caval filters are often 
used to prevent migration of the thrombi.
 Theodore A. Kotchen 
228
 Hypertension is one of the leading causes of the global 
burden of disease. Approximately 7.6 million deaths 
(13–15% of the total) and 92 million disability-adjusted 
life years worldwide were attributable to high blood pres-
sure in 2001. Hypertension doubles the risk of cardiovas-
cular diseases, including coronary heart disease (CHD), 
congestive heart failure (CHF), ischemic and hemor-
rhagic stroke, renal failure, and peripheral arterial disease. 
It often is associated with additional cardiovascular disease 
risk factors, and the risk of cardiovascular disease increases 
with the total burden of risk factors. Although antihyper-
tensive therapy clearly reduces the risks of cardiovascular 
and renal disease, large segments of the hypertensive pop-
ulation are either untreated or inadequately treated. 
 epiDeMiology 
 Blood pressure levels, the rate of age-related increases 
in blood pressure, and the prevalence of hypertension 
vary among countries and among subpopulations within 
a country. Hypertension is present in all populations 
except for a small number of individuals living in primi-
tive, culturally isolated societies. In industrialized societ-
ies, blood pressure increases steadily during the fi rst two 
decades of life. In children and adolescents, blood pres-
sure is associated with growth and maturation. Blood 
pressure “tracks” over time in children and between 
adolescence and young adulthood. In the United States, 
average systolic blood pressure is higher for men than 
for women during early adulthood, although among 
older individuals the age-related rate of rise is steeper 
for women. Consequently, among individuals aged 60 
and older, systolic blood pressures of women are higher 
than those of men. Among adults, diastolic blood pres-
sure also increases progressively with age until ∼55 years, 
after which it tends to decrease. The consequence is a 
widening of pulse pressure (the difference between 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure) beyond age 60. 
The probability that a middle-aged or elderly individual 
will develop hypertension in his or her lifetime is 90%. 
 In the United States, based on results of the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES), approximately 30% (age-adjusted preva-
lence) of adults, or at least 65 million individuals, have 
hypertension (defi ned as any one of the following: sys-
tolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, diastolic blood pres-
sure ≥90 mmHg, taking antihypertensive medications). 
Hypertension prevalence is 33.5% in non-Hispanic 
blacks, 28.9% in non-Hispanic whites, and 20.7% in 
Mexican Americans. The likelihood of hypertension 
increases with age, and among individuals age ≥60, 
the prevalence is 65.4%. Recent evidence suggests that 
the prevalence of hypertension in the United States may 
be increasing, possibly as a consequence of increasing 
obesity. The prevalence of hypertension and stroke mor-
tality rates are higher in the southeastern United States 
than in other regions. In African Americans, hyperten-
sion appears earlier, is generally more severe, and results 
in higher rates of morbidity and mortality from stroke, 
left ventricular hypertrophy, CHF, and end-stage renal 
disease (ESRD) than in white Americans. 
 Both environmental and genetic factors may contrib-
ute to regional and racial variations in blood pressure and 
hypertension prevalence. Studies of societies undergoing 
“acculturation” and studies of migrants from a less to a 
more urbanized setting indicate a profound environmen-
tal contribution to blood pressure. Obesity and weight 
gain are strong independent risk factors for hyperten-
sion. It has been estimated that 60% of hypertensives 
are >20% overweight. Among populations, hyperten-
sion prevalence is related to dietary NaCl intake, and 
the age-related increase in blood pressure may be aug-
mented by a high NaCl intake. Low dietary intakes of 
calcium and potassium also may contribute to the risk of 
hypertension. The urine sodium-to-potassium ratio is a 
stronger correlate of blood pressure than is either sodium 
or potassium alone. Alcohol consumption, psychosocial 
 HYPERTENSIVE VASCULAR DISEASE 
 chapter 19 
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
229
stress, and low levels of physical activity also may con-
tribute to hypertension.
Adoption, twin, and family studies document a sig-
nificant heritable component to blood pressure levels and 
hypertension. Family studies controlling for a common 
environment indicate that blood pressure heritabilities are 
in the range of 15–35%. In twin studies, heritability esti-
mates of blood pressure are ∼60% for males and 30–40% 
for females. High blood pressure before age 55 occurs 
3.8 times more frequently among persons with a positive 
family history of hypertension.
Genetic Considerations
Although specific genetic variants have been iden-
tified in rare Mendelian forms of hypertension 
(Table 19-5), these variants are not applicable to 
the vast majority (>98%) of patients with essential 
hypertension. For most individuals, it is likely that 
hypertension represents a polygenic disorder in which a 
combination of genes acts in concert with environmen-
tal exposures to make only a modest contribution to 
blood pressure. Further, different subsets of genes may 
lead to different phenotypes associated with hyperten-
sion, e.g., obesity, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance.
Several strategies are being utilized in the search for 
specific hypertension-related genes. Animal models 
(including selectively bred rats and congenic rat strains) 
provide a powerful approach for evaluating genetic 
loci and genes associated with hypertension. Compara-
tive mapping strategies allow for the identification of 
syntenic genomic regions between the rat and human 
genomes that may be involved in blood pressure regula-
tion. In association studies, different alleles (or combi-
nations of alleles at different loci) of specific candidate 
genes or chromosomal regions are compared in hyper-
tensive patients and normotensive control subjects. 
Current evidence suggests that genes that encode com-
ponents of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 
along with angiotensinogen and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) polymorphisms, may be related to 
hypertension and to blood pressure sensitivity to dietary 
NaCl. The alpha-adducin gene is thought to be associ-
ated with increased renal tubular absorption of sodium, 
and variants of this gene may be associated with hyper-
tension and salt sensitivity of blood pressure. Other 
genes possibly related to hypertension include genes 
encoding the AT1 receptor, aldosterone synthase, and 
the β2 adrenoreceptor. Genomewide association stud-
ies involve rapidly scanning markers across the entire 
genome to identify loci (not specific genes) associated 
with an observable trait (e.g., blood pressure) or a par-
ticular disease. This strategy has been facilitated by the 
availability of dense genotyping chips and the Interna-
tional HapMap. To date, the results of candidate gene 
studies often have not been replicated, and in contrast 
to several other polygenic disorders, genomewide asso-
ciation studies have had limited success in identifying 
genetic determinants of hypertension.
Preliminary evidence suggests that there may also be 
genetic determinants of target organ damage attributed 
to hypertension. Family studies indicate significant her-
itability of left ventricular mass, and there is consider-
able individual variation in the responses of the heart to 
hypertension. Family studies and variations in candidate 
genes associated with renal damage suggest that genetic 
factors also may contribute to hypertensive nephropa-
thy. Specific genetic variants have been linked to CHD 
and stroke.
In the future, it is possible that DNA analysis will pre-
dict individual risk for hypertension and target organ 
damage and will identify responders to specific classes of 
antihypertensive agents. However, with the exception of 
the rare, monogenic hypertensive diseases, the genetic 
variants associated with hypertension remain to be con-
firmed, and the intermediate steps by which these vari-
ants affect blood pressure remain to be determined.
Mechanisms of Hypertension
To provide a framework for understanding the patho-
genesis of and treatment options for hypertensive disor-
ders, it is useful to understand factors involved in the 
regulation of both normal and elevated arterial pres-
sure. Cardiac output and peripheral resistance are the 
two determinants of arterial pressure (Fig. 19-1). Car-
diac output is determined by stroke volume and heart 
rate; stroke volume is related to myocardial contractil-
ity and to the size of the vascular compartment. Periph-
eral resistance is determined by functional and anatomic 
changes in small arteries (lumen diameter 100–400 μm) 
and arterioles.
Intravascular Volume
Vascular volume is a primary determinant of arterial 
pressure over the long term. Sodium is predominantly 
an extracellular ion and is a primary determinant of the 
extracellular fluid volume. When NaCl intake exceeds 
Arterial pressure
Cardiac output
Peripheral resistance
Stroke volume
Heart rate
Vascular structure
Vascular function
Figure 19-1
Determinants of arterial pressure.
230
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
the capacity of the kidney to excrete sodium, vascular 
volume initially expands and cardiac output increases. 
However, many vascular beds (including kidney and 
brain) have the capacity to autoregulate blood flow, and 
if constant blood flow is to be maintained in the face 
of increased arterial pressure, resistance within that bed 
must increase, since
Blood flow
pressure across the vascular bed
=
vascular resis
ce
tan
The initial elevation of blood pressure in response to 
vascular volume expansion may be related to an increase 
of cardiac output; however, over time, peripheral resis-
tance increases and cardiac output reverts toward nor-
mal. The effect of sodium on blood pressure is related 
to the provision of sodium with chloride; nonchloride 
salts of sodium have little or no effect on blood pres-
sure. As arterial pressure increases in response to a 
high NaCl intake, urinary sodium excretion increases 
and sodium balance is maintained at the expense of an 
increase in arterial pressure. The mechanism for this 
“pressure-natriuresis” phenomenon may involve a sub-
tle increase in the glomerular filtration rate, decreased 
absorbing capacity of the renal tubules, and possibly 
hormonal factors such as atrial natriuretic factor. In indi-
viduals with an impaired capacity to excrete sodium, 
greater increases in arterial pressure are required to 
achieve natriuresis and sodium balance.
NaCl-dependent hypertension may be a consequence 
of a decreased capacity of the kidney to excrete sodium, 
due either to intrinsic renal disease or to increased pro-
duction of a salt-retaining hormone (mineralocorti-
coid) resulting in increased renal tubular reabsorption 
of sodium. Renal tubular sodium reabsorption also may 
be augmented by increased neural activity to the kid-
ney. In each of these situations, a higher arterial pressure 
may be required to achieve sodium balance. Conversely, 
salt-wasting disorders are associated with low blood 
pressure levels. ESRD is an extreme example of volume-
dependent hypertension. In ∼80% of these patients, vas-
cular volume and hypertension can be controlled with 
adequate dialysis; in the other 20%, the mechanism of 
hypertension is related to increased activity of the renin-
angiotensin system and is likely to be responsive to phar-
macologic blockade of renin-angiotensin.
Autonomic Nervous System
The autonomic nervous system maintains cardiovascu-
lar homeostasis via pressure, volume, and chemorecep-
tor signals. Adrenergic reflexes modulate blood pressure 
over the short term, and adrenergic function, in concert 
with hormonal and volume-related factors, contributes 
to the long-term regulation of arterial pressure. The 
three endogenous catecholamines are norepinephrine, 
epinephrine, and dopamine. All three play important 
roles in tonic and phasic cardiovascular regulation.
The activities of the adrenergic receptors are medi-
ated by guanosine nucleotide-binding regulatory pro-
teins (G proteins) and by intracellular concentrations of 
downstream second messengers. In addition to recep-
tor affinity and density, physiologic responsiveness 
to catecholamines may be altered by the efficiency of 
receptor-effector coupling at a site “distal” to receptor 
binding. The receptor sites are relatively specific both 
for the transmitter substance and for the response that 
occupancy of the receptor site elicits. Norepinephrine 
and epinephrine are agonists for all adrenergic recep-
tor subtypes, although with varying affinities. Based on 
their physiology and pharmacology, adrenergic recep-
tors have been divided into two principal types: α and 
β. These types have been differentiated further into 
α1, α2, β1, and β2 receptors. Recent molecular clon-
ing studies have identified several additional subtypes. 
α Receptors are occupied and activated more avidly by 
norepinephrine than by epinephrine, and the reverse 
is true for β receptors. α1 Receptors are located on 
postsynaptic cells in smooth muscle and elicit vaso-
constriction. α2 Receptors are localized on presynap-
tic membranes of postganglionic nerve terminals that 
synthesize norepinephrine. When activated by cat-
echolamines, α2 receptors act as negative feedback 
controllers, inhibiting further norepinephrine release. 
In the kidney, activation of α1-adrenergic receptors 
increases renal tubular reabsorption of sodium. Differ-
ent classes of antihypertensive agents either inhibit α1 
receptors or act as agonists of α2 receptors and reduce 
systemic sympathetic outflow. Activation of myocardial 
β1 receptors stimulates the rate and strength of cardiac 
contraction and consequently increases cardiac output. 
β1 Receptor activation also stimulates renin release 
from the kidney. Another class of antihypertensive 
agents acts by inhibiting β1 receptors. Activation of β2 
receptors by epinephrine relaxes vascular smooth mus-
cle and results in vasodilation.
Circulating 
catecholamine 
concentrations 
may 
affect the number of adrenoreceptors in various tissues. 
Downregulation of receptors may be a consequence 
of sustained high levels of catecholamines and pro-
vides an explanation for decreasing responsiveness, or 
tachyphylaxis, to catecholamines. For example, ortho-
static hypotension frequently is observed in patients 
with pheochromocytoma, possibly due to the lack of 
norepinephrine-induced vasoconstriction with assump-
tion of the upright posture. Conversely, with chronic 
reduction of neurotransmitter substances, adrenorecep-
tors may increase in number or be upregulated, result-
ing in increased responsiveness to the neurotransmitter. 
Chronic administration of agents that block adrenergic 
receptors may result in upregulation, and withdrawal 
of those agents may produce a condition of temporary 
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
231
hypersensitivity to sympathetic stimuli. For example, 
clonidine is an antihypertensive agent that is a centrally 
acting α2 agonist that inhibits sympathetic outflow. 
Rebound hypertension may occur with the abrupt ces-
sation of clonidine therapy, probably as a consequence 
of upregulation of α1 receptors.
Several reflexes modulate blood pressure on a min-
ute-to-minute basis. One arterial baroreflex is mediated 
by stretch-sensitive sensory nerve endings in the carotid 
sinuses and the aortic arch. The rate of firing of these 
baroreceptors increases with arterial pressure, and the 
net effect is a decrease in sympathetic outflow, resulting 
in decreases in arterial pressure and heart rate. This is a 
primary mechanism for rapid buffering of acute fluctua-
tions of arterial pressure that may occur during postural 
changes, behavioral or physiologic stress, and changes in 
blood volume. However, the activity of the baroreflex 
declines or adapts to sustained increases in arterial pres-
sure such that the baroreceptors are reset to higher pres-
sures. Patients with autonomic neuropathy and impaired 
baroreflex function may have extremely labile blood 
pressures with difficult-to-control episodic blood pres-
sure spikes associated with tachycardia.
In both normal-weight and obese individuals, hyper-
tension often is associated with increased sympathetic 
outflow. Based on recordings of postganglionic muscle 
nerve activity (detected by a microelectrode inserted in 
a peroneal nerve in the leg), sympathetic outflow tends 
to be higher in hypertensive than in normotensive indi-
viduals. Sympathetic outflow is increased in obesity-
related hypertension and in hypertension associated with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Baroreceptor activation via elec-
trical stimulation of carotid sinus afferent nerves has been 
shown to lower blood pressure in patients with “resis-
tant” hypertension. Drugs that block the sympathetic 
nervous system are potent antihypertensive agents, indi-
cating that the sympathetic nervous system plays a per-
missive, although not necessarily a causative, role in the 
maintenance of increased arterial pressure.
Pheochromocytoma is the most blatant example of 
hypertension related to increased catecholamine pro-
duction, in this instance by a tumor. Blood pressure 
can be reduced by surgical excision of the tumor or by 
pharmacologic treatment with an α1 receptor antagonist 
or with an inhibitor of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-
limiting step in catecholamine biosynthesis.
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system contrib-
utes to the regulation of arterial pressure primarily via 
the vasoconstrictor properties of angiotensin II and the 
sodium-retaining properties of aldosterone. Renin is an 
aspartyl protease that is synthesized as an enzymatically 
inactive precursor, prorenin. Most renin in the circula-
tion is synthesized in the renal afferent renal arteriole. 
Prorenin may be secreted directly into the circulation 
or may be activated within secretory cells and released 
as active renin. Although human plasma contains two 
to five times more prorenin than renin, there is no evi-
dence that prorenin contributes to the physiologic activ-
ity of this system. There are three primary stimuli for 
renin secretion: (1) decreased NaCl transport in the dis-
tal portion of the thick ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle that abuts the corresponding afferent arteriole 
(macula densa), (2) decreased pressure or stretch within 
the renal afferent arteriole (baroreceptor mechanism), 
and (3) sympathetic nervous system stimulation of renin-
secreting cells via β1 adrenoreceptors. Conversely, renin 
secretion is inhibited by increased NaCl transport in the 
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, by increased 
stretch within the renal afferent arteriole, and by β1 
receptor blockade. In addition, angiotensin II directly 
inhibits renin secretion due to angiotensin II type 1 
receptors on juxtaglomerular cells, and renin secre-
tion increases in response to pharmacologic blockade of 
either ACE or angiotensin II receptors.
Once released into the circulation, active renin 
cleaves a substrate, angiotensinogen, to form an inac-
tive decapeptide, angiotensin I (Fig. 19-2). A con-
verting enzyme, located primarily but not exclusively 
in the pulmonary circulation, converts angiotensin I to 
the active octapeptide, angiotensin II, by releasing the 
C-terminal histidyl-leucine dipeptide. The same con-
verting enzyme cleaves a number of other peptides, 
including and thereby inactivating the vasodilator bra-
dykinin. Acting primarily through angiotensin II type 1 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
AT1 receptor
AT2 receptor
Renin
Aldosterone
Bradykinin
Inactive
peptides
ACE-kininase II
Figure 19-2
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis.
232
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
(AT1) receptors on cell membranes, angiotensin II is a 
potent pressor substance, the primary tropic factor for 
the secretion of aldosterone by the adrenal zona glo-
merulosa, and a potent mitogen that stimulates vascular 
smooth muscle cell and myocyte growth. Independent 
of its hemodynamic effects, angiotensin II may play a 
role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis through a 
direct cellular action on the vessel wall. An angioten-
sin II type 2 (AT2) receptor has been characterized. It 
is widely distributed in the kidney and has the opposite 
functional effects of the AT1 receptor. The AT2 recep-
tor induces vasodilation, sodium excretion, and inhibi-
tion of cell growth and matrix formation. Experimen-
tal evidence suggests that the AT2 receptor improves 
vascular remodeling by stimulating smooth muscle cell 
apoptosis and contributes to the regulation of glomer-
ular filtration rate. AT1 receptor blockade induces an 
increase in AT2 receptor activity.
Renin-secreting tumors are clear examples of renin-
dependent hypertension. In the kidney, these tumors 
include benign hemangiopericytomas of the juxtaglo-
merular apparatus and, infrequently, renal carcinomas, 
including Wilms’ tumors. Renin-producing carcino-
mas also have been described in lung, liver, pancreas, 
colon, and adrenals. In these instances, in addition to 
excision and/or ablation of the tumor, treatment of 
hypertension includes pharmacologic therapies targeted 
to inhibit angiotensin II production or action. Reno-
vascular hypertension is another renin-mediated form 
of hypertension. Obstruction of the renal artery leads 
to decreased renal perfusion pressure, thereby stimu-
lating renin secretion. Over time, as a consequence of 
secondary renal damage, this form of hypertension may 
become less renin dependent.
Angiotensinogen, renin, and angiotensin II are also 
synthesized locally in many tissues, including the brain, 
pituitary, aorta, arteries, heart, adrenal glands, kidneys, 
adipocytes, leukocytes, ovaries, testes, uterus, spleen, 
and skin. Angiotensin II in tissues may be formed by the 
enzymatic activity of renin or by other proteases, e.g., 
tonin, chymase, and cathepsins. In addition to regulat-
ing local blood flow, tissue angiotensin II is a mitogen 
that stimulates growth and contributes to modeling and 
repair. Excess tissue angiotensin II may contribute to 
atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy, and renal failure, 
and consequently may be a target for pharmacologic 
therapy to prevent target organ damage.
Angiotensin II is the primary tropic factor regulating 
the synthesis and secretion of aldosterone by the zona 
glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone synthesis 
is also dependent on potassium, and aldosterone secre-
tion may be decreased in potassium-depleted individu-
als. Although acute elevations of adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) levels also increase aldosterone secre-
tion, ACTH is not an important tropic factor for the 
chronic regulation of aldosterone.
Aldosterone is a potent mineralocorticoid that 
increases sodium reabsorption by amiloride-sensitive 
epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) on the apical surface 
of the principal cells of the renal cortical collecting duct 
(Chap. 1). Electric neutrality is maintained by exchang-
ing sodium for potassium and hydrogen ions. Conse-
quently, increased aldosterone secretion may result in 
hypokalemia and alkalosis. Because potassium depletion 
may inhibit aldosterone synthesis, clinically, hypokale-
mia should be corrected before a patient is evaluated for 
hyperaldosteronism.
Mineralocorticoid receptors also are expressed in the 
colon, salivary glands, and sweat glands. Cortisol also 
binds to these receptors but normally functions as a 
less potent mineralocorticoid than aldosterone because 
cortisol is converted to cortisone by the enzyme 11 
β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2. Cortisone has 
no affinity for the mineralocorticoid receptor. Primary 
aldosteronism is a compelling example of mineralocor-
ticoid-mediated hypertension. In this disorder, adrenal 
aldosterone synthesis and release are independent of 
renin-angiotensin, and renin release is suppressed by the 
resulting volume expansion.
Aldosterone also has effects on nonepithelial targets. 
Aldosterone and/or mineralocorticoid receptor acti-
vation induces structural and functional alterations in 
the heart, kidney, and blood vessels, leading to myo-
cardial fibrosis, nephrosclerosis, and vascular inflam-
mation and remodeling, perhaps as a consequence of 
oxidative stress. These effects are amplified by a high 
salt intake. In animal models, high circulating aldoste-
rone levels stimulate cardiac fibrosis and left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy, and spironolactone (an aldosterone 
antagonist) prevents aldosterone-induced myocardial 
fibrosis. Pathologic patterns of left ventricular geome-
try also have been associated with elevations of plasma 
aldosterone concentration in patients with essential 
hypertension as well as in patients with primary aldo-
steronism. In patients with CHF, low-dose spirono-
lactone reduces the risk of progressive heart failure 
and sudden death from cardiac causes by 30%. Owing 
to a renal hemodynamic effect, in patients with pri-
mary aldosteronism, high circulating levels of aldo-
sterone also may cause glomerular hyperfiltration and 
albuminuria. These renal effects are reversible after 
removal of the effects of excess aldosterone by adrenal-
ectomy or spironolactone.
Increased activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
axis is not invariably associated with hypertension. In 
response to a low-NaCl diet or to volume contraction, 
arterial pressure and volume homeostasis may be main-
tained by increased activity of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone axis. Secondary aldosteronism (i.e., increased 
aldosterone secondary to increased renin-angiotensin), 
but not hypertension, also is observed in edematous states 
such as CHF and liver disease.
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
233
Vascular Mechanisms
Vascular radius and compliance of resistance arteries are 
also important determinants of arterial pressure. Resis-
tance to flow varies inversely with the fourth power of 
the radius, and, consequently, small decreases in lumen 
size significantly increase resistance. In hypertensive 
patients, structural, mechanical, or functional changes 
may reduce the lumen diameter of small arteries and arte-
rioles. Remodeling refers to geometric alterations in the 
vessel wall without a change in vessel volume. Hyper-
trophic (increased cell size and increased deposition of 
intercellular matrix) or eutrophic vascular remodeling 
results in decreased lumen size and hence contributes 
to increased peripheral resistance. Apoptosis, low-grade 
inflammation, and vascular fibrosis also contribute to 
remodeling. Lumen diameter also is related to elastic-
ity of the vessel. Vessels with a high degree of elasticity 
can accommodate an increase of volume with relatively 
little change in pressure, whereas in a semirigid vascular 
system, a small increment in volume induces a relatively 
large increment of pressure.
Hypertensive patients have stiffer arteries, and arte-
riosclerotic patients may have particularly high systolic 
blood pressures and wide pulse pressures as a conse-
quence of decreased vascular compliance due to struc-
tural changes in the vascular wall. Recent evidence sug-
gests that arterial stiffness has independent predictive 
value for cardiovascular events. Clinically, a number of 
devices are available to evaluate arterial stiffness or com-
pliance, including ultrasound and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI).
Ion transport by vascular smooth muscle cells may 
contribute to hypertension-associated abnormalities of 
vascular tone and vascular growth, both of which are 
modulated by intracellular pH (pHi). Three ion transport 
mechanisms participate in the regulation of pHi: (1) Na+-
H+ exchange, (2) Na+-dependent HCO3
−-Cl− exchange, 
and (3) cation-independent HCO3
−-Cl− exchange. Based 
on measurements in cell types that are more accessible 
than vascular smooth muscle (e.g., leukocytes, erythro-
cytes, platelets, skeletal muscle), activity of the Na+-H+ 
exchanger is increased in hypertension, and this may 
result in increased vascular tone by two mechanisms. 
First, increased sodium entry may lead to increased vas-
cular tone by activating Na+-Ca2+ exchange and thereby 
increasing intracellular calcium. Second, increased pHi 
enhances calcium sensitivity of the contractile apparatus, 
leading to an increase in contractility for a given intra-
cellular calcium concentration. Additionally, increased 
Na+-H+ exchange may stimulate growth of vascular 
smooth muscle cells by enhancing sensitivity to mitogens.
Vascular endothelial function also modulates vascular 
tone. The vascular endothelium synthesizes and releases a 
spectrum of vasoactive substances, including nitric oxide, 
a potent vasodilator. Endothelium-dependent vasodilation 
is impaired in hypertensive patients. This impairment 
often is assessed with high-resolution ultrasonography 
before and after the hyperemic phase of reperfusion that 
follows 5 minutes of forearm ischemia. Alternatively, 
endothelium-dependent vasodilation may be assessed 
in response to an intra-arterially infused endothelium-
dependent vasodilator, e.g., acetylcholine. Endothelin is 
a vasoconstrictor peptide produced by the endothelium, 
and orally active endothelin antagonists may lower blood 
pressure in patients with resistant hypertension.
Currently, it is not known if the hypertension-related 
vascular abnormalities of ion transport and endothelial 
function are primary alterations or secondary conse-
quences of elevated arterial pressure. Limited evidence 
suggests that vascular compliance and endothelium-
dependent vasodilation may be improved by aerobic 
exercise, weight loss, and antihypertensive agents. It 
remains to be determined whether these interventions 
affect arterial structure and stiffness via a blood pressure–
independent mechanism and whether different classes 
of antihypertensive agents preferentially affect vascular 
structure and function.
Pathologic Consequences of 
Hypertension
Hypertension is an independent predisposing factor for 
heart failure, coronary artery disease, stroke, renal dis-
ease, and peripheral arterial disease (PAD).
Heart
Heart disease is the most common cause of death in 
hypertensive patients. Hypertensive heart disease is the 
result of structural and functional adaptations leading 
to left ventricular hypertrophy, CHF, abnormalities of 
blood flow due to atherosclerotic coronary artery dis-
ease and microvascular disease, and cardiac arrhythmias.
Both genetic and hemodynamic factors contribute to 
left ventricular hypertrophy. Clinically, left ventricular 
hypertrophy can be diagnosed by electrocardiography, 
although echocardiography provides a more sensitive 
measure of left ventricular wall thickness. Individuals 
with left ventricular hypertrophy are at increased risk 
for CHD, stroke, CHF, and sudden death. Aggressive 
control of hypertension can regress or reverse left ven-
tricular hypertrophy and reduce the risk of cardiovas-
cular disease. It is not clear whether different classes of 
antihypertensive agents have an added impact on reduc-
ing left ventricular mass, independent of their blood 
pressure–lowering effect.
CHF may be related to systolic dysfunction, diastolic 
dysfunction, or a combination of the two. Abnormali-
ties of diastolic function that range from asymptom-
atic heart disease to overt heart failure are common in 
234
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
hypertensive patients. Patients with diastolic heart fail-
ure have a preserved ejection fraction, which is a mea-
sure of systolic function. Approximately one-third of 
patients with CHF have normal systolic function but 
abnormal diastolic function. Diastolic dysfunction is an 
early consequence of hypertension-related heart dis-
ease and is exacerbated by left ventricular hypertrophy 
and ischemia. Cardiac catheterization provides the most 
accurate assessment of diastolic function. Alternatively, 
diastolic function can be evaluated by several noninva-
sive methods, including echocardiography and radionu-
clide angiography.
Brain
Stroke is the second most frequent cause of death in the 
world; it accounts for 5 million deaths each year, with 
an additional 15 million persons having nonfatal strokes. 
Elevated blood pressure is the strongest risk factor for 
stroke. Approximately 85% of strokes are due to infarc-
tion, and the remainder are due to either intracerebral or 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. The incidence of stroke rises 
progressively with increasing blood pressure levels, par-
ticularly systolic blood pressure in individuals >65 years. 
Treatment of hypertension convincingly decreases the 
incidence of both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes.
Hypertension also is associated with impaired cog-
nition in an aging population, and longitudinal studies 
support an association between midlife hypertension and 
late-life cognitive decline. Hypertension-related cogni-
tive impairment and dementia may be a consequence of 
a single infarct due to occlusion of a “strategic” larger 
vessel or multiple lacunar infarcts due to occlusive small 
vessel disease resulting in subcortical white matter isch-
emia. Several clinical trials suggest that antihypertensive 
therapy has a beneficial effect on cognitive function, 
although this remains an active area of investigation.
Cerebral blood flow remains unchanged over a wide 
range of arterial pressures (mean arterial pressure of 
50–150 mmHg) through a process termed autoregulation 
of blood flow. In patients with the clinical syndrome of 
malignant hypertension, encephalopathy is related to fail-
ure of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow at the upper 
pressure limit, resulting in vasodilation and hyperperfu-
sion. Signs and symptoms of hypertensive encephalopathy 
may include severe headache, nausea and vomiting (often 
of a projectile nature), focal neurologic signs, and altera-
tions in mental status. Untreated, hypertensive encepha-
lopathy may progress to stupor, coma, seizures, and death 
within hours. It is important to distinguish hypertensive 
encephalopathy from other neurologic syndromes that 
may be associated with hypertension, e.g., cerebral isch-
emia, hemorrhagic or thrombotic stroke, seizure disor-
der, mass lesions, pseudotumor cerebri, delirium tremens, 
meningitis, acute intermittent porphyria, traumatic or 
chemical injury to the brain, and uremic encephalopathy.
Kidney
The kidney is both a target and a cause of hypertension. 
Primary renal disease is the most common etiology of 
secondary hypertension. Mechanisms of kidney-related 
hypertension include a diminished capacity to excrete 
sodium, excessive renin secretion in relation to volume 
status, and sympathetic nervous system overactivity. 
Conversely, hypertension is a risk factor for renal injury 
and end-stage renal disease. The increased risk associ-
ated with high blood pressure is graded, continuous, and 
present throughout the distribution of blood pressure 
above optimal pressure. Renal risk appears to be more 
closely related to systolic than to diastolic blood pres-
sure, and black men are at greater risk than white men 
for developing ESRD at every level of blood pressure. 
Proteinuria is a reliable marker of the severity of chronic 
kidney disease and is a predictor of its progression. 
Patients with high urine protein excretion (>3 g/24 h) 
have a more rapid rate of progression than do those with 
lower protein excretion rates.
Atherosclerotic, hypertension-related vascular lesions 
in the kidney primarily affect preglomerular arterioles, 
resulting in ischemic changes in the glomeruli and post-
glomerular structures. Glomerular injury also may be 
a consequence of direct damage to the glomerular cap-
illaries due to glomerular hyperperfusion. Studies of 
hypertension-related renal damage, primarily in experi-
mental animals, suggest that loss of autoregulation of renal 
blood flow at the afferent arteriole results in transmission 
of elevated pressures to an unprotected glomerulus with 
ensuing hyperfiltration, hypertrophy, and eventual focal 
segmental glomerular sclerosis. With progressive renal 
injury there is a loss of autoregulation of renal blood flow 
and glomerular filtration rate, resulting in a lower blood 
pressure threshold for renal damage and a steeper slope 
between blood pressure and renal damage. The result 
may be a vicious cycle of renal damage and nephron loss 
leading to more severe hypertension, glomerular hyperfil-
tration, and further renal damage. Glomerular pathology 
progresses to glomerulosclerosis, and eventually the renal 
tubules may also become ischemic and gradually atrophic. 
The renal lesion associated with malignant hypertension 
consists of fibrinoid necrosis of the afferent arterioles, 
sometimes extending into the glomerulus, and may result 
in focal necrosis of the glomerular tuft.
Clinically, macroalbuminuria (a random urine albumin/ 
creatinine ratio >300 mg/g) or microalbuminuria (a ran-
dom urine albumin/creatinine ratio 30–300 mg/g) are 
early markers of renal injury. These are also risk factors 
for renal disease progression and cardiovascular disease.
Peripheral Arteries
In addition to contributing to the pathogenesis of 
hypertension, blood vessels may be a target organ for 
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
235
atherosclerotic disease secondary to long-standing ele-
vated blood pressure. Hypertensive patients with arterial 
disease of the lower extremities are at increased risk for 
future cardiovascular disease. Although patients with ste-
notic lesions of the lower extremities may be asymptom-
atic, intermittent claudication is the classic symptom of 
PAD. This is characterized by aching pain in the calves 
or buttocks while walking that is relieved by rest. The 
ankle-brachial index is a useful approach for evaluating 
PAD and is defined as the ratio of noninvasively assessed 
ankle to brachial (arm) systolic blood pressure. An ankle-
brachial index <0.90 is considered diagnostic of PAD 
and is associated with >50% stenosis in at least one major 
lower limb vessel. Several studies suggest that an ankle-
brachial index <0.80 is associated with elevated blood 
pressure, particularly systolic blood pressure.
Defining Hypertension
From an epidemiologic perspective, there is no obvi-
ous level of blood pressure that defines hypertension. In 
adults, there is a continuous, incremental risk of cardio-
vascular disease, stroke, and renal disease across levels of 
both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The Multiple 
Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT), which included 
>350,000 male participants, demonstrated a continuous 
and graded influence of both systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure on CHD mortality, extending down to systolic 
blood pressures of 120 mmHg. Similarly, results of a 
meta-analysis involving almost 1 million participants indi-
cate that ischemic heart disease mortality, stroke mortal-
ity, and mortality from other vascular causes are directly 
related to the height of the blood pressure, beginning at 
115/75 mmHg, without evidence of a threshold. Cardio-
vascular disease risk doubles for every 20-mmHg increase 
in systolic and 10-mmHg increase in diastolic pressure. 
Among older individuals, systolic blood pressure and 
pulse pressure are more powerful predictors of cardiovas-
cular disease than is diastolic blood pressure.
Clinically, hypertension may be defined as that level 
of blood pressure at which the institution of therapy 
reduces blood pressure–related morbidity and mortality. 
Current clinical criteria for defining hypertension gen-
erally are based on the average of two or more seated 
blood pressure readings during each of two or more out-
patient visits. A recent classification recommends blood 
pressure criteria for defining normal blood pressure, pre-
hypertension, hypertension (stages I and II), and isolated 
systolic hypertension, which is a common occurrence 
among the elderly (Table 19-1). In children and adoles-
cents, hypertension generally is defined as systolic and/or 
diastolic blood pressure consistently >95th percentile for 
age, sex, and height. Blood pressures between the 90th 
and 95th percentiles are considered prehypertensive and 
are an indication for lifestyle interventions.
Home blood pressure and average 24-h ambula-
tory blood pressure measurements are generally lower 
than clinic blood pressures. Because ambulatory blood 
pressure recordings yield multiple readings throughout 
the day and night, they provide a more comprehen-
sive assessment of the vascular burden of hypertension 
than do a limited number of office readings. Increasing 
evidence suggests that home blood pressures, includ-
ing 24-h blood pressure recordings, more reliably pre-
dict target organ damage than do office blood pressures. 
Blood pressure tends to be higher in the early morn-
ing hours, soon after waking, than at other times of day. 
Myocardial infarction and stroke are more common in 
the early morning hours. Nighttime blood pressures 
are generally 10–20% lower than daytime blood pres-
sures, and an attenuated nighttime blood pressure “dip” 
is associated with increased cardiovascular disease risk. 
Recommended criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension 
are average awake blood pressure ≥135/85 mmHg and 
asleep blood pressure ≥120/75 mmHg. These levels 
approximate a clinic blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg.
Approximately 15–20% of patients with stage 1 
hypertension (as defined in Table 19-1) based on 
office blood pressures have average ambulatory read-
ings <135/85 mmHg. This phenomenon, so-called 
white coat hypertension, also may be associated with 
an increased risk of target organ damage (e.g., left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, carotid atherosclerosis, overall car-
diovascular morbidity), although to a lesser extent than 
in individuals with elevated office and ambulatory read-
ings. Individuals with white coat hypertension are also 
at increased risk for developing sustained hypertension.
Clinical Disorders of 
Hypertension
Depending on methods of patient ascertainment, 
∼80–95% of hypertensive patients are diagnosed as hav-
ing “essential” hypertension (also referred to as primary 
or idiopathic hypertension). In the remaining 5–20% 
Table 19-1
Blood Pressure Classification
Blood Pressure 
Classification
Systolic, 
mmHg
Diastolic, 
mmHg
Normal
<120
and <80
Prehypertension
120–139
or 80–89
Stage 1 hypertension
140–159
or 90–99
Stage 2 hypertension
≥160
or ≥100
Isolated systolic hypertension
≥140
and <90
Source: Adapted from AV Chobanian et al: JAMA 289:2560, 2003.
236
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
of hypertensive patients, a specific underlying disorder 
causing the elevation of blood pressure can be identified 
(Tables 19-2 and 19-3). In individuals with “second-
ary” hypertension, a specific mechanism for the blood 
pressure elevation is often more apparent.
Essential Hypertension
Essential hypertension tends to be familial and is likely to 
be the consequence of an interaction between environ-
mental and genetic factors. The prevalence of essential 
hypertension increases with age, and individuals with rela-
tively high blood pressures at younger ages are at increased 
risk for the subsequent development of hypertension. It 
is likely that essential hypertension represents a spectrum 
of disorders with different underlying pathophysiologies. 
In the majority of patients with established hypertension, 
peripheral resistance is increased and cardiac output is nor-
mal or decreased; however, in younger patients with mild 
or labile hypertension, cardiac output may be increased 
and peripheral resistance may be normal.
When plasma renin activity (PRA) is plotted 
against 24-h sodium excretion, ∼10–15% of hyperten-
sive patients have high PRA and 25% have low PRA. 
High-renin patients may have a vasoconstrictor form of 
hypertension, whereas low-renin patients may have vol-
ume-dependent hypertension. Inconsistent associations 
between plasma aldosterone and blood pressure have 
been described in patients with essential hypertension. 
The association between aldosterone and blood pressure 
is more striking in African Americans, and PRA tends 
to be low in hypertensive African Americans. This raises 
the possibility that subtle increases in aldosterone may 
contribute to hypertension in at least some groups of 
patients who do not have overt primary aldosteronism. 
Furthermore, spironolactone, an aldosterone antagonist, 
may be a particularly effective antihypertensive agent 
for some patients with essential hypertension, including 
some patients with “drug-resistant” hypertension.
Obesity and the Metabolic 
Syndrome
There is a well-documented association between obe-
sity (body mass index >30 kg/m2) and hypertension. 
Further, cross-sectional studies indicate a direct linear 
correlation between body weight (or body mass index) 
and blood pressure. Centrally located body fat is a more 
important determinant of blood pressure elevation than 
is peripheral body fat. In longitudinal studies, a direct 
correlation exists between change in weight and change 
in blood pressure over time. Sixty percent of hyperten-
sive adults are more than 20% overweight. It has been 
established that 60–70% of hypertension in adults may 
be directly attributable to adiposity.
Table 19-3
Secondary Causes of Systolic and Diastolic Hypertension
Renal
Parenchymal diseases, renal cysts (including polycystic kidney disease), renal tumors 
(including renin-secreting tumors), obstructive uropathy
Renovascular
Arteriosclerotic, fibromuscular dysplasia
Adrenal
Primary aldosteronism, Cushing’s syndrome, 17α-hydroxylase deficiency, 11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency, 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (licorice), pheochromocytoma
Aortic coarctation
Obstructive sleep apnea
Preeclampsia/eclampsia
Neurogenic
Psychogenic, diencephalic syndrome, familial dysautonomia, polyneuritis (acute porphyria, 
lead poisoning), acute increased intracranial pressure, acute spinal cord section
Miscellaneous endocrine
Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, hypercalcemia, acromegaly
Medications
High-dose estrogens, adrenal steroids, decongestants, appetite suppressants, cyclospo-
rine, tricyclic antidepressants, monamine oxidase inhibitors, erythropoietin, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents, cocaine
Mendelian forms of hypertension
See Table 19-4
Table 19-2
Systolic Hypertension With Wide Pulse 
Pressure
1. Decreased vascular compliance (arteriosclerosis)
2. Increased cardiac output
	 a. Aortic regurgitation
	 b. Thyrotoxicosis
	 c. Hyperkinetic heart syndrome
	 d. Fever
	 e. Arteriovenous fistula
	 	 f.  Patent ductus arteriosus
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
237
Hypertension and dyslipidemia frequently occur 
together and in association with resistance to insulin-
stimulated glucose uptake. This clustering of risk factors 
is often, but not invariably, associated with obesity, par-
ticularly abdominal obesity. Insulin resistance also is asso-
ciated with an unfavorable imbalance in the endothelial 
production of mediators that regulate platelet aggregation, 
coagulation, fibrinolysis, and vessel tone. When these risk 
factors cluster, the risks for CHD, stroke, diabetes, and 
cardiovascular disease mortality are increased further.
Depending on the populations studied and the meth-
odologies for defining insulin resistance, ∼25–50% of 
nonobese, nondiabetic hypertensive persons are insulin 
resistant. The constellation of insulin resistance, abdomi-
nal obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia has been 
designated as the metabolic syndrome. As a group, first-
degree relatives of patients with essential hypertension 
are also insulin resistant, and hyperinsulinemia (a surro-
gate marker of insulin resistance) may predict the even-
tual development of hypertension and cardiovascular 
disease. Although the metabolic syndrome may in part 
be heritable as a polygenic condition, the expression of 
the syndrome is modified by environmental factors, such 
as degree of physical activity and diet. Insulin sensitiv-
ity increases and blood pressure decreases in response to 
weight loss. The recognition that cardiovascular disease 
risk factors tend to cluster within individuals has impor-
tant implications for the evaluation and treatment of 
hypertension. Evaluation of both hypertensive patients 
and individuals at risk for developing hypertension 
should include assessment of overall cardiovascular dis-
ease risk. Similarly, introduction of lifestyle modification 
strategies and drug therapies should address overall risk 
and not simply focus on hypertension.
Renal Parenchymal Diseases
Virtually all disorders of the kidney may cause hyperten-
sion (Table 19-3), and renal disease is the most common 
cause of secondary hypertension. Hypertension is present 
in >80% of patients with chronic renal failure. In general, 
hypertension is more severe in glomerular diseases than in 
interstitial diseases such as chronic pyelonephritis. Con-
versely, hypertension may cause nephrosclerosis, and in 
some instances it may be difficult to determine whether 
hypertension or renal disease was the initial disorder. Pro-
teinuria >1000 mg/d and an active urine sediment are 
indicative of primary renal disease. In either instance, the 
goals are to control blood pressure and retard the rate of 
progression of renal dysfunction.
Renovascular hypertension
Hypertension due to an occlusive lesion of a renal 
artery, renovascular hypertension, is a potentially cur-
able form of hypertension. In the initial stages, the 
mechanism of hypertension generally is related to acti-
vation of the renin-angiotensin system. However, renin 
activity and other components of the renin-angiotensin 
system may be elevated only transiently; over time, 
sodium retention and recruitment of other pressure 
mechanisms may contribute to elevated arterial pres-
sure. Two groups of patients are at risk for this disor-
der: older arteriosclerotic patients who have a plaque 
obstructing the renal artery, frequently at its origin, and 
patients with fibromuscular dysplasia. Atherosclerosis 
accounts for the large majority of patients with reno-
vascular hypertension. Although fibromuscular dyspla-
sia may occur at any age, it has a strong predilection 
for young white women. The prevalence in females is 
eightfold that in males. There are several histologic vari-
ants of fibromuscular dysplasia, including medial fibro-
plasia, perimedial fibroplasia, medial hyperplasia, and 
intimal fibroplasia. Medial fibroplasia is the most com-
mon variant and accounts for approximately two-thirds 
of patients. The lesions of fibromuscular dysplasia are 
frequently bilateral and, in contrast to atherosclerotic 
renovascular disease, tend to affect more distal portions 
of the renal artery.
In addition to the age and sex of the patient, several 
clues from the history and physical examination suggest 
a diagnosis of renovascular hypertension. The diagno-
sis should be considered in patients with other evidence 
of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Although response 
to antihypertensive therapy does not exclude the diag-
nosis, severe or refractory hypertension, recent loss 
of hypertension control or recent onset of moderately 
severe hypertension, and unexplained deterioration of 
renal function or deterioration of renal function associ-
ated with an ACE inhibitor should raise the possibility 
of renovascular hypertension. Approximately 50% of 
patients with renovascular hypertension have an abdom-
inal or flank bruit, and the bruit is more likely to be 
hemodynamically significant if it lateralizes or extends 
throughout systole into diastole.
If blood pressure is adequately controlled with a 
simple antihypertensive regimen and renal function 
remains stable, there may be little impetus to pursue 
an evaluation for renal artery stenosis, particularly in an 
older patient with atherosclerotic disease and comorbid 
conditions. Patients with long-standing hypertension, 
advanced renal insufficiency, or diabetes mellitus are less 
likely to benefit from renal vascular repair. The most 
effective medical therapies include an ACE inhibitor 
or an angiotensin II receptor blocker; however, these 
agents decrease glomerular filtration rate in a stenotic 
kidney owing to efferent renal arteriolar dilation. In the 
presence of bilateral renal artery stenosis or renal artery 
stenosis to a solitary kidney, progressive renal insuffi-
ciency may result from the use of these agents. Impor-
tantly, the renal insufficiency is generally reversible after 
discontinuation of the offending drug.
238
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
If renal artery stenosis is suspected and if the clinical 
condition warrants an intervention such as percutaneous 
transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA), placement of a 
vascular endoprosthesis (stent), or surgical renal revascu-
larization, imaging studies should be the next step in the 
evaluation. As a screening test, renal blood flow may be 
evaluated with a radionuclide [131I]-orthoiodohippurate 
(OIH) scan or glomerular filtration rate may be evalu-
ated with a [99mTc]-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid 
(DTPA) scan before and after a single dose of captopril 
(or another ACE inhibitor). The following are consis-
tent with a positive study: (1) decreased relative uptake 
by the involved kidney, which contributes <40% of total 
renal function, (2) delayed uptake on the affected side, 
and (3) delayed washout on the affected side. In patients 
with normal, or nearly normal, renal function, a nor-
mal captopril renogram essentially excludes functionally 
significant renal artery stenosis; however, its usefulness 
is limited in patients with renal insufficiency (creatinine 
clearance <20 mL/min) or bilateral renal artery steno-
sis. Additional imaging studies are indicated if the scan 
is positive. Doppler ultrasound of the renal arteries pro-
duces reliable estimates of renal blood flow velocity 
and offers the opportunity to track a lesion over time. 
Positive studies usually are confirmed at angiography, 
whereas false-negative results occur frequently, particu-
larly in obese patients. Gadolinium-contrast magnetic 
resonance angiography offers clear images of the proxi-
mal renal artery but may miss distal lesions. An advan-
tage is the opportunity to image the renal arteries with 
an agent that is not nephrotoxic. Contrast arteriography 
remains the “gold standard” for evaluation and iden-
tification of renal artery lesions. Potential risks include 
nephrotoxicity, particularly in patients with diabetes 
mellitus or preexisting renal insufficiency.
Some degree of renal artery obstruction may be 
observed in almost 50% of patients with atherosclerotic 
disease, and there are several approaches for evaluating 
the functional significance of such a lesion to predict the 
effect of vascular repair on blood pressure control and 
renal function. Each approach has varying degrees of 
sensitivity and specificity, and no single test is sufficiently 
reliable to determine a causal relationship between a renal 
artery lesion and hypertension. Functionally significant 
lesions generally occlude more than 70% of the lumen 
of the affected renal artery. On angiography, the pres-
ence of collateral vessels to the ischemic kidney suggests 
a functionally significant lesion. A lateralizing renal vein 
renin ratio (ratio >1.5 of affected side/contralateral 
side) has a 90% predictive value for a lesion that would 
respond to vascular repair; however, the false-negative 
rate for blood pressure control is 50–60%. Measurement 
of the pressure gradient across a renal artery lesion does 
not reliably predict the response to vascular repair.
In the final analysis, a decision concerning vascu-
lar repair versus medical therapy and the type of repair 
procedure should be individualized for each patient. 
Patients with fibromuscular disease have more favorable 
outcomes than do patients with atherosclerotic lesions, 
presumably owing to their younger age, shorter dura-
tion of hypertension, and less systemic disease. Because 
of its low risk-versus-benefit ratio and high success 
rate (improvement or cure of hypertension in 90% of 
patients and restenosis rate of 10%), PTRA is the initial 
treatment of choice for these patients. Surgical revascu-
larization may be undertaken if PTRA is unsuccessful or 
if a branch lesion is present. In atherosclerotic patients, 
vascular repair should be considered if blood pressure 
cannot be controlled adequately despite optimal medical 
therapy or if renal function deteriorates. Surgery may 
be the preferred initial approach for younger athero-
sclerotic patients without comorbid conditions; how-
ever, for most atherosclerotic patients, depending on 
the location of the lesion, the initial approach may be 
PTRA and/or stenting. Surgical revascularization may 
be indicated if these approaches are unsuccessful, the 
vascular lesion is not amenable to PTRA or stenting, 
or concomitant aortic surgery is required, e.g., to repair 
an aneurysm. A National Institutes of Health–sponsored 
prospective, randomized clinical trial is in progress com-
paring medical therapy alone with medical therapy plus 
renal revascularization regarding Cardiovascular Out-
comes for Renal Atherosclerotic Lesions (CORAL).
Primary Aldosteronism
Excess aldosterone production due to primary aldo-
steronism is a potentially curable form of hyperten-
sion. In patients with primary aldosteronism, increased 
aldosterone production is independent of the renin-
angiotensin system, and the consequences are sodium 
retention, hypertension, hypokalemia, and low PRA. 
The reported prevalence of this disorder varies from 
<2% to ∼15% of hypertensive individuals. In part, this 
variation is related to the intensity of screening and the 
criteria for establishing the diagnosis.
History and physical examination provide little 
information about the diagnosis. The age at the time 
of diagnosis is generally the third through fifth decade. 
Hypertension is usually mild to moderate but occasion-
ally may be severe; primary aldosteronism should be 
considered in all patients with refractory hypertension. 
Hypertension in these patients may be associated with 
glucose intolerance. Most patients are asymptomatic, 
although, infrequently, polyuria, polydipsia, paresthesias, 
or muscle weakness may be present as a consequence 
of hypokalemic alkalosis. In a hypertensive patient with 
unprovoked hypokalemia (i.e., unrelated to diuretics, 
vomiting, or diarrhea), the prevalence of primary aldo-
steronism approaches 40–50%. In patients on diuret-
ics, serum potassium <3.1 mmol/L (<3.1 meq/L) also 
raises the possibility of primary aldosteronism; however, 
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
239
serum potassium is an insensitive and nonspecific screen-
ing test. However, serum potassium is normal in ∼25% 
of patients subsequently found to have an aldosterone- 
producing adenoma, and higher percentages of patients 
with other etiologies of primary aldosteronism are not 
hypokalemic. Additionally, hypokalemic hypertension 
may be a consequence of secondary aldosteronism, other 
mineralocorticoid- and glucocorticoid-induced hyper-
tensive disorders, and pheochromocytoma.
The ratio of plasma aldosterone to plasma renin activ-
ity (PA/PRA) is a useful screening test. These measure-
ments preferably are obtained in ambulatory patients in 
the morning. A ratio >30:1 in conjunction with a plasma 
aldosterone concentration >555 pmol/L (>20 ng/dL) 
reportedly has a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 91% 
for an aldosterone-producing adenoma. In a Mayo Clinic 
series, an aldosterone-producing adenoma subsequently 
was confirmed surgically in >90% of hypertensive 
patients with a PA/PRA ratio ≥20 and a plasma aldo-
sterone concentration ≥415 pmol/L (≥15 ng/dL). There 
are, however, several caveats to interpreting the ratio. 
The cutoff for a “high” ratio is laboratory and assay 
dependent. Some antihypertensive agents may affect the 
ratio (e.g., aldosterone antagonists, angiotensin receptor 
antagonists, and ACE inhibitors may increase renin; aldo-
sterone antagonists may increase aldosterone). Current 
recommendations are to withdraw aldosterone antagonists 
for at least 4 weeks before obtaining these measurements, 
with this caveat. The ratio has been reported to be useful 
as a screening test in measurements obtained with patients 
taking their usual antihypertensive medications. A high 
ratio in the absence of an elevated plasma aldosterone 
level is considerably less specific for primary aldosteronism 
since many patients with essential hypertension have low 
renin levels in this setting, particularly African Americans 
and elderly patients. In patients with renal insufficiency, 
the ratio may also be elevated because of decreased aldo-
sterone clearance. In patients with an elevated PA/PRA 
ratio, the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism can be con-
firmed by demonstrating failure to suppress plasma aldo-
sterone to <277 pmol/L (<10 ng/dL) after IV infusion 
of 2 L of isotonic saline over 4 h; post-saline infusion 
plasma aldosterone values between 138 and 277 pmol/L 
(5–10 ng/dL) are not determinant. Alternative confirma-
tory tests include failure to suppress aldosterone (based 
on test-specific criteria) in response to an oral NaCl load, 
fludrocortisone, or captopril.
Several adrenal abnormalities may culminate in the 
syndrome of primary aldosteronism, and appropriate 
therapy depends on the specific etiology. Some 60–70% 
of patients have an aldosterone-producing adrenal ade-
noma. The tumor is almost always unilateral, and most 
often measures <3 cm in diameter. Most of the remain-
der of these patients have bilateral adrenocortical hyper-
plasia (idiopathic hyperaldosteronism). Rarely, primary 
aldosteronism may be caused by an adrenal carcinoma 
or an ectopic malignancy, e.g., ovarian arrhenoblas-
toma. Most aldosterone-producing carcinomas, in con-
trast to adrenal adenomas and hyperplasia, produce 
excessive amounts of other adrenal steroids in addi-
tion to aldosterone. Functional differences in hormone 
secretion may assist in the differential diagnosis. Aldo-
sterone biosynthesis is more responsive to adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH) in patients with adenoma 
and more responsive to angiotensin in patients with 
hyperplasia. Consequently, patients with adenoma tend 
to have higher plasma aldosterone in the early morn-
ing that decreases during the day, reflecting the diurnal 
rhythm of ACTH, whereas plasma aldosterone tends to 
increase with upright posture in patients with hyperpla-
sia, reflecting the normal postural response of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone axis. However, there is some 
overlap in the ability of these measurements to discrimi-
nate between adenoma and hyperplasia.
Adrenal computed tomography (CT) should be car-
ried out in all patients diagnosed with primary aldoste-
ronism. High-resolution CT may identify tumors as 
small as 0.3 cm and is positive for an adrenal tumor 90% 
of the time. If the CT is not diagnostic, an adenoma 
may be detected by adrenal scintigraphy with 6 β-[I131]
iodomethyl-19-norcholesterol after dexamethasone sup-
pression (0.5 mg every 6 h for 7 days); however, this 
technique has decreased sensitivity for adenomas <1.5 cm.
When carried out by an experienced radiologist, 
bilateral adrenal venous sampling for measurement of 
plasma aldosterone is the most accurate means of dif-
ferentiating unilateral from bilateral forms of primary 
aldosteronism. The sensitivity and specificity of adre-
nal venous sampling (95% and 100%, respectively) for 
detecting unilateral aldosterone hypersecretion are supe-
rior to those of adrenal CT; success rates are 90–96%, 
and complication rates are <2.5%. One frequently used 
protocol involves sampling for aldosterone and corti-
sol levels in response to ACTH stimulation. An ipsilat-
eral/contralateral aldosterone ratio >4, with symmetric 
ACTH-stimulated cortisol levels, is indicative of unilat-
eral aldosterone production.
Hypertension generally is responsive to surgery in 
patients with adenoma but not in patients with bilat-
eral adrenal hyperplasia. Unilateral adrenalectomy, 
often done via a laparoscopic approach, is curative in 
40–70% of patients with an adenoma. Surgery should 
be undertaken after blood pressure has been controlled 
and hypokalemia corrected. Transient hypoaldosteron-
ism may occur up to 3 months postoperatively, result-
ing in hyperkalemia. Potassium should be monitored 
during this time, and hyperkalemia should be treated 
with potassium-wasting diuretics and with fludrocor-
tisone, if needed. Patients with bilateral hyperplasia 
should be treated medically. The drug regimen for 
these patients, as well as for patients with an adenoma 
who are poor surgical candidates, should include an 
240
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
aldosterone antagonist and, if necessary, other potas-
sium-sparing diuretics.
Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism is a 
rare, monogenic autosomal dominant disorder character-
ized by moderate to severe hypertension, often occur-
ring at an early age. These patients may have a family 
history of hemorrhagic stroke at a young age. Hypo-
kalemia is usually mild or absent. Normally, angioten-
sin II stimulates aldosterone production by the adrenal 
zona glomerulosa, whereas ACTH stimulates cortisol 
production in the zona fasciculata. Owing to a chime-
ric gene on chromosome 8, ACTH also regulates aldo-
sterone secretion by the zona fasciculata in patients with 
glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism. The con- 
sequence is overproduction in the zona fasciculata of 
both aldosterone and hybrid steroids (18-hydroxycortisol 
and 18-oxocortisol) due to oxidation of cortisol. The 
diagnosis may be established by urine excretion rates of 
these hybrid steroids that are 20 to 30 times normal or 
by direct genetic testing. Therapeutically, suppression 
of ACTH with low-dose glucocorticoids corrects the 
hyperaldosteronism, hypertension, and hypokalemia. 
Spironolactone is also a therapeutic option.
Cushing’s Syndrome
Cushing’s syndrome is related to excess cortisol pro-
duction due either to excess ACTH secretion (from 
a pituitary tumor or an ectopic tumor) or to ACTH-
independent adrenal production of cortisol. Hyperten-
sion occurs in 75–80% of patients with Cushing’s syn-
drome. The mechanism of hypertension may be related 
to stimulation of mineralocorticoid receptors by corti-
sol and increased secretion of other adrenal steroids. If 
clinically suspected based on phenotypic characteristics, 
in patients not taking exogenous glucocorticoids, labo-
ratory screening may be carried out with measurement 
of 24-h excretion rates of urine free cortisol or an over-
night dexamethasone-suppression test. Recent evidence 
suggests that late night salivary cortisol is also a sensi-
tive and convenient screening test. Further evaluation is 
required to confirm the diagnosis and identify the spe-
cific etiology of Cushing’s syndrome. Appropriate ther-
apy depends on the etiology.
Pheochromocytoma
Catecholamine-secreting tumors are located in the adre-
nal medulla (pheochromocytoma) or in extra-adrenal 
paraganglion tissue (paraganglioma) and account for 
hypertension in ∼0.05% of patients. If unrecognized, 
pheochromocytoma may result in lethal cardiovas-
cular consequences. Clinical manifestations, including 
hypertension, are primarily related to increased circu-
lating catecholamines, although some of these tumors 
may secrete a number of other vasoactive substances. In 
a small percentage of patients, epinephrine is the pre-
dominant catecholamine secreted by the tumor, and 
these patients may present with hypotension rather 
than hypertension. The initial suspicion of the diag-
nosis is based on symptoms and/or the association of 
pheochromocytoma with other disorders (Table 19-4). 
Approximately 20% of pheochromocytomas are famil-
ial with autosomal dominant inheritance. Inherited 
pheochromocytomas may be associated with multiple 
endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and type 2B, von 
Hippel-Lindau disease, and neurofibromatosis (Table 19-4). 
Each of these syndromes is related to specific, identifiable 
germ-line mutations. Additionally, mutations of succi-
nate dehydrogenase genes are associated with paragan-
glioma syndromes, generally characterized by head and 
neck paragangliomas. Laboratory testing consists of mea-
suring catecholamines in either urine or plasma. Genetic 
screening is available for evaluating patients and relatives 
suspected of harboring a pheochromocytoma associated 
with a familial syndrome. Surgical excision is the defini-
tive treatment of pheochromocytoma and results in cure 
in ∼90% of patients.
Miscellaneous Causes of 
Hypertension
Hypertension due to obstructive sleep apnea is being 
recognized with increasing frequency. Independent of 
obesity, hypertension occurs in >50% of individuals 
with obstructive sleep apnea. The severity of hyper-
tension correlates with the severity of sleep apnea. 
Approximately 70% of patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea are obese. Hypertension related to obstructive 
sleep apnea also should be considered in patients with 
drug-resistant hypertension and patients with a history 
of snoring. The diagnosis can be confirmed by polysom-
nography. In obese patients, weight loss may alleviate or 
cure sleep apnea and related hypertension. Continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) administered during 
sleep is an effective therapy for obstructive sleep apnea. 
With CPAP, patients with apparently drug-resistant 
hypertension may be more responsive to antihyperten-
sive agents.
Coarctation of the aorta is the most common con-
genital cardiovascular cause of hypertension. The inci-
dence is 1–8 per 1000 live births. It is usually sporadic 
but occurs in 35% of children with Turner syndrome. 
Even when the anatomic lesion is surgically corrected in 
infancy, up to 30% of patients develop subsequent hyper-
tension and are at risk of accelerated coronary artery dis-
ease and cerebrovascular events. Patients with less severe 
lesions may not be diagnosed until young adulthood. 
The physical findings are diagnostic and include dimin-
ished and delayed femoral pulses and a systolic pressure 
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
241
gradient between the right arm and the legs and, depend-
ing on the location of the coarctation, between the right 
and left arms. A blowing systolic murmur may be heard 
in the posterior left interscapular areas. The diagnosis may 
be confirmed by chest x-ray and transesophageal echo-
cardiography. Therapeutic options include surgical repair 
and balloon angioplasty, with or without placement of an 
intravascular stent. Subsequently, many patients do not 
have a normal life expectancy but may have persistent 
hypertension, with death due to ischemic heart disease, 
cerebral hemorrhage, or aortic aneurysm.
Several additional endocrine disorders, including thyroid 
diseases and acromegaly, cause hypertension. Mild diastolic 
hypertension may be a consequence of hypothyroidism, 
whereas hyperthyroidism may result in systolic hyperten-
sion. Hypercalcemia of any etiology, the most common 
being primary hyperparathyroidism, may result in hyper-
tension. Hypertension also may be related to a number of 
prescribed or over-the-counter medications.
Monogenic Hypertension
A number of rare forms of monogenic hypertension 
have been identified (Table 19-4). These disorders 
may be recognized by their characteristic phenotypes, 
and in many instances the diagnosis may be confirmed 
by genetic analysis. Several inherited defects in adrenal 
Table 19-4
Rare Mendelian Forms of Hypertension
Disease
Phenotype
Genetic Cause
Glucocorticoid-remediable  
hyperaldosteronism
Autosomal dominant
Absent or mild hypokalemia
Chimeric 11β-hydroxylase/
aldosterone gene on chromosome 8
17α-hydroxylase deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Males: pseudohermaphroditism
Females: primary amenorrhea, absent  
secondary sexual characteristics
Random mutations of the CYP17 
gene on chromosome 10
11β-hydroxylase deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Masculinization
Mutations of the CYP11B1 gene on 
chromosome 8q21-q22
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency (apparent mineralocorti-
coid excess syndrome)
Autosomal recessive
Hypokalemia, low renin, low aldosterone
Mutations in the 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase gene
Liddle’s syndrome
Autosomal dominant
Hypokalemia, low renin, low aldosterone
Mutation subunits of the epithelial 
sodium channel SCNN1B and 
SCNN1C genes
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II 
(Gordon’s syndrome)
Autosomal dominant
Hyperkalemia, normal glomerular filtration rate
Linkage to chromosomes 1q31-q42 
and 17p11-q21
Hypertension exacerbated in  
pregnancy
Autosomal dominant
Severe hypertension in early pregnancy
Missense mutation with substitution 
of leucine for serine at codon 810 
(MRL810)
Polycystic kidney disease
Autosomal dominant
Large cystic kidneys, renal failure, liver cysts, 
cerebral aneurysms, valvular heart disease
Mutations in the PKD1 gene on 
chromosome 16 and PKD2 gene 
on chromosome 4
Pheochromocytoma
Autosomal dominant
(a) Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2A 
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, hyperpara-
thyroidism
(b) Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B 
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, mucosal 
neuromas, thickened corneal nerves,  
alimentary ganglioneuromatoses,  
marfanoid habitus
(c) von Hippel-Lindau disease 
Retinal angiomas, hemangioblastomas 
of the cerebellum and spinal cord, renal 
cell carcinoma
(d) Neurofibromatosis type 1 
Multiple neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots
(a) Mutations in the RET  
protooncogene
(b) Mutations in the RET  
protooncogene
(c) Mutations in the VHL tumor- 
suppressor gene
(d) Mutations in the NF1 tumor- 
suppressor gene
242
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
steroid biosynthesis and metabolism result in mineralo-
corticoid-induced hypertension and hypokalemia. In 
patients with a 17α-hydroxylase deficiency, synthesis 
of sex hormones and cortisol is decreased (Fig. 19-3). 
Consequently, these individuals do not mature sexually; 
males may present with pseudohermaphroditism and 
females with primary amenorrhea and absent secondary 
sexual characteristics. Because cortisol-induced negative 
feedback on pituitary ACTH production is diminished, 
ACTH-stimulated adrenal steroid synthesis proximal 
to the enzymatic block is increased. Hypertension and 
hypokalemia are consequences of increased synthesis of 
mineralocorticoids proximal to the enzymatic block, 
particularly desoxycorticosterone. Increased steroid pro-
duction and, hence, hypertension may be treated with 
low-dose glucocorticoids. An 11β-hydroxylase defi-
ciency results in a salt-retaining adrenogenital syndrome 
that occurs in 1 in 100,000 live births. This enzymatic 
defect results in decreased cortisol synthesis, increased 
synthesis of mineralocorticoids (e.g., desoxycortico-
sterone), and shunting of steroid biosynthesis into the 
androgen pathway. In the severe form, the syndrome 
may present early in life, including the newborn period, 
with virilization and ambiguous genitalia in females and 
penile enlargement in males, or in older children as pre-
cocious puberty and short stature. Acne, hirsutism, and 
menstrual irregularities may be the presenting features 
when the disorder is first recognized in adolescence or 
early adulthood. Hypertension is less common in the 
late-onset forms. Patients with an 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase deficiency have an impaired capacity to 
metabolize cortisol to its inactive metabolite, cortisone, 
and hypertension is related to activation of mineralocor-
ticoid receptors by cortisol. This defect may be inher-
ited or acquired, due to licorice-containing glycyrrhizin 
acid. The same substance is present in the paste of sev-
eral brands of chewing tobacco. The defect in Liddle’s 
syndrome (Chap. 6) results from constitutive activation 
of amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channels on the 
distal renal tubule, resulting in excess sodium reabsorp-
tion; the syndrome is ameliorated by amiloride. Hyper-
tension exacerbated in pregnancy is due to activation of 
the mineralocorticoid receptor by progesterone.
approach to the 
patient	
Hypertension
History  The initial assessment of a hypertensive 
patient should include a complete history and physi-
cal examination to confirm a diagnosis of hyperten-
sion, screen for other cardiovascular disease risk factors, 
screen for secondary causes of hypertension, identify 
cardiovascular consequences of hypertension and other 
comorbidities, assess blood pressure–related lifestyles, 
and determine the potential for intervention.
Most patients with hypertension have no specific 
symptoms referable to their blood pressure elevation. 
Although popularly considered a symptom of elevated 
arterial pressure, headache generally occurs only in 
patients with severe hypertension. Characteristically, 
a “hypertensive headache” occurs in the morning and
Mineralocorticoid
Glucocorticoid
Androgen
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17 OH Pregnenolone
Deoxycortisol
(17α hydroxylase)
DHEA
Progesterone
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Deoxycorticosterone
17 OH Progesterone
Cortisone
Cortisol
Androstenedione
Testosterone
(21 hydroxylase)
(11β hydroxylase)
(11β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase)
Figure 19-3
Adrenal enzymatic defects.
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
243
is localized to the occipital region. Other nonspecific 
symptoms that may be related to elevated blood pres-
sure include dizziness, palpitations, easy fatigability, and 
impotence. When symptoms are present, they are gener-
ally related to hypertensive cardiovascular disease or to 
manifestations of secondary hypertension. Table 19-5 
lists salient features that should be addressed in obtain-
ing a history from a hypertensive patient.
Measurement 
of 
Blood 
Pressure  
Reliable measurements of blood pressure depend on 
attention to the details of the technique and condi-
tions of the measurement. Proper training of observers, 
positioning of the patient, and selection of cuff size are 
essential. Owing to recent regulations preventing the 
use of mercury because of concerns about its potential 
toxicity, most office measurements are made with aner-
oid sphygmomanometers or with oscillometric devices. 
These instruments should be calibrated periodically, 
and their accuracy confirmed. Before the blood pres-
sure measurement is taken, the individual should be 
seated quietly in a chair (not the exam table) with feet 
on the floor for 5 min in a private, quiet setting with a 
comfortable room temperature. At least two measure-
ments should be made. The center of the cuff should be 
at heart level, and the width of the bladder cuff should 
equal at least 40% of the arm circumference; the length 
of the cuff bladder should be enough to encircle at least 
80% of the arm circumference. It is important to pay 
attention to cuff placement, stethoscope placement, 
and the rate of deflation of the cuff (2 mmHg/s). Systolic 
blood pressure is the first of at least two regular “tap-
ping” Korotkoff sounds, and diastolic blood pressure is 
the point at which the last regular Korotkoff sound is 
heard. In current practice, a diagnosis of hypertension 
generally is based on seated office measurements.
Table 19-5
Patient’s Relevant History
Duration of hypertension
Previous therapies: responses and side effects
Family history of hypertension and cardiovascular disease
Dietary and psychosocial history
Other risk factors: weight change, dyslipidemia, smoking, 
diabetes, physical inactivity
Evidence of secondary hypertension: history of renal  
disease; change in appearance; muscle weakness; spells 
of sweating, palpitations, tremor; erratic sleep, snoring, 
daytime somnolence; symptoms of hypo- or hyperthy-
roidism; use of agents that may increase blood pressure
Evidence of target organ damage: history of TIA, stroke, 
transient blindness; angina, myocardial infarction, con-
gestive heart failure; sexual function 
Other comorbidities
Abbreviation: TIA, transient ischemic attack.
Currently available ambulatory monitors are fully 
automated, use the oscillometric technique, and typi-
cally are programmed to take readings every 15–30 min. 
Twenty-four-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitor-
ing more reliably predicts cardiovascular disease risk 
than do office measurements. However, ambulatory 
monitoring is not used routinely in clinical practice and 
generally is reserved for patients in whom white coat 
hypertension is suspected. The Seventh Report of the 
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) 
has also recommended ambulatory monitoring for treat-
ment resistance, symptomatic hypotension, autonomic 
failure, and episodic hypertension.
Physical Examination  Body habitus, includ-
ing weight and height, should be noted. At the initial 
examination, blood pressure should be measured in 
both arms and preferably in the supine, sitting, and 
standing positions to evaluate for postural hypotension. 
Even if the femoral pulse is normal to palpation, arterial 
pressure should be measured at least once in the lower 
extremity in patients in whom hypertension is discov-
ered before age 30. Heart rate also should be recorded. 
Hypertensive individuals have an increased prevalence 
of atrial fibrillation. The neck should be palpated for an 
enlarged thyroid gland, and patients should be assessed 
for signs of hypo- and hyperthyroidism. Examination of 
blood vessels may provide clues about underlying vas-
cular disease and should include funduscopic examina-
tion, auscultation for bruits over the carotid and femoral 
arteries, and palpation of femoral and pedal pulses. The 
retina is the only tissue in which arteries and arterioles 
can be examined directly. With increasing severity of 
hypertension and atherosclerotic disease, progressive 
funduscopic changes include increased arteriolar light 
reflex, arteriovenous crossing defects, hemorrhages and 
exudates, and, in patients with malignant hypertension, 
papilledema. Examination of the heart may reveal a loud 
second heart sound due to closure of the aortic valve 
and an S4 gallop attributed to atrial contraction against a 
noncompliant left ventricle. Left ventricular hypertrophy 
may be detected by an enlarged, sustained, and laterally 
displaced apical impulse. An abdominal bruit, particu-
larly a bruit that lateralizes and extends throughout sys-
tole into diastole, raises the possibility of renovascular 
hypertension. Kidneys of patients with polycystic kidney 
disease may be palpable in the abdomen. The physical 
examination also should include evaluation for signs of 
CHF and a neurologic examination.
Laboratory Testing  Table 19-6 lists rec-
ommended laboratory tests in the initial evaluation of 
hypertensive patients. Repeat measurements of renal 
function, serum electrolytes, fasting glucose, and lipids 
244
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
may be obtained after the introduction of a new antihy-
pertensive agent and then annually or more frequently 
if clinically indicated. More extensive laboratory testing 
is appropriate for patients with apparent drug-resistant 
hypertension or when the clinical evaluation suggests a 
secondary form of hypertension.
Treatment	
Hypertension
Lifestyle 
Interventions  Implementation 
of lifestyles that favorably affect blood pressure has 
implications for both the prevention and the treatment 
of hypertension. Health-promoting lifestyle modifica-
tions are recommended for individuals with prehyper-
tension and as an adjunct to drug therapy in hyperten-
sive individuals. These interventions should address 
overall cardiovascular disease risk. Although the impact 
of lifestyle interventions on blood pressure is more pro-
nounced in persons with hypertension, in short-term tri-
als, weight loss and reduction of dietary NaCl have been 
shown to prevent the development of hypertension. In 
hypertensive individuals, even if these interventions do 
not produce a sufficient reduction in blood pressure to 
avoid drug therapy, the number of medications or doses 
required for blood pressure control may be reduced. 
Dietary modifications that effectively lower blood pres-
sure are weight loss, reduced NaCl intake, increased 
potassium intake, moderation of alcohol consumption, 
and an overall healthy dietary pattern (Table 19-7).
Prevention and treatment of obesity are important 
for reducing blood pressure and cardiovascular disease 
risk. In short-term trials, even modest weight loss can 
lead to a reduction of blood pressure and an increase 
in insulin sensitivity. Average blood pressure reductions 
of 6.3/3.1 mmHg have been observed with a reduction 
in mean body weight of 9.2 kg. Regular physical activ-
ity facilitates weight loss, decreases blood pressure, 
and reduces the overall risk of cardiovascular disease.  
Blood pressure may be lowered by 30 min of moderately 
intense physical activity, such as brisk walking, 6–7 days a 
week, or by more intense, less frequent workouts.
There is individual variability in the sensitivity of 
blood pressure to NaCl, and this variability may have a 
genetic basis. Based on results of meta-analyses, low-
ering of blood pressure by limiting daily NaCl intake to 
4.4–7.4 g (75–125 meq) results in blood pressure reduc-
tions of 3.7–4.9/0.9–2.9 mmHg in hypertensive individu-
als and lesser reductions in normotensive individuals. 
Dietary NaCl reduction also has been shown to reduce 
the long-term risk of cardiovascular events in adults with 
“prehypertension.” Potassium and calcium supplementa-
tion have inconsistent, modest antihypertensive effects, 
and, independent of blood pressure, potassium supple-
mentation may be associated with reduced stroke mor-
tality. Alcohol use in persons consuming three or more 
drinks per day (a standard drink contains ∼14 g ethanol) 
is associated with higher blood pressures, and a reduc-
tion of alcohol consumption is associated with a reduc-
tion of blood pressure. In patients with advanced renal 
disease, dietary protein restriction may have a modest 
effect in mitigating renal damage by reducing the intra-
renal transmission of systemic arterial pressure.
The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyperten-
sion) trial convincingly demonstrated that over an 
8-week period a diet high in fruits, vegetables, and low-
fat dairy products lowers blood pressure in individuals 
with high-normal blood pressures or mild hypertension. 
Reduction of daily NaCl intake to <6 g (100 meq) aug-
mented the effect of this diet on blood pressure. Fruits 
and vegetables are enriched sources of potassium, mag-
nesium, and fiber, and dairy products are an important 
source of calcium.
Pharmacologic Therapy  Drug therapy 
is recommended for individuals with blood pressures 
Table 19-6
Basic Laboratory Tests for Initial Evaluation
System
Test
Renal
Microscopic urinalysis, albumin excretion, 
serum BUN and/or creatinine
Endocrine
Serum sodium, potassium, calcium, ?TSH
Metabolic
Fasting blood glucose, total cholesterol, 
HDL and LDL (often computed) cholesterol, 
triglycerides
Other
Hematocrit, electrocardiogram
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; HDL, LDL, high-/low-density 
lipoprotein; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Table 19-7
Lifestyle Modifications to Manage 
Hypertension
Weight reduction
Attain and maintain BMI <25 kg/m2
Dietary salt reduction
<6 g NaCl/d
Adapt DASH-type 
dietary plan
Diet rich in fruits, vegetables, 
and low-fat dairy products with 
reduced content of saturated and 
total fat
Moderation of alcohol 
consumption
For those who drink alcohol, con-
sume ≤2 drinks/day in men and 
≤1 drink/day in women
Physical activity
Regular aerobic activity, e.g., brisk 
walking for 30 min/d
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; DASH, Dietary Approaches 
to Stop Hypertension (trial).
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
245
≥140/90 mmHg. The degree of benefit derived from 
antihypertensive agents is related to the magnitude of 
the blood pressure reduction. Lowering systolic blood 
pressure by 10–12 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure 
by 5–6 mmHg confers relative risk reductions of 35–40% 
for stroke and 12–16% for CHD within 5 years of the ini-
tiation of treatment. Risk of heart failure is reduced by 
>50%. Hypertension control is the single most effec-
tive intervention for slowing the rate of progression of 
hypertension-related chronic kidney disease.
There is considerable variation in individual responses 
to different classes of antihypertensive agents, and 
the magnitude of response to any single agent may 
be limited by activation of counterregulatory mecha-
nisms that oppose the hypotensive effect of the agent. 
Most available agents reduce systolic blood pres-
sure by 7–13 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by  
4–8 mmHg when corrected for placebo effect. More 
often than not, combinations of agents, with comple-
mentary antihypertensive mechanisms, are required 
to achieve goal blood pressure reductions. Selection of 
antihypertensive agents and combinations of agents 
should be individualized, taking into account age, 
severity of hypertension, other cardiovascular disease 
risk factors, comorbid conditions, and practical consid-
erations related to cost, side effects, and frequency of 
dosing (Table 19-8).
Diuretics  Low-dose thiazide diuretics often are used 
as first-line agents alone or in combination with other 
antihypertensive drugs. Thiazides inhibit the Na+/Cl− 
pump in the distal convoluted tubule and hence 
increase sodium excretion. In the long term, they also 
may act as vasodilators. Thiazides are safe, efficacious, 
inexpensive, and reduce clinical events. They provide 
additive blood pressure–lowering effects when com-
bined with beta blockers, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), or angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs). In contrast, addition of a diuretic to a 
calcium channel blocker is less effective. Usual doses of 
hydrochlorothiazide range from 6.25–50 mg/d. Owing 
to an increased incidence of metabolic side effects 
(hypokalemia, insulin resistance, increased choles-
terol), higher doses generally are not recommended. 
Two potassium-sparing diuretics, amiloride and triam-
terene, act by inhibiting epithelial sodium channels in 
the distal nephron. These agents are weak antihyper-
tensive agents but may be used in combination with a 
thiazide to protect against hypokalemia. The main phar-
macologic target for loop diuretics is the Na+-K+-2Cl− 
cotransporter in the thick ascending limb of the loop 
of Henle. Loop diuretics generally are reserved for 
hypertensive patients with reduced glomerular filtra-
tion rates [reflected in serum creatinine >220 μmol/L 
(>2.5 mg/dL)], CHF, or sodium retention and edema for 
some other reason, such as treatment with a potent 
vasodilator, e.g., minoxidil.
Blockers of the Renin-Angiotensin System
ACEIs decrease the production of angiotensin II, 
increase bradykinin levels, and reduce sympathetic 
nervous system activity. ARBs provide selective block-
ade of AT1 receptors, and the effect of angiotensin II on 
unblocked AT2 receptors may augment their hypoten-
sive effect. Both classes of agents are effective antihy-
pertensive agents that may be used as monotherapy 
or in combination with diuretics, calcium antagonists, 
and alpha blocking agents. ACEIs and ARBs have been 
shown to improve insulin action and ameliorate the 
adverse effects of diuretics on glucose metabolism. 
Although the overall impact on the incidence of dia-
betes is modest, compared with amlodipine (a cal-
cium antagonist), valsartan (an ARB) has been shown 
to reduce the risk of developing diabetes in high-risk 
hypertensive patients. ACEI/ARB combinations are 
less effective in lowering blood pressure than is the 
case when either class of these agents is used in com-
bination with other classes of agents. In patients with 
vascular disease or a high risk of diabetes, combina-
tion ACEI/ARB therapy has been associated with more 
adverse events (e.g., cardiovascular death, myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and hospitalization for heart failure) 
without increases in benefit. However, in hypertensive 
patients with proteinuria, preliminary data suggest that 
reduction of proteinuria with ACEI/ARB combination 
treatment may be more effective than treatment with 
either agent alone.
Side effects of ACEIs and ARBs include functional 
renal insufficiency due to efferent renal arteriolar dila-
tion in a kidney with a stenotic lesion of the renal artery. 
Additional predisposing conditions to renal insuffi-
ciency induced by these agents include dehydration, 
CHF, and use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
Dry cough occurs in ∼15% of patients, and angioedema 
occurs in <1% of patients taking ACEIs. Angioedema 
occurs most commonly in individuals of Asian ori-
gin and more commonly in African Americans than in 
whites. Hyperkalemia due to hypoaldosteronism is an 
occasional side effect of both ACEIs and ARBs.
A new approach to blocking the renin-angiotensin 
system has been introduced into clinical practice for the 
treatment of hypertension: direct renin inhibitors. Block-
ade of the renin-angiotensin system is more complete 
with renin inhibitors than with ACEIs or ARBs. Aliskiren is 
the first of a class of oral, nonpeptide competitive inhibi-
tors of the enzymatic activity of renin. Monotherapy 
with aliskiren seems to be as effective as an ACEI or ARB 
for lowering blood pressure, but not more effective. Fur-
ther blood reductions may be achieved when aliskiren 
is used in combination with a thiazide diuretic, an ACEI, 
246
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
Table 19-8
Examples of Oral Drugs Used in Treatment of Hypertension
Drug Class
Examples
Usual Total Daily 
Dosea (Dosing 
Frequency/Day)
Other Indications
Contraindications/
Cautions
Diuretics
Thiazides
Loop diuretics
Aldosterone  
antagonists
K+ retaining
Hydrochlorothiazide
Chlorthalidone
Furosemide
Ethacrynic acid
Spironolactone
Eplerenone
Amiloride
Triamterene
6.25–50 mg (1–2)
25–50 mg (1)
40–80 mg (2–3)
50–100 mg (2–3)
25–100 mg (1–2)
50–100 mg (1–2)
5–10 mg (1–2)
50–100 mg (1–2)
CHF due to systolic 
dysfunction, renal 
failure
CHF due to systolic 
dysfunction, primary 
aldosteronism
Diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
hyperuricemia, gout, 
hypokalemia
Diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
hyperuricemia, gout, 
hypokalemia
Renal failure, hyperkalemia
Renal failure, hyperkalemia
Beta blockers
Cardioselective
Nonselective
Combined alpha/
beta
Atenolol
Metoprolol
Propranolol
Propranolol LA
Labetalol
Carvedilol
25–100 mg (1)
25–100 mg (1–2)
40–160 mg (2)
60–180 (1)
200–800 mg (2)
12.5–50 mg (2)
Angina, CHF due to 
systolic dysfunction, 
post-MI, sinus  
tachycardia, ventric-
ular tachyarrhythmias
?Post-MI, CHF
Asthma, COPD, 2nd- or 
3rd-degree heart block, 
sick-sinus syndrome
Alpha antagonists
Selective
Nonselective
Prazosin
Doxazosin
Terazosin
Phenoxybenzamine
2–20 mg (2–3)
1–16 mg (1)
1–10 mg (1–2)
20–120 mg (2–3)
Prostatism
Pheochromocytoma
Sympatholytics
Central
Clonidine
Clonidine patch
Methyldopa
Reserpine
Guanfacine
0.1–0.6 mg (2)
0.1–0.3 mg (1/week)
250–1000 mg (2)
0.05–0.25 mg (1)
0.5–2 mg (1)
ACE inhibitors
Captopril
Lisinopril
Ramipril
25–200 mg (2)
10–40 mg (1)
2.5–20 mg (1–2)
Post-MI, coronary 
syndromes, CHF with 
low ejection fraction, 
nephropathy
Acute renal failure,  
bilateral renal artery  
stenosis, pregnancy, 
hyperkalemia
Angiotensin II antago-
nists
Losartan
Valsartan
Candesartan
25–100 mg (1–2)
80–320 mg (1)
2–32 mg (1–2)
CHF with low  
ejection fraction, 
nephropathy, ACE 
inhibitor cough
Renal failure, bilateral  
renal artery stenosis, 
pregnancy, hyperkalemia
Renin inhibitors
Aliskiren
150–300 mg (1)
Diabetic nephropathy
Pregnancy
Calcium antagonists
Dihydropyridines
Nondihydropyri-
dines
Nifedipine (long acting)
Verapamil (long acting)
Diltiazem (long acting)
30–60 mg (1)
120–360 mg (1–2)
180-420 mg (1)
Post-MI, supraven-
tricular tachycardias, 
angina
2nd- or 3rd-degree heart 
block
Direct vasodilators
Hydralazine
Minoxidil
25–100 mg (2)
2.5–80 mg (1–2)
Severe coronary artery 
disease
aAt the initiation of therapy, lower doses may be preferable for elderly patients and for select combinations of antihypertensive agents.
Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; MI, myo-
cardial infarction.
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
247
an ARB, or calcium antagonists. Currently, aliskiren is not 
considered a first-line antihypertensive agent.
Aldosterone 
Antagonists  Spironolactone is 
a nonselective aldosterone antagonist that may be 
used alone or in combination with a thiazide diuretic. 
It may be a particularly effective agent in patients with 
low-renin essential hypertension, resistant hyperten-
sion, and primary aldosteronism. In patients with CHF, 
low-dose spironolactone reduces mortality and hos-
pitalizations for heart failure when given in addition 
to conventional therapy with ACEIs, digoxin, and loop 
diuretics. Because spironolactone binds to progester-
one and androgen receptors, side effects may include 
gynecomastia, impotence, and menstrual abnormalities. 
These side effects are circumvented by a newer agent, 
eplerenone, which is a selective aldosterone antagonist. 
Eplerenone has recently been approved in the United 
States for the treatment of hypertension.
Beta 
Blockers  β-Adrenergic receptor blockers 
lower blood pressure by decreasing cardiac output 
due to a reduction of heart rate and contractility. Other 
proposed mechanisms by which beta blockers lower 
blood pressure include a central nervous system effect 
and inhibition of renin release. Beta blockers are par-
ticularly effective in hypertensive patients with tachy-
cardia, and their hypotensive potency is enhanced by 
coadministration with a diuretic. In lower doses, some 
beta blockers selectively inhibit cardiac β1 receptors 
and have less influence on β2 receptors on bronchial 
and vascular smooth muscle cells; however, there seems 
to be no difference in the antihypertensive potencies 
of cardioselective and nonselective beta blockers. Cer-
tain beta blockers have intrinsic sympathomimetic 
activity, and it is uncertain whether this constitutes an 
overall advantage or disadvantage in cardiac therapy. 
Beta blockers without intrinsic sympathomimetic activ-
ity decrease the rate of sudden death, overall mortality, 
and recurrent myocardial infarction. In patients with 
CHF, beta blockers have been shown to reduce the risks 
of hospitalization and mortality. Carvedilol and labet-
alol block both β receptors and peripheral α-adrenergic 
receptors. The potential advantages of combined β- and 
α-adrenergic blockade in treating hypertension remain 
to be determined.
`-Adrenergic Blockers  Postsynaptic, selective 
α-adrenoreceptor antagonists lower blood pressure 
by decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. They are 
effective antihypertensive agents used either as mono-
therapy or in combination with other agents. However, 
in clinical trials of hypertensive patients, alpha block-
ade has not been shown to reduce cardiovascular mor-
bidity and mortality or to provide as much protection 
against CHF as other classes of antihypertensive agents.  
These agents are also effective in treating lower urinary 
tract symptoms in men with prostatic hypertrophy. Non-
selective α-adrenoreceptor antagonists bind to postsyn-
aptic and presynaptic receptors and are used primarily for 
the management of patients with pheochromocytoma.
Sympatholytic Agents  Centrally acting α2 sym-
pathetic agonists decrease peripheral resistance by 
inhibiting sympathetic outflow. They may be particu-
larly useful in patients with autonomic neuropathy who 
have wide variations in blood pressure due to barore-
ceptor denervation. Drawbacks include somnolence, 
dry mouth, and rebound hypertension on withdrawal. 
Peripheral sympatholytics decrease peripheral resis-
tance and venous constriction by depleting nerve ter-
minal norepinephrine. Although they are potentially 
effective antihypertensive agents, their usefulness is lim-
ited by orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction, and 
numerous drug-drug interactions.
Calcium Channel Blockers  Calcium antago-
nists reduce vascular resistance through L-channel 
blockade, which reduces intracellular calcium and 
blunts vasoconstriction. This is a heterogeneous group 
of agents that includes drugs in the following three 
classes: phenylalkylamines (verapamil), benzothiaze-
pines (diltiazem), and 1,4-dihydropyridines (nifedipine-
like). Used alone and in combination with other agents 
(ACEIs, beta blockers, α1-adrenergic blockers), calcium 
antagonists effectively lower blood pressure; however, 
it is unclear if adding a diuretic to a calcium blocker 
results in a further lowering of blood pressure. Side 
effects of flushing, headache, and edema with dihydro-
pyridine use are related to their potencies as arteriolar 
dilators; edema is due to an increase in transcapillary 
pressure gradients, not to net salt and water retention.
Direct Vasodilators  Direct vasodilators decrease 
peripheral resistance and concomitantly activate mecha-
nisms that defend arterial pressure, notably the sympa-
thetic nervous system, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system, and sodium retention. Usually, they are not 
considered first-line agents but are most effective when 
added to a combination that includes a diuretic and a 
beta blocker. Hydralazine is a potent direct vasodilator 
that has antioxidant and nitric oxide–enhancing actions, 
and minoxidil is a particularly potent agent and is used 
most frequently in patients with renal insufficiency who 
are refractory to all other drugs. Hydralazine may induce 
a lupus-like syndrome, and side effects of minoxidil 
include hypertrichosis and pericardial effusion.
Comparisons of Antihypertensives  
Based on pooling results from clinical trials, meta- 
analyses of the efficacy of different classes of antihy-
pertensive agents suggest essentially equivalent blood 
248
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
pressure–lowering effects of the following six major 
classes of antihypertensive agents when used as mono-
therapy: thiazide diuretics, beta blockers, ACEIs, ARBs, 
calcium antagonists, and α2 blockers. On average, stan-
dard doses of most antihypertensive agents reduce 
blood pressure by 8–10/4–7 mmHg; however, there may 
be subgroup differences in responsiveness. Younger 
patients may be more responsive to beta blockers 
and ACEIs, whereas patients over age 50 may be more 
responsive to diuretics and calcium antagonists. There is 
a limited relationship between plasma renin and blood 
pressure response. Patients with high-renin hyperten-
sion may be more responsive to ACEIs and ARBs than 
to other classes of agents, whereas patients with low-
renin hypertension are more responsive to diuretics and 
calcium antagonists. Hypertensive African Americans 
tend to have low renin and may require higher doses 
of ACEIs and ARBs than whites for optimal blood pres-
sure control, although this difference is abolished when 
these agents are combined with a diuretic. Beta block-
ers also appear to be less effective than thiazide diuret-
ics in African Americans than in non-African Americans. 
Identification of genetic variants that influence blood 
pressure responsiveness would potentially provide a 
rational basis for the selection of a specific class of an 
antihypertensive agent in an individual patient. Early 
pharmacogenetic studies, utilizing either a candidate 
gene approach or genomewide scans, have shown 
associations of gene polymorphisms with blood pres-
sure responsiveness to specific antihypertensive drugs. 
However, the reported effects have generally been too 
small to affect clinical decisions, and associated poly-
morphisms remain to be confirmed in subsequent 
studies. Currently, in practical terms, the presence of 
comorbidities often influences the selection of antihy-
pertensive agents.
A recent meta-analysis of more than 30 random-
ized trials of blood pressure–lowering therapy indi-
cates that for a given reduction in blood pressure, the 
major drug classes seem to produce similar overall net 
effects on total cardiovascular events. In both nondia-
betic and diabetic hypertensive patients, most trials 
have failed to show significant differences in cardiovas-
cular outcomes with different drug regimens as long as 
equivalent decreases in blood pressure were achieved. 
For example, the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering 
Treatment to prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) dem-
onstrated that the occurrence of coronary heart dis-
ease death and nonfatal myocardial infarction, as well 
as overall mortality, was virtually identical in hyper-
tensive patients treated with either an ACEI (lisinopril), 
a diuretic (chlorthalidone), or a calcium antagonist 
(amlodipine).
However, in specific patient groups, ACEIs may have 
particular advantages, beyond that of blood pressure 
control, in reducing cardiovascular and renal outcomes. 
ACEIs and ARBs decrease intraglomerular pressure and 
proteinuria and may retard the rate of progression of 
renal insufficiency, not totally accounted for by their 
hypotensive effects, in both diabetic and nondiabetic 
renal diseases. Among African Americans with hyper-
tension-related renal disease, ACEIs appear to be more 
effective than beta blockers or dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blockers in slowing, although not preventing, 
the decline of glomerular filtration rate. In experimen-
tal models of hypertension and diabetes, renal protec-
tion with aliskiren (a renin inhibitor) was comparable 
to that with ACEIs and ARBs. Independent of its blood 
pressure–lowering effect, aliskiren has renal protective 
effects in patients with hypertension, type 2 diabetes, 
and nephropathy. The renoprotective effect of these 
renin-angiotensin blockers, compared with other anti-
hypertensive drugs, is less obvious at lower blood pres-
sures. In most patients with hypertension and heart 
failure due to systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction, the 
use of diuretics, ACEIs or ARBs, and beta blockers is rec-
ommended to improve survival. Independent of blood 
pressure, in both hypertensive and normotensive indi-
viduals, ACEIs attenuate the development of left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, improve symptomatology and risk 
of death from CHF, and reduce morbidity and mortal-
ity rates in post–myocardial infarction patients. Similar 
benefits in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality rates 
in patients with CHF have been observed with the use 
of ARBs. ACEIs provide better coronary protection than 
do calcium channel blockers, whereas calcium channel 
blockers provide more stroke protection than do either 
ACEIs or beta blockers. Results of a recent large, double-
blind prospective clinical trial [Rationale and Design of 
the Avoiding Cardiovascular Events through Combina-
tion Therapy in Patients Living with Systolic Hyperten-
sion (ACCOMPLISH Trial)] indicated that combination 
treatment with an ACEI (benazepril) plus a calcium 
antagonist (amlodipine) was superior to treatment with 
the ACEI plus a diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide) in reduc-
ing the risk of cardiovascular events and death among 
high-risk patients with hypertension. However, the com-
bination of an ACEI and a diuretic has recently been 
shown to produce major reductions in morbidity and 
mortality in the very elderly.
After a stroke, combination therapy with an ACEI 
and a diuretic, but not with an ARB, reduces the rate of 
recurrent stroke. Some of these apparent differences 
may reflect differences in trial design and/or patient 
groups.
Blood Pressure Goals of Antihyper-
tensive Therapy  Based on clinical trial data, the 
maximum protection against combined cardiovascular 
endpoints is achieved with pressures <135–140 mmHg 
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
249
for systolic blood pressure and <80–85 mmHg for 
diastolic blood pressure; however, treatment has not 
reduced cardiovascular disease risk to the level in non-
hypertensive individuals. More aggressive blood pres-
sure targets for blood pressure control (e.g., office or 
clinic blood pressure <130/80 mmHg) are generally rec-
ommended for patients with diabetes, coronary heart 
disease, chronic kidney disease, or additional cardio-
vascular disease risk factors. An even lower goal blood 
pressure (systolic blood pressure ∼120 mmHg) may be 
desirable for patients with proteinuria (>1 g/d) since 
the decline of glomerular filtration rate in these patients 
is particularly blood pressure–dependent. In diabetic 
patients, effective blood pressure control reduces the 
risk of cardiovascular events and death as well as the risk 
for microvascular disease (nephropathy, retinopathy). 
Risk reduction is greater in diabetic than in nondiabetic 
individuals. Although the optimal target blood pres-
sure in patients with heart failure has not been estab-
lished, a reasonable goal is the lowest blood pressure 
that is not associated with evidence of hypoperfusion.
To achieve recommended blood pressure goals,  
the majority of individuals with hypertension will 
require treatment with more than one drug. Three or 
more drugs frequently are needed in patients with dia-
betes and renal insufficiency. For most agents, reduction 
of blood pressure at half-standard doses is only ∼20% 
less than at standard doses. Appropriate combinations 
of agents at these lower doses may have additive or 
almost additive effects on blood pressure with a lower 
incidence of side effects.
Despite theoretical concerns about decreasing cere-
bral, coronary, and renal blood flow by overly aggres-
sive antihypertensive therapy, clinical trials have found 
no evidence for a “J-curve” phenomenon; i.e., at blood 
pressure reductions achieved in clinical practice, there 
does not appear to be a lower threshold for increasing 
cardiovascular risk. A small nonprogressive increase in 
the serum creatinine concentration with blood pres-
sure reduction may occur in patients with chronic 
renal insufficiency. This generally reflects a hemody-
namic response, not structural renal injury, indicat-
ing that intraglomerular pressure has been reduced. 
Blood pressure control should not be allowed to 
deteriorate in order to prevent a modest rise in creati-
nine. Even among older patients with isolated systolic 
hypertension, further lowering of diastolic blood pres-
sure does not result in harm. However, relatively little 
information is available concerning the risk-versus-
benefit ratio of antihypertensive therapy in individuals  
>80 years, and in this population, gradual blood pres-
sure reduction to less aggressive target levels of control 
may be appropriate.
The term resistant hypertension refers to patients with 
blood pressures persistently >140/90 mmHg despite 
taking three or more antihypertensive agents, includ-
ing a diuretic, in a reasonable combination and at full 
doses. Resistant or difficult-to-control hypertension is 
more common in patients >60 years than in younger 
patients. Resistant hypertension may be related to 
“pseudoresistance” (high office blood pressures and 
lower home blood pressures), nonadherence to ther-
apy, identifiable causes of hypertension (including 
obesity and excessive alcohol intake), and the use of 
any of a number of nonprescription and prescription 
drugs (Table 19-3). Rarely, in older patients, pseudohy-
pertension may be related to the inability to measure 
blood pressure accurately in severely sclerotic arteries. 
This condition is suggested if the radial pulse remains 
palpable despite occlusion of the brachial artery by the 
cuff (Osler maneuver). The actual blood pressure can be 
determined by direct intra-arterial measurement. Evalu-
ation of patients with resistant hypertension might 
include home blood pressure monitoring to determine 
if office blood pressures are representative of the usual 
blood pressure. A more extensive evaluation for a sec-
ondary form of hypertension should be undertaken 
if no other explanation for hypertension resistance 
becomes apparent.
Hypertensive Emergencies  Probably due 
to the widespread availability of antihypertensive ther-
apy, in the United States there has been a decline in the 
numbers of patients presenting with “crisis levels” of 
blood pressure. Most patients who present with severe 
hypertension are chronically hypertensive, and in the 
absence of acute end organ damage, precipitous lower-
ing of blood pressure may be associated with significant 
morbidity and should be avoided. The key to successful 
management of severe hypertension is to differentiate 
hypertensive crises from hypertensive urgencies. The 
degree of target organ damage, rather than the level 
of blood pressure alone, determines the rapidity with 
which blood pressure should be lowered. Tables 19-9 
and 19-10 list a number of hypertension-related emer-
gencies and recommended therapies.
Malignant hypertension is a syndrome associated with 
an abrupt increase of blood pressure in a patient with 
underlying hypertension or related to the sudden onset 
of hypertension in a previously normotensive individual. 
The absolute level of blood pressure is not as impor-
tant as its rate of rise. Pathologically, the syndrome is 
associated with diffuse necrotizing vasculitis, arteriolar 
thrombi, and fibrin deposition in arteriolar walls. Fibri-
noid necrosis has been observed in arterioles of kidney, 
brain, retina, and other organs. Clinically, the syndrome 
is recognized by progressive retinopathy (arteriolar 
spasm, hemorrhages, exudates, and papilledema), dete-
riorating renal function with proteinuria, microangio-
pathic hemolytic anemia, and encephalopathy. In these 
250
Section V
Renal Vascular Disease
patients, historic inquiry should include questions about 
the use of monamine oxidase inhibitors and recre-
ational drugs (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines).
Although blood pressure should be lowered rap-
idly in patients with hypertensive encephalopathy, 
there are inherent risks of overly aggressive therapy. 
In hypertensive individuals, the upper and lower limits 
of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow are shifted to 
higher levels of arterial pressure, and rapid lowering of 
blood pressure to below the lower limit of autoregula-
tion may precipitate cerebral ischemia or infarction as 
a consequence of decreased cerebral blood flow. Renal 
and coronary blood flows also may decrease with overly 
aggressive acute therapy. The initial goal of therapy is to 
reduce mean arterial blood pressure by no more than 
25% within minutes to 2 h or to a blood pressure in 
the range of 160/100–110 mmHg. This may be accom-
plished with IV nitroprusside, a short-acting vasodilator 
with a rapid onset of action that allows for minute-to-
minute control of blood pressure. Parenteral labetalol 
and nicardipine are also effective agents for the treat-
ment of hypertensive encephalopathy.
In patients with malignant hypertension without 
encephalopathy or another catastrophic event, it is 
preferable to reduce blood pressure over hours or 
longer rather than minutes. This goal may effectively 
be achieved initially with frequent dosing of short-
acting oral agents such as captopril, clonidine, and 
labetalol.
Acute, transient blood pressure elevations that last 
days to weeks frequently occur after thrombotic and 
hemorrhagic strokes. Autoregulation of cerebral blood 
flow is impaired in ischemic cerebral tissue, and higher 
arterial pressures may be required to maintain cerebral 
blood flow. Although specific blood pressure targets 
have not been defined for patients with acute cerebro-
vascular events, aggressive reductions of blood pres-
sure are to be avoided. With the increasing availability 
of improved methods for measuring cerebral blood flow 
(using CT technology), studies are in progress to evalu-
ate the effects of different classes of antihypertensive 
agents on both blood pressure and cerebral blood flow 
after an acute stroke. Currently, in the absence of other 
indications for acute therapy, for patients with cerebral 
infarction who are not candidates for thrombolytic ther-
apy, one recommended guideline is to institute antihy-
pertensive therapy only for patients with a systolic blood 
pressure >220 mmHg or a diastolic blood pressure >130 
mmHg. If thrombolytic therapy is to be used, the rec-
ommended goal blood pressure is <185 mmHg systolic 
pressure and <110 mmHg diastolic pressure. In patients 
with hemorrhagic stroke, suggested guidelines for initi-
ating antihypertensive therapy are systolic >180 mmHg 
or diastolic pressure >130 mmHg. The management
Table 19-10
Usual Intravenous Doses of Antihypertensive 
Agents Used in Hypertensive Emergenciesa
Antihypertensive 
Agent
Intravenous Dose
Nitroprusside
Initial 0.3 (μg/kg)/min; usual 2–4 (μg/
kg)/min; maximum 10 (μg/kg)/min 
for 10 min
Nicardipine
Initial 5 mg/h; titrate by 2.5 mg/h at 
5–15 min intervals; max 15 mg/h
Labetalol
2 mg/min up to 300 mg or 20 mg 
over 2 min, then 40–80 mg at 
10-min intervals up to 300 mg total
Enalaprilat
Usual 0.625–1.25 mg over 5 min 
every 6–8 h; maximum 5 mg/dose
Esmolol
Initial 80–500 μg/kg over 1 min, then 
50–300 (μg/kg)/min
Phentolamine
5–15 mg bolus
Nitroglycerin
Initial 5 μg/min, then titrate by 
5 μg/min at 3–5-min intervals; if 
no response is seen at 20 μg/min, 
incremental increases of  
10–20 μg/min may be used
Hydralazine
10–50 mg at 30-min intervals
aConstant blood pressure monitoring is required. Start with the low-
est dose. Subsequent doses and intervals of administration should 
be adjusted according to the blood pressure response and duration 
of action of the specific agent.
Table 19-9
Preferred Parenteral Drugs for Selected 
Hypertensive Emergencies
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Nitroprusside, nicardipine, 
labetalol
Malignant hypertension (when 
IV therapy is indicated)
Labetalol, nicardipine, 
nitroprusside, enalaprilat
Stroke
Nicardipine, labetalol, 
nitroprusside
Myocardial infarction/unstable 
angina
Nitroglycerin, nicardipine, 
labetalol, esmolol
Acute left ventricular failure
Nitroglycerin, enalaprilat, 
loop diuretics
Aortic dissection
Nitroprusside, esmolol, 
labetalol
Adrenergic crisis
Phentolamine, nitroprusside
Postoperative hypertension
Nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, 
labetalol, nicardipine
Preeclampsia/eclampsia of 
pregnancy
Hydralazine, labetalol, 
nicardipine
Source: Adapted from DG Vidt, in S Oparil, MA Weber (eds): Hyper-
tension, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
 
CHAPTER 19
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
251
of hypertension after subarachnoid hemorrhage is con-
troversial. Cautious reduction of blood pressure is indi-
cated if mean arterial pressure is >130 mmHg.
In addition to pheochromocytoma, an adrenergic 
crisis due to catecholamine excess may be related to
cocaine or amphetamine overdose, clonidine with-
drawal, acute spinal cord injuries, and an interaction 
of tyramine-containing compounds with monamine 
oxidase inhibitors. These patients may be treated with 
phentolamine or nitroprusside. 
This page intentionally left blank 
Section VI
Urinary Tract 
Infections and 
Obstruction
 Kalpana Gupta  I   barbara W. Trautner 
254
 Urinary tract infection (UTI) is a common and painful 
human illness that, fortunately, is rapidly responsive to 
modern antibiotic therapy. In the preantibiotic era, UTI 
caused signifi cant morbidity. Hippocrates, writing about 
a disease that appears to have been acute cystitis, said 
that the illness could last for a year before either resolv-
ing or worsening to involve the kidneys. When chemo-
therapeutic agents used to treat UTI were introduced in 
the early twentieth century, they were relatively inef-
fective, and persistence of infection after 3 weeks of 
therapy was common. Nitrofurantoin, which became 
available in the 1950s, was the fi rst tolerable and effec-
tive agent for the treatment of UTI. 
 Since the most common manifestation of UTI is 
acute cystitis, and since acute cystitis is far more prev-
alent among women than among men, most clinical 
research on UTI has involved women. Many studies 
have enrolled women from college campuses or large 
health maintenance organizations in the United States. 
Therefore, when reviewing the literature and recom-
mendations concerning UTI, clinicians must consider 
whether the fi ndings are applicable to their patient 
populations. 
 DefinitionS 
 UTI may be asymptomatic (subclinical infection) or 
symptomatic (disease). Thus, the term  UTI encompasses 
a variety of clinical entities, including asymptomatic bac-
teriuria (ABU), cystitis, prostatitis, and pyelonephritis. 
The distinction between symptomatic UTI and ABU 
has major clinical implications. Both UTI and ABU 
connote the presence of bacteria in the urinary tract, 
usually accompanied by white blood cells and infl am-
matory cytokines in the urine. However, ABU occurs 
in the absence of symptoms attributable to the bacteria 
in the urinary tract and does not usually require treat-
ment, while UTI has more typically been assumed to 
imply symptomatic disease that warrants antimicrobial 
therapy. Much of the literature concerning UTI, partic-
ularly catheter-associated infection, does not differenti-
ate between UTI and ABU. In this chapter, the term 
UTI denotes symptomatic disease;  cystitis , symptomatic 
infection of the bladder; and  pyelonephritis , symptom-
atic infection of the kidneys.  Uncomplicated UTI refers 
to acute cystitis or pyelonephritis in nonpregnant out-
patient women without anatomic abnormalities or 
instrumentation of the urinary tract;  complicated UTI is a 
catch-all term that encompasses all other types of UTI. 
Recurrent UTI is not necessarily complicated; individ-
ual episodes can be uncomplicated and treated as such. 
Catheter-associated bacteriuria can be either symptomatic 
(CAUTI) or asymptomatic. 
 ePiDemiology anD riSK factorS 
 Except among infants and the elderly, UTI occurs far 
more commonly in females than in males. During the 
neonatal period, the incidence of UTI is slightly higher 
among males than among females because male infants 
more commonly have congenital urinary tract anoma-
lies. After 50 years of age, obstruction from prostatic 
hypertrophy becomes common in men, and the inci-
dence of UTI is almost as high among men as among 
women. Between 1 year and ∼50 years of age, UTI and 
recurrent UTI are predominantly diseases of females. 
The prevalence of ABU is ∼5% among women between 
ages 20 and 40 and may be as high as 40–50% among 
elderly women and men. 
 As many as 50–80% of women in the general popu-
lation acquire at least one UTI during their lifetime—
uncomplicated cystitis in most cases. Recent use of a 
 URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS, 
PYELONEPHRITIS, AND PROSTATITIS 
 CHAPTER 20 
 
CHAPTER 20
Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and Prostatitis
255
diaphragm with spermicide, frequent sexual intercourse, 
and a history of UTI are independent risk factors for 
acute cystitis. Cystitis is temporally related to recent 
sexual intercourse, with a sixtyfold increase in the rela-
tive odds of acute cystitis in the 48 h after intercourse. 
In healthy postmenopausal women, sexual activity, dia-
betes mellitus, and incontinence are risk factors for UTI.
Many factors predisposing women to cystitis also 
increase the risk of pyelonephritis. Factors indepen-
dently associated with pyelonephritis in young healthy 
women include frequent sexual intercourse, a new sex-
ual partner, a UTI in the previous 12 months, a mater-
nal history of UTI, diabetes, and incontinence. The 
common risk factors for cystitis and pyelonephritis are 
not surprising given that pyelonephritis typically arises 
through the ascent of bacteria from the bladder to the 
upper urinary tract. However, pyelonephritis can occur 
without clear antecedent cystitis.
About 20–30% of women who have had one epi-
sode of UTI will have recurrent episodes. Early recur-
rence (within 2 weeks) is usually regarded as relapse 
rather than reinfection and may indicate the need to 
evaluate the patient for a sequestered focus. Intracellular 
pods of infecting organisms within the bladder epithe-
lium have been demonstrated in animal models of UTI, 
but the importance of this phenomenon in humans is 
not yet clear. The rate of recurrence ranges from 0.3 to 
7.6 infections per patient per year, with an average of 
2.6 infections per year. It is not uncommon for mul-
tiple recurrences to follow an initial infection, result-
ing in clustering of episodes. Clustering may be related 
temporally to the presence of a new risk factor or to 
the sloughing of the protective outer bladder epithelial 
layer in response to bacterial attachment during acute 
cystitis. The likelihood of a recurrence decreases with 
increasing time since the last infection. A case-control 
study of predominantly white premenopausal women 
with recurrent UTI identified frequent sexual inter-
course, use of spermicide, a new sexual partner, a first 
UTI before 15 years of age, and a maternal history of 
UTI as independent risk factors for recurrent UTI. The 
only consistently documented behavioral risk factors 
for recurrent UTI include frequent sexual intercourse 
and spermicide use. In postmenopausal women, ana-
tomic factors affecting bladder emptying, such as cysto-
celes, urinary incontinence, and residual urine, are most 
strongly associated with recurrent UTI.
In pregnant women, ABU has clinical consequences, 
and both screening for and treatment of this condition 
are indicated. Specifically, ABU during pregnancy is 
associated with preterm birth and perinatal mortality 
for the fetus and with pyelonephritis for the mother. A 
Cochrane meta-analysis found that treatment of ABU 
in pregnant women decreased the risk of pyelonephritis 
by 75%.
The majority of men with UTI have a functional or 
anatomic abnormality of the urinary tract, most commonly 
urinary obstruction secondary to prostatic hypertrophy. 
That said, not all men with UTI have detectable urinary 
abnormalities; this point is particularly relevant for men 
≤45 years of age. Lack of circumcision is also associated 
with an increased risk of UTI, because Escherichia coli is 
more likely to colonize the glans and prepuce, and subse-
quently migrate into the urinary tract.
Women—but not men—with diabetes have a two- 
to threefold higher rate of ABU and UTI than women 
without diabetes. Increased duration of diabetes and the 
use of insulin rather than oral medication are also asso-
ciated with a higher risk of UTI among women with 
diabetes. Poor bladder function, obstruction in urinary 
flow, and incomplete voiding are additional factors 
commonly found in patients with diabetes that increase 
the risk of UTI. Impaired cytokine secretion may con-
tribute to ABU in diabetic women.
Etiology
The uropathogens causing UTI vary by clinical syn-
drome but are usually enteric gram-negative rods that 
have migrated to the urinary tract. The susceptibility 
patterns of these organisms vary by clinical syndrome 
and by geography. In acute uncomplicated cystitis in the 
United States, the etiologic agents are highly predict-
able: E. coli accounts for 75–90% of isolates; Staphylo-
coccus saprophyticus for 5–15% (with particularly frequent 
isolation from younger women); and Klebsiella spe-
cies, Proteus species, Enterococcus species, Citrobacter spe-
cies, and other organisms for 5–10%. Similar etiologic 
agents are found in Europe and Brazil. The spectrum of 
agents causing uncomplicated pyelonephritis is similar, 
with E. coli predominating. In complicated UTI (e.g., 
CAUTI), E. coli remains the predominant organism, but 
other aerobic gram-negative rods, such as Klebsiella spe-
cies, Proteus species, Citrobacter species, Acinetobacter spe-
cies, Morganella species, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, also 
are frequently isolated. Gram-positive bacteria (e.g., 
enterococci and Staphylococcus aureus) and yeasts are also 
important pathogens in complicated UTI. Data on eti-
ology and resistance are generally obtained from labo-
ratory surveys and should be understood in the context 
that organism identification is performed only in cases 
in which urine is sent for culture—i.e., typically when 
complicated UTI or pyelonephritis is suspected. The 
available data demonstrate a worldwide increase in the 
resistance of E. coli to antibiotics commonly used to treat 
UTI. North American and European surveys of E. coli 
isolates from women with acute cystitis have documented 
rates of resistance to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(TMP-SMX) greater than 20% and rates of resistance to 
ciprofloxacin between 5% and 10% in some regions. 
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
256
Since resistance rates vary by local geographic region, 
with individual patient characteristics, and over time, it 
is important to use current and local data when choosing 
a treatment regimen.
Pathogenesis
The urinary tract can be viewed as an anatomic unit 
united by a continuous column of urine extending from 
the urethra to the kidneys. In the majority of UTIs, 
bacteria establish infection by ascending from the ure-
thra to the bladder. Continuing ascent up the ureter to 
the kidney is the pathway for most renal parenchymal 
infections. However, introduction of bacteria into the 
bladder does not inevitably lead to sustained and symp-
tomatic infection. The interplay of host, pathogen, and 
environmental factors determines whether tissue inva-
sion and symptomatic infection will ensue (Fig. 20-1). 
For example, bacteria often enter the bladder after sexual 
intercourse, but normal voiding and innate host defense 
mechanisms in the bladder eliminate these organisms. 
Any foreign body in the urinary tract, such as a urinary 
catheter or stone, provides an inert surface for bacte-
rial colonization. Abnormal micturition and/or signifi-
cant residual urine volume promotes true infection. In 
the simplest of terms, anything that increases the likeli-
hood of bacteria entering the bladder and staying there 
increases the risk of UTI.
Bacteria can also gain access to the urinary tract 
through the bloodstream. However, hematogenous 
spread accounts for <2% of documented UTIs and usu-
ally results from bacteremia caused by relatively viru-
lent organisms, such as Salmonella and S. aureus. Indeed, 
the isolation of either of these pathogens from a patient 
without a catheter or other instrumentation warrants a 
search for a bloodstream source. Hematogenous infec-
tions may produce focal abscesses or areas of pyelo-
nephritis within a kidney and result in positive urine 
cultures. The pathogenesis of candiduria is distinct in 
that the hematogenous route is common. The presence 
of Candida in the urine of a noninstrumented immuno-
competent patient implies either genital contamination 
or potentially widespread visceral dissemination.
Environmental factors
Vaginal ecology
In women, vaginal ecology is an important environmen-
tal factor affecting the risk of UTI. Colonization of the 
vaginal introitus and perirurethral area with organisms 
from the intestinal flora (usually E. coli) is the critical ini-
tial step in the pathogenesis of UTI. Sexual intercourse 
is associated with an increased risk of vaginal coloniza-
tion with E. coli and thereby increases the risk of UTI. 
Nonoxynol-9 in spermicide is toxic to the normal vagi-
nal microflora and thus is likewise associated with an 
increased risk of E. coli vaginal colonization and bacteri-
uria. In postmenopausal women, the previously predom-
inant vaginal lactobacilli are replaced with gram-negative 
colonization. The use of topical estrogens to prevent 
UTI in postmenopausal women is controversial; given 
the side effects of systemic hormone replacement, oral 
estrogens should not be used to prevent UTI.
Anatomic and functional abnormalities
Any condition that permits urinary stasis or obstruc-
tion predisposes the individual to UTI. Foreign bod-
ies such as stones or urinary catheters provide an inert 
surface for bacterial colonization and formation of a 
persistent biofilm. Thus, vesicoureteral reflux, ureteral 
obstruction secondary to prostatic hypertrophy, neuro-
genic bladder, and urinary diversion surgery create an 
environment favorable to UTI. In persons with such 
conditions, E. coli strains lacking typical urinary viru-
lence factors are often the cause of infection. Inhibition 
of ureteral peristalsis and decreased ureteral tone lead-
ing to vesicoureteral reflux are important in the patho-
genesis of pyelonephritis in pregnant women. Ana-
tomic factors—specifically, the distance of the urethra 
from the anus—are considered to be the primary reason 
why UTI is predominantly an illness of young women 
rather than of young men.
Host factors
The genetic background of the host influences the 
individual’s susceptibility to recurrent UTI, at least 
among women. A familial disposition to UTI and 
to pyelonephritis is well documented. Women with 
recurrent UTI are more likely to have had their first 
UTI before age 15 years and to have a maternal history 
Infection,
colonization, or
elimination
Host
Organism
Host
 
Genetic background
 
Behavioral factors
 
Underlying disease
 
Tissue-specific receptors
Environment
 
Vaginal ecology
 
Anatomy/urinary retention
 
Medical devices
Organism
 
Type of organism
 
Presence of virulence factors
 
Expression of virulence factors
Environment
Figure 20-1
Pathogenesis of urinary tract infection. The relationship 
between specific host, pathogen, and environmental factors 
determines the clinical outcome.
 
CHAPTER 20
Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and Prostatitis
257
of UTI. A component of the underlying pathogenesis of 
this familial predisposition to recurrent UTI may be per-
sistent vaginal colonization with E. coli, even during 
asymptomatic periods. Vaginal and periurethral mucosal 
cells from women with recurrent UTI bind threefold 
more uropathogenic bacteria than do mucosal cells from 
women without recurrent infection. Epithelial cells from 
susceptible women may possess specific types or greater 
numbers of receptors to which E. coli can bind, thereby 
facilitating colonization and invasion. Mutations in host 
response genes (e.g., those coding for toll-like receptors 
and the interleukin 8 receptor) have also been linked to 
recurrent UTI and pyelonephritis. Polymorphisms in the 
interleukin 8–specific receptor gene CXCR1 are associ-
ated with increased susceptibility to pyelonephritis. 
Lower-level expression of CXCR1 on the surface of 
neutrophils impairs neutrophil-dependent host defense 
against bacterial invasion of the renal parenchyma.
Microbial factors
An anatomically normal urinary tract presents a 
stronger barrier to infection than a compromised 
urinary tract. Thus, strains of E. coli that cause 
invasive symptomatic infection of the urinary tract in 
otherwise normal hosts often possess and express genetic 
virulence factors, including surface adhesins that mediate 
binding to specific receptors on the surface of uroepithe-
lial cells. The best-studied adhesins are the P fimbriae, 
hairlike protein structures that interact with a specific 
receptor on renal epithelial cells. (The letter P denotes 
the ability of these fimbriae to bind to blood group anti-
gen P, which contains a d-galactose-d-galactose residue.) 
P fimbriae are important in the pathogenesis of pyelone-
phritis and subsequent bloodstream invasion from the 
kidney.
Another adhesin is the type 1 pilus (fimbria), which 
all E. coli strains possess but not all E. coli strains express. 
Type 1 pili are thought to play a key role in initiating 
E. coli bladder infection; they mediate binding to uropla-
kins on the luminal surface of bladder uroepithelial cells. 
The binding of type 1 fimbriae of E. coli to receptors on 
uroepithelial cells initiates a complex series of signaling 
events that leads to apoptosis and exfoliation of uroepithe-
lial cells, with the attached E. coli organisms carried away 
in the urine.
approach to the 
patient	
Clinical Manifestations
The most important issue to be addressed when a UTI 
is suspected is the characterization of the clinical syn-
drome as ABU, uncomplicated cystitis, pyelonephritis, 
prostatitis, or complicated UTI. This information will 
shape the diagnostic and therapeutic approach.
Asymptomatic Bacteriuria  A diagnosis of ABU 
can be considered only when the patient does not 
have local or systemic symptoms referable to the uri-
nary tract. The clinical presentation is usually that of  
a patient who undergoes a screening urine culture for a 
reason unrelated to the genitourinary tract and is inci-
dentally found to have bacteriuria. The presence of sys-
temic signs or symptoms such as fever, altered mental 
status, and leukocytosis in the setting of a positive urine 
culture does not merit a diagnosis of symptomatic UTI 
unless other potential etiologies have been considered.
Cystitis  The typical symptoms of cystitis are dysuria, 
urinary frequency, and urgency. Nocturia, hesitancy, 
suprapubic discomfort, and gross hematuria are often 
noted as well. Unilateral back or flank pain is generally 
an indication that the upper urinary tract is involved. 
Fever is also an indication of invasive infection of either 
the kidney or the prostate.
Pyelonephritis  Mild pyelonephritis can present as 
low-grade fever with or without lower-back or costover-
tebral-angle pain, whereas severe pyelonephritis can 
manifest as high fever, rigors, nausea, vomiting, and flank 
and/or loin pain. Symptoms are generally acute in onset, 
and symptoms of cystitis may not be present. Fever is 
the main feature distinguishing cystitis and pyelone-
phritis. The fever of pyelonephritis typically exhibits a 
high, spiking “picket-fence” pattern and resolves over  
72 h of therapy. Bacteremia develops in 20–30% of cases 
of pyelonephritis. Patients with diabetes may present 
with obstructive uropathy associated with acute papillary 
necrosis when the sloughed papillae obstruct the ure-
ter. Papillary necrosis may also be evident in some cases 
of pyelonephritis complicated by obstruction, sickle cell 
disease, analgesic nephropathy, or combinations of these 
conditions. In the rare cases of bilateral papillary necrosis, 
a rapid rise in the serum creatinine level may be the first 
indication of the condition. Emphysematous pyelonephri-
tis is a particularly severe form of the disease that is asso-
ciated with the production of gas in renal and perinephric 
tissues and occurs almost exclusively in diabetic patients 
(Fig. 20-2). Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis occurs 
when chronic urinary obstruction (often by staghorn cal-
culi), together with chronic infection, leads to suppura-
tive destruction of renal tissue (Fig. 20-3). On pathologic 
examination, the residual renal tissue frequently has a 
yellow coloration with infiltration by lipid-laden macro-
phages. Pyelonephritis can also be complicated by intra-
parenchymal abscess formation; this situation should be 
suspected when a patient has continued fever and/or 
bacteremia despite antibacterial therapy.
Prostatitis  Prostatitis 
includes 
both 
infectious 
and noninfectious abnormalities of the prostate gland. 
Infections can be acute or chronic, are almost always 
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
258
are usually present, and symptoms of bladder outlet 
obstruction are common. Chronic bacterial prostatitis 
presents more insidiously as recurrent episodes of cysti-
tis, sometimes with associated pelvic and perineal pain. 
Men who present with recurrent cystitis should be eval-
uated for a prostatic focus.
Complicated UTI  Complicated UTI presents as 
a symptomatic episode of cystitis or pyelonephritis in 
a man or woman with an anatomic predisposition to 
infection, with a foreign body in the urinary tract, or with 
factors predisposing to a delayed response to therapy.
Diagnostic Tools
History
The diagnosis of any of the UTI syndromes or ABU 
begins with a detailed history (Fig. 20-4). The his-
tory given by the patient has a high predictive value in 
uncomplicated cystitis. A meta-analysis evaluating the 
probability of acute UTI on the basis of history and 
physical findings concluded that, in women presenting 
with at least one symptom of UTI (dysuria, frequency, 
hematuria, or back pain) and without complicating fac-
tors, the probability of acute cystitis or pyelonephritis is 
50%. The even higher rates of accuracy of self-diagnosis 
among women with recurrent UTI probably account 
for the success of patient-initiated treatment of recur-
rent cystitis. If vaginal discharge and complicating fac-
tors are absent and risk factors for UTI are present, then 
the probability of UTI is close to 90%, and no labora-
tory evaluation is needed. Similarly, a combination of 
Figure 20-2
Emphysematous pyelonephritis. Infection of the right kid-
ney of a diabetic man by Escherichia coli, a gas-forming, 
facultative anaerobic uropathogen, has led to destruction of 
the renal parenchyma (arrow) and tracking of gas through the 
retroperitoneal space (arrowhead).
A
   
B
Figure 20-3
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis. A. This photograph 
shows extensive destruction of renal parenchyma due to 
long-standing suppurative inflammation. The precipitating fac-
tor was obstruction by a staghorn calculus, which has been 
removed, leaving a depression (arrow). The mass effect of xan-
thogranulomatous pyelonephritis can mimic renal malignancy. 
B. A large staghorn calculus (arrow) is seen obstructing the 
renal pelvis and calyceal system. The lower pole of the kid-
ney shows areas of hemorrhage and necrosis with collapse of 
cortical areas. (Both images courtesy of Dharam M. Ramnani, 
MD, Virginia Urology Pathology Laboratory, Richmond, VA.)
bacterial in nature, and are far less common than the 
noninfectious entity of chronic pelvic pain syndrome 
(formerly known as chronic prostatitis). Acute bacte-
rial prostatitis presents as dysuria, frequency, and pain 
in the prostatic, pelvic, or perineal area. Fever and chills 
 
CHAPTER 20
Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and Prostatitis
259
Acute onset of
Back pain
Nausea/vomiting
Fever
Possible cystitis
symptoms
Acute onset of urinary
symptoms
Dysuria
Frequency
Urgency
Non-localizing systemic
symptoms
Fever
Altered mental status
Leukocytosis
Positive urine culture in the
absence of
Urinary symptoms
Systemic symptoms
related to the urinary
tract
Recurrent acute urinary
symptoms
Male with perineal, pelvic, or
prostatic pain
Indwelling urinary catheter
All other patients
Woman with unclear history
or risk factors for STD
Otherwise healthy woman who
is not pregnant, clear history
Patient who is pregnant, is a
renal transplant recipient, or
will undergo an invasive
urologic procedure
Otherwise healthy woman who
is not pregnant
Patient with urinary catheter
All other patients
All other patients
Otherwise healthy woman who
is not pregnant
Male
Patients with signs and
symptoms of systemic
infection and no obvious
cause
Consider CAUTI
Exchange or remove catheter
Urinalysis and culture
Blood cultures if fever present
Consider acute prostatitis
Urinalysis and culture
Consider urology evaluation
Consider uncomplicated cystitis or STD
Dipstick, urinalysis, and culture
STD evaluation, pelvic exam
Consider uncomplicated cystitis
No urine culture needed
Consider telephone management
Consider complicated UTI or pyelonephritis
Consider other potential etiologies
Urine culture
Blood cultures
Consider complicated UTI
Urinalysis and culture
Address any modifiable anatomic or
functional abnormalities
Consider uncomplicated pyelonephritis
Urine culture
Consider outpatient management
Consider ABU
Screening and treatment warranted
Consider ABU
No additional workup or treatment
needed
Consider CA-ABU
No additional workup or treatment
needed
Remove unnecessary catheters
Consider recurrent cystitis
Urine culture to establish diagnosis
Consider prophylaxis or patient-initiated
management
Consider chronic bacterial prostatitis
Meares-Stamey 4-glass test
Consider urology consult
Consider pyelonephritis
Urine culture
Blood cultures
DIAGNOSTIC FLOWCHART FOR EVALUATING URINARY TRACT INFECTION
Clinical Presentation
Patient Characteristics
Diagnostic and Management Considerations
Figure 20-4
Diagnostic approach to urinary tract infection. ABU, 
asymptomatic bacteriuria; CA-ABU, catheter-associated ABU; 
CAUTI, catheter-associated UTI; STD, sexually transmitted 
disease.
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
260
dysuria and urinary frequency in the absence of vagi-
nal discharge increases the probability of UTI to 96%. 
Further laboratory evaluation with dipstick testing or 
urine culture is not necessary in such patients before the 
initiation of definitive therapy.
When the patient’s history is applied as a diagnos-
tic tool, it is important to recall that the studies included 
in the meta-analysis cited above did not enroll children, 
adolescents, pregnant women, men, or patients with 
complicated UTI. One significant concern is that sexually 
transmitted disease—that caused by Chlamydia trachoma-
tis in particular—may be inappropriately treated as UTI. 
This concern is particularly relevant for female patients 
under the age of 25. The differential diagnosis to be 
considered when women present with dysuria includes 
cervicitis (C. trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae), vaginitis 
(Candida albicans, Trichomonas vaginalis), herpetic urethri-
tis, interstitial cystitis, and noninfectious vaginal or vulvar 
irritation. Women with more than one sexual partner and 
inconsistent use of condoms are at high risk for both UTI 
and sexually transmitted disease, and symptoms alone do 
not always distinguish between these conditions.
The urine dipstick test, urinalysis, and  
urine culture
Useful diagnostic tools include the urine dipstick test and 
urinalysis, both of which provide point-of-care informa-
tion, and the urine culture, which can retrospectively 
confirm a prior diagnosis. Understanding the parameters 
of the dipstick test is important in interpreting its results. 
Only members of the family Enterobacteriaceae convert 
nitrate to nitrite, and enough nitrite must accumulate in 
the urine to reach the threshold of detection. If a woman 
with acute cystitis is forcing fluids and voiding frequently, 
the dipstick test for nitrite is less likely to be positive, even 
when E. coli is present. The leukocyte esterase test detects 
this enzyme in the host’s polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
in the urine, whether the cells are intact or lysed. Many 
reviews have attempted to describe the diagnostic accu-
racy of dipstick testing. The bottom line for clinicians 
is that a urine dipstick test can confirm the diagnosis of 
uncomplicated cystitis in a patient with a reasonably high 
pretest probability of this disease. Either nitrite or leu-
kocyte esterase positivity can be interpreted as a positive 
result. Blood in the urine may also suggest a diagnosis of 
UTI. A dipstick test negative for both nitrite and leuko-
cyte esterase in the same type of patient should prompt 
consideration of other explanations for the patient’s symp-
toms and collection of urine for culture. A negative dip-
stick test is not sufficiently sensitive to rule out bacteriuria 
in pregnant women, in whom it is important to detect all 
episodes of bacteriuria. Performance characteristics of the 
dipstick test differ in men (highly specific) and in non-
catheterized nursing home residents (highly sensitive).
Urine microscopy reveals pyuria in nearly all cases 
of cystitis and hematuria in ∼30% of cases. In cur-
rent practice, most hospital laboratories use an auto-
mated system rather than manual examination for urine 
microscopy. A machine aspirates a sample of the urine 
and then classifies the particles in the urine by size, 
shape, contrast, light scatter, volume, and other prop-
erties. These automated systems can be overwhelmed 
by high numbers of dysmorphic red blood cells, white 
blood cells, or crystals; in general, counts of bacteria 
are less accurate than are counts of red and white blood 
cells. Our clinical recommendation is that the patient’s 
symptoms and presentation should outweigh an incon-
gruent result on automated urinalysis.
The detection of bacteria in a urine culture is the 
diagnostic “gold standard” for UTI; unfortunately, 
however, culture results do not become available until 
24 h after the patient’s presentation. Identifying specific 
organism(s) can require an additional 24 h. Studies of 
women with symptoms of cystitis have found that a col-
ony count threshold of >102 bacteria/mL is more sensi-
tive (95%) and specific (85%) than a threshold of 105/mL 
for the diagnosis of acute cystitis in women. In men, the 
minimal level indicating infection appears to be 103/mL. 
Urine specimens frequently become contaminated with 
the normal microbial flora of the distal urethra, vagina, 
or skin. These contaminants can grow to high numbers 
if the collected urine is allowed to stand at room tem-
perature. In most instances, a culture that yields mixed 
bacterial species is contaminated except in settings of 
long-term catheterization, chronic urinary retention, or 
the presence of a fistula between the urinary tract and 
the gastrointestinal or genital tract.
Diagnosis
The approach to diagnosis is influenced by which of the 
clinical UTI syndromes is suspected (Fig. 20-4).
Uncomplicated cystitis in women
Uncomplicated cystitis in women can be treated on the 
basis of history alone. However, if the symptoms are 
not specific or if a reliable history cannot be obtained, 
then a urine dipstick test should be performed. A posi-
tive nitrite or leukocyte esterase result in a woman 
with one symptom of UTI increases the probability of 
UTI from 50% to ∼80%, and empirical treatment can 
be considered without further testing. In this setting, 
a negative dipstick result does not rule out UTI, and 
a urine culture, close clinical follow-up, and possibly a 
pelvic examination are recommended. These recom-
mendations are made with the caveat that factors asso-
ciated with complicated UTI, such as pregnancy, are 
not present.
 
CHAPTER 20
Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and Prostatitis
261
Cystitis in men
The signs and symptoms of cystitis in men are simi-
lar to those in women, but this disease differs in sev-
eral important ways in the male population. Collection 
of urine for culture is strongly recommended when 
a man has symptoms of UTI, as the documentation 
of bacteriuria can differentiate the less common syn-
dromes of acute and chronic bacterial prostatitis from 
the very common entity of chronic pelvic pain syn-
drome, which is not associated with bacteriuria and 
thus is not usually responsive to antibacterial therapy. 
If the diagnosis is unclear, localization cultures using 
the two- or four-glass Meares-Stamey test (urine col-
lection after prostate massage) should be undertaken to 
differentiate between bacterial and nonbacterial pros-
tatic syndromes, and the patient should be referred to 
a urologist. Men with febrile UTI often have an ele-
vated serum level of prostate-specific antigen as well 
as an enlarged prostate and enlarged seminal vesicles 
on ultrasound—findings indicative of prostate involve-
ment. In 85 men with febrile UTI, symptoms of uri-
nary retention, early recurrence of UTI, hematuria 
at follow-up, and voiding difficulties were predictive 
of surgically correctable disorders. Men with none of 
these symptoms had normal upper and lower urinary 
tracts on urologic workup.
Asymptomatic bacteriuria
The diagnosis of ABU involves both microbiologic and 
clinical criteria. The microbiologic criterion is usually 
≥105 bacterial cfu/mL except in catheter-associated dis-
ease, in which case ≥102 cfu/mL is the cutoff. The clin-
ical criterion is that the person has no signs or symptoms 
referable to UTI.
Treatment	
Urinary Tract Infections
Antimicrobial therapy is warranted for any symptomatic 
UTI. The choice of antimicrobial agent and the dose and 
duration of therapy depend on the site of infection and 
the presence or absence of complicating conditions. 
Each category of UTI warrants a different approach 
based on the particular clinical syndrome.
Uncomplicated 
Cystitis 
In 
Women 
Since the species and antimicrobial susceptibilities of 
the bacteria that cause acute uncomplicated cystitis are 
highly predictable, many episodes of uncomplicated 
cystitis can be managed over the telephone (Fig. 20-4). 
Most patients with other UTI syndromes require fur-
ther diagnostic evaluation. Although the risk of serious 
complications with telephone management appears to 
be low, studies of telephone management algorithms 
generally have involved otherwise healthy white women 
who are at low risk for complications of UTI.
In 1999, TMP-SMX was recommended as the first-
line agent for treatment of uncomplicated UTI in the 
published guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. Antibiotic resistance among uropathogens 
causing uncomplicated cystitis has since increased, 
appreciation of the importance of collateral damage (as 
defined below) has increased, and newer agents have 
been studied. Unfortunately, there is no longer a single 
best agent for acute uncomplicated cystitis.
Collateral damage refers to the adverse ecologic 
effects of antimicrobial therapy, including killing of the 
normal flora and selection of drug-resistant organisms. 
Outbreaks of Clostridium difficile infection offer an exam-
ple of collateral damage in the hospital environment. 
The implication of collateral damage in this context is 
that a drug that is highly efficacious for the treatment of 
UTI is not necessarily the optimal first-line agent if it also 
has pronounced secondary effects on the normal flora 
or is likely to change resistance patterns. Drugs used 
for UTI that have a minimal effect on fecal flora include 
pivmecillinam, fosfomycin, and nitrofurantoin. In con-
trast, trimethoprim, TMP-SMX, quinolones, and ampicil-
lin affect the fecal flora more significantly; these drugs 
are notably the agents for which rising resistance levels 
have been documented.
Several effective therapeutic regimens are available 
for acute uncomplicated cystitis in women (Table 20-1). 
Well-studied first-line agents include TMP-SMX and 
nitrofurantoin. Second-line agents include fluoroquino-
lone and β-lactam compounds. Single-dose fosfomycin 
treatment for acute cystitis is widely used in Europe but 
has produced mixed results in randomized trials. Pivme-
cillinam is not currently available in the United States or 
Canada but is a popular agent in some European coun-
tries. The pros and cons of other therapies are discussed 
briefly below.
Traditionally, TMP-SMX has been recommended as 
first-line treatment for acute cystitis, and it remains 
appropriate to consider the use of this drug in regions 
with resistance rates not exceeding 20%. TMP-SMX 
resistance has clinical significance: in TMP-SMX–treated 
patients with resistant isolates, the time to symptom res-
olution is longer, and rates of both clinical and microbio-
logic failure are higher. Individual host factors associated 
with an elevated risk of UTI caused by a strain of E. coli 
resistant to TMP-SMX include recent use of TMP-SMX or 
another antimicrobial agent and recent travel to an area 
with high rates of TMP-SMX resistance. The optimal set-
ting for empirical use of TMP-SMX is uncomplicated UTI 
in a female patient who has an established relationship 
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
262
with the practitioner and who can thus seek further care 
if her symptoms do not respond promptly.
Resistance to nitrofurantoin remains low despite  
>60 years of use. Since this drug affects bacterial metab-
olism in multiple pathways, several mutational steps 
are required for the development of resistance. Nitro-
furantoin remains highly active against E. coli and most 
non–E. coli isolates. Proteus, Pseudomonas, Serratia, 
Enterobacter, and yeasts are all intrinsically resistant to 
this drug. Although nitrofurantoin has traditionally been 
prescribed as a 7-day regimen, similar microbiologic 
and clinical efficacies are noted with a 5-day course of 
nitrofurantoin or a 3-day course of TMP-SMX for treat-
ment of women with acute cystitis; 3-day courses of 
nitrofurantoin are not recommended for acute cystitis. 
Nitrofurantoin does not reach significant levels in tissue 
and cannot be used to treat pyelonephritis.
Most fluoroquinolones are highly effective for short-
course therapy for cystitis; the exception is moxifloxacin, 
which does not achieve adequate urinary levels. The 
fluoroquinolones commonly used for UTI include oflox-
acin, ciprofloxacin, and levofloxacin. The main concern 
about fluoroquinolone use for acute cystitis is the prop-
agation of fluoroquinolone resistance, not only among 
uropathogens but also among other organisms causing 
more serious and difficult-to-treat infections at other 
sites. Fluoroquinolone use is also a factor driving the 
emergence of C. difficile outbreaks in hospital settings. 
Most experts now call for restricting fluoroquinolones 
to specific instances of uncomplicated cystitis in which 
other antimicrobial agents are not suitable. Quinolone 
use in the elderly has been associated with an increased 
risk of Achilles tendon rupture.
Except for pivmecillinam, β-lactam agents gen-
erally have not performed as well as TMP-SMX or 
fluoroquinolones in acute cystitis. Rates of pathogen 
eradication are lower and relapse rates are higher with 
β-lactam drugs. The generally accepted explanation is 
that β-lactams fail to eradicate uropathogens from the 
vaginal reservoir. A proposed role for intracellular bio-
film communities is intriguing. Many strains of E. coli 
that are resistant to TMP-SMX are also resistant to amox-
icillin and cephalexin; thus, these drugs should be used 
only for patients infected with susceptible strains.
Urinary analgesics are appropriate in certain situ-
ations to speed resolution of bladder discomfort. The  
urinary tract analgesic phenazopyridine is widely used 
but can cause significant nausea. Combination anal-
gesics containing urinary antiseptics (methenamine, 
methylene blue), a urine-acidifying agent (sodium phos-
phate), and an antispasmodic agent (hyoscyamine) are 
also available.
Pyelonephritis  Since patients with pyelo-
nephritis have tissue-invasive disease, the treatment 
regimen chosen should have a very high likelihood of 
eradicating the causative organism and should reach 
therapeutic blood levels quickly. High rates of TMP-
SMX–resistant E. coli in patients with pyelonephritis 
have made fluoroquinolones the first-line therapy for 
acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis. Whether the fluo-
roquinolones are given orally or parenterally depends 
on the patient’s tolerance for oral intake. A random-
ized clinical trial demonstrated that a 7-day course of 
therapy with oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily, with 
or without an initial IV 400-mg dose) was highly effec-
tive for the initial management of pyelonephritis in the 
outpatient setting. Oral TMP-SMX (one double-strength 
tablet twice daily for 14 days) is also effective for treat-
ment of acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis if the
Table 20-1
Treatment Strategies for Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis
Drug and Dose
Estimated Clinical 
Efficacy (%)
Estimated Bacterial 
Efficacy (%)
Common Side Effects
Nitrofurantoin, 100 mg bid × 5–7 d
84–95
86–92
Nausea, headache
TMP-SMX, 1 DS tablet bid × 3 d
90–100
91–100
Rash, urticaria, nausea, vomiting, 
hematologic abnormalities
Fosfomycin, 3-g single-dose 
sachet
70–91
78–83
Diarrhea, nausea, headache
Pivmecillinam, 400 mg bid × 3–7 d
55–82
74–84
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Fluoroquinolones, dose varies by 
agent; 3-d regimen
85–95
81–98
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, head-
ache, drowsiness, insomnia
β-Lactams, dose varies by agent; 
5- to 7-d regimen
79–98
74–98
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, 
urticaria
Note: Efficacy rates are averages or ranges calculated from the data and studies included in the 2010 Infectious Diseases Society of America/
European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases Guideline for Treatment of Uncomplicated UTI. DS, double-strength; TMP-
SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
 
CHAPTER 20
Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and Prostatitis
263
uropathogen is known to be susceptible. If the pathogen’s 
susceptibility is not known and TMP-SMX is used, an initial 
IV 1-g dose of ceftriaxone is recommended. Oral β-lactam 
agents are less effective than the fluoroquinolones and 
should be used with caution and close follow-up. Options 
for parenteral therapy for uncomplicated pyelonephri-
tis include fluoroquinolones, an aminoglycoside with or 
without ampicillin, an extended-spectrum cephalospo-
rin with or without an aminoglycoside, or a carbapenem. 
Combinations of a β-lactam and a β-lactamase inhibitor 
(e.g., ampicillin-sulbactam, ticarcillin-clavulanate, and 
piperacillin-tazobactam) or imipenem-cilastatin can be 
used in patients with more complicated histories, previous 
episodes of pyelonephritis, or recent urinary tract manipu-
lations; in general, the treatment of such patients should 
be guided by urine culture results. Once the patient has 
responded clinically, oral therapy should be substituted 
for parenteral therapy.
UTI In Pregnant Women  Nitrofurantoin, 
ampicillin, and the cephalosporins are considered 
relatively safe in early pregnancy. One retrospective 
case-control study suggesting an association between 
nitrofurantoin and birth defects awaits confirmation. 
Sulfonamides should clearly be avoided both in the first 
trimester (because of possible teratogenic effects) and 
near term (because of a possible role in the development 
of kernicterus). Fluoroquinolones are avoided because 
of possible adverse effects on fetal cartilage develop-
ment. Ampicillin and the cephalosporins have been used 
extensively in pregnancy and are the drugs of choice for 
the treatment of asymptomatic or symptomatic UTI in 
this group of patients. For pregnant women with overt 
pyelonephritis, parenteral β-lactam therapy with or with-
out aminoglycosides is the standard of care.
UTI In Men  Since the prostate is involved in the 
majority of cases of febrile UTI in men, the goal in these 
patients is to eradicate the prostatic infection as well as 
the bladder infection. In men with apparently uncompli-
cated UTI, a 7- to 14-day course of a fluoroquinolone or 
TMP-SMX is recommended. If acute bacterial prostatitis is 
suspected, antimicrobial therapy should be initiated after 
urine and blood are obtained for cultures. Therapy can be 
tailored to urine culture results and should be continued 
for 2–4 weeks. For documented chronic bacterial prosta-
titis, a 4- to 6-week course of antibiotics is often neces-
sary. Recurrences, which are not uncommon in chronic 
prostatitis, often warrant a 12-week course of treatment.
Complicated UTI  Complicated UTI (other than 
that discussed previously) occurs in a heterogeneous 
group of patients with a wide variety of structural and 
functional abnormalities of the urinary tract and kid-
neys. The range of species and their susceptibility to 
antimicrobial agents are likewise heterogeneous. As a
consequence, therapy for complicated UTI must be 
individualized and guided by urine culture results. Fre-
quently, a patient with complicated UTI will have prior 
urine culture data that can be used to guide empiri-
cal therapy while current culture results are awaited. 
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis is treated with 
nephrectomy. Percutaneous drainage can be used as 
the initial therapy in emphysematous pyelonephritis and 
can be followed by elective nephrectomy as needed. 
Papillary necrosis with obstruction requires intervention 
to relieve the obstruction and to preserve renal function.
Asymptomatic Bacteriuria  Treatment of 
ABU does not decrease the frequency of symptomatic 
infections or complications except in pregnant women, 
persons undergoing urologic surgery, and perhaps neu-
tropenic patients and renal transplant recipients. Treat-
ment of ABU in pregnant women and patients under-
going urologic procedures should be directed by urine 
culture results. In all other populations, screening for 
and treatment of ABU are discouraged. The majority of 
cases of catheter-associated bacteriuria are asymptom-
atic and do not warrant antimicrobial therapy.
Catheter-Associated 
UTI  Multiple insti-
tutions have released guidelines for the treatment of 
CAUTI, which is defined by bacteriuria and symptoms in 
a catheterized patient. The signs and symptoms either 
are localized to the urinary tract or can include oth-
erwise unexplained systemic manifestations, such as 
fever. The accepted threshold for bacteriuria varies from  
≥103 cfu/mL to ≥105 cfu/mL.
The 
formation 
of 
biofilm—a 
living 
layer 
of  
uropathogens—on the urinary catheter is central to the 
pathogenesis of CAUTI and affects both therapeutic and 
preventive strategies. Organisms in a biofilm are relatively 
resistant to killing by antibiotics, and eradication of a 
catheter-associated biofilm is difficult without removal of 
the device itself. Furthermore, because catheters provide 
a conduit for bacteria to enter the bladder, bacteriuria is 
inevitable with long-term catheter use.
The typical signs and symptoms of UTI, including 
pain, urgency, dysuria, fever, peripheral leukocytosis, and 
pyuria, have less predictive value for the diagnosis of 
infection in catheterized patients. Furthermore, the pres-
ence of bacteria in the urine of a patient who is febrile 
and catheterized does not necessarily predict CAUTI, and 
other explanations for the fever should be considered.
The etiology of CAUTI is diverse, and urine culture 
results are essential to guide treatment. Fairly good 
evidence supports the practice of catheter change dur-
ing treatment for CAUTI. The goal is to remove biofilm-
associated organisms that could serve as a nidus for 
reinfection. Pathology studies reveal that many patients 
with long-term catheters have occult pyelonephritis. 
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
264
A randomized trial in persons with spinal cord injury 
who were practicing intermittent catheterization found 
that relapse was more common after 3 days of therapy 
than after 14 days. In general, a 7- to 14-day course of 
antibiotics is recommended, but further studies on the 
optimal duration of therapy are needed.
In the setting of long-term catheter use, systemic anti-
biotics, bladder-acidifying agents, antimicrobial bladder 
washes, topical disinfectants, and antimicrobial drainage-
bag solutions have all been ineffective at preventing the 
onset of bacteriuria and have been associated with the 
emergence of resistant organisms. The best strategy for 
prevention of CAUTI is to avoid insertion of unneces-
sary catheters and to remove catheters once they are no 
longer necessary. Evidence is insufficient to recommend 
suprapubic catheters and condom catheters as alterna-
tives to indwelling urinary catheters as a means to prevent 
CAUTI. However, intermittent catheterization may be pref-
erable to long-term indwelling urethral catheterization 
in certain populations (e.g., spinal cord–injured persons) 
to prevent both infectious and anatomic complications. 
Antimicrobial catheters impregnated with silver or nitro-
furazone have not been shown to provide significant clini-
cal benefit in terms of reducing rates of symptomatic UTI.
Candiduria  The 
appearance 
of 
Candida 
in 
the urine is an increasingly common complication of 
indwelling catheterization, particularly for patients in 
the intensive care unit, those taking broad-spectrum 
antimicrobial drugs, and those with underlying diabe-
tes mellitus. C. albicans is still the most common isolate, 
although C. glabrata and other non-albicans species are 
also isolated frequently. The clinical presentation var-
ies from an asymptomatic laboratory finding to pyelo-
nephritis and even sepsis. In asymptomatic patients, 
removal of the urethral catheter results in resolution of 
candiduria in more than one-third of cases. Treatment 
is recommended for patients who have symptomatic 
cystitis or pyelonephritis and for those who are at high 
risk for disseminated disease. High-risk patients include 
those with neutropenia, those who are undergoing uro-
logic manipulation, and low-birth-weight infants. Flucon-
azole (200–400 mg/d for 14 days) achieves high levels in 
urine and is the first-line regimen for Candida infections 
of the urinary tract. The newer azoles and echinocandins 
are characterized by only low-level urinary excretion and 
thus are not recommended, although cases of success-
ful eradication of candiduria with some of these agents 
have been reported. For Candida isolates with high lev-
els of resistance to fluconazole, oral flucytosine and/or 
parenteral amphotericin B are options. Bladder irrigation 
with amphotericin B generally is not recommended.
Prevention of Recurrent UTI  
In Women
Recurrence of uncomplicated cystitis in reproductive- 
age women is common, and a preventive strategy 
is indicated if recurrent UTIs are interfering with a 
patient’s lifestyle. The threshold of two or more symp-
tomatic episodes per year is not absolute; decisions 
about interventions should take the patient’s prefer-
ences into account.
Three prophylactic strategies are available: continu-
ous, postcoital, or patient-initiated therapy. Continu-
ous prophylaxis and postcoital prophylaxis usually entail 
low doses of TMP-SMX, a fluoroquinolone, or nitro-
furantoin. These regimens are all highly effective dur-
ing the period of active antibiotic intake. Typically, a 
prophylactic regimen is prescribed for 6 months and 
then discontinued, at which point the rate of recurrent 
UTI often returns to baseline. If bothersome infections 
recur, the prophylactic program can be reinstituted for 
a longer period.
Patient-initiated therapy involves supplying the 
patient with materials for urine culture and self- 
medication with a course of antibiotics at the first 
symptoms of infection. The urine culture is refriger-
ated and delivered to the physician’s office for con-
firmation of the diagnosis. When an established and 
reliable patient-provider relationship exists, the urine 
culture can be omitted as long as the symptomatic epi-
sodes respond completely to short-course therapy and 
are not followed by relapse.
Prognosis
Cystitis is a risk factor for recurrent cystitis and pyelo-
nephritis. ABU is common among elderly and catheter-
ized patients but does not in itself increase the risk of 
death. The relationships among recurrent UTI, chronic 
pyelonephritis, and renal insufficiency have been 
widely studied. In the absence of anatomic abnormali-
ties, recurrent infection in children and adults does not 
lead to chronic pyelonephritis or to renal failure. More-
over, infection does not play a primary role in chronic 
interstitial nephritis; the primary etiologic factors in this 
condition are analgesic abuse, obstruction, reflux, and 
toxin exposure. In the presence of underlying renal 
abnormalities (particularly obstructing stones), infection 
as a secondary factor can accelerate renal parenchymal 
damage. In spinal cord–injured patients, use of a long-
term indwelling bladder catheter is a well-documented 
risk factor for bladder cancer. Chronic bacteriuria 
resulting in chronic inflammation is one possible expla-
nation for this observation.
 Julian L. Seifter 
265
 Obstruction to the fl ow of urine, with attendant stasis 
and elevation in urinary tract pressure, impairs renal and 
urinary conduit functions and is a common cause of acute 
and chronic kidney disease (obstructive nephropathy). 
With early relief of obstruction, the defects in function 
usually disappear completely. However, chronic obstruc-
tion may produce permanent loss of renal mass (renal 
atrophy) and excretory capability, as well as enhanced 
susceptibility to local infection and stone formation. Early 
diagnosis and prompt therapy are therefore essential to 
minimize the otherwise devastating effects of obstruction 
on kidney structure and function. 
 etioLogY 
 Obstruction to urine fl ow can result from  intrinsic or 
 extrinsic mechanical blockade as well as from  functional defects 
not associated with fi xed occlusion of the urinary drain-
age system. Mechanical obstruction can occur at any 
level of the urinary tract, from the renal calyces to the 
external urethral meatus. Normal points of narrowing, 
such as the ureteropelvic and ureterovesical junctions, 
bladder neck, and urethral meatus, are common sites of 
obstruction. When obstruction is above the level of the 
bladder, unilateral dilatation of the ureter ( hydroureter ) 
and renal pyelocalyceal system ( hydronephrosis ) occur; 
lesions at or below the level of the bladder cause bilateral 
involvement. 
 Common forms of obstruction are listed in  Table 21-1 . 
Childhood causes include  congenital malformations , such 
as narrowing of the ureteropelvic junction and abnor-
mal insertion of the ureter into the bladder, the most 
common cause. Vesicoureteral refl ux in the absence 
of urinary tract infection or bladder neck obstruc-
tion often resolves with age. Reinsertion of the ure-
ter into the bladder is indicated if refl ux is severe and 
unlikely to improve spontaneously, if renal function 
deteriorates, or if urinary tract infections recur despite 
chronic antimicrobial therapy. Vesicoureteral refl ux 
may cause prenatal hydronephrosis and, if severe, can 
lead to recurrent urinary infections and renal scarring 
in childhood. Posterior urethral valves are the most 
common cause of bilateral hydronephrosis in boys. In 
adults, urinary tract obstruction (UTO) is due mainly 
to  acquired defects . Pelvic tumors, calculi, and urethral 
stricture predominate. Ligation of or injury to the
ureter during pelvic or colonic surgery can lead to 
hydronephrosis which, if unilateral, may remain unde-
tected. Obstructive uropathy may also result from 
extrinsic neoplastic (carcinoma of cervix or colon) or 
infl ammatory disorders. Lymphomas and pelvic or colonic 
neoplasms with retroperitoneal involvement are causes of 
ureteral obstruction. 
Functional impairment of urine ﬂ ow usually results from 
disorders that involve both the ureter and bladder. 
Causes include neurogenic bladder, often with adynamic 
ureter, and vesicoureteral refl ux. Refl ux in children may 
result in severe unilateral or bilateral hydroureter and
hydronephrosis. Urinary retention may be the conse-
quence of α-adrenergic and anticholinergic agents, as 
well as opiates. Hydronephrosis in pregnancy is due to 
relaxational effects of progesterone on smooth muscle of 
the renal pelvis, as well as ureteral compression by the 
enlarged uterus. 
 cLinicaL Features anD 
PatHoPHYsioLogY 
 The pathophysiology and clinical features of UTO are 
summarized in  Table 21-2 .  Pain , the symptom that most 
commonly leads to medical attention, is due to distention 
of the collecting system or renal capsule. Pain severity is 
infl uenced more by the rate at which distention devel-
ops than by the degree of distention. Acute supravesical 
 URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTION 
 cHaPter 21 
266
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
Table 21-1
Common Mechanical Causes of Urinary Tract Obstruction
Ureter
Bladder Outlet
Urethra
Congenital
Ureteropelvic junction narrowing or obstruction
Ureterovesical junction narrowing or obstruction  
and reflux
Ureterocele
Retrocaval ureter
Bladder neck obstruction
Ureterocele
Posterior urethral valves
Anterior urethral valves
Stricture
Meatal stenosis
Phimosis
Acquired Intrinsic Defects
Calculi
Inflammation
Infection
Trauma
Sloughed papillae
Tumor
Blood clots
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Cancer of prostate
Cancer of bladder
Calculi
Diabetic neuropathy
Spinal cord disease
Anticholinergic drugs and α-adrenergic 
antagonists
Stricture
Tumor
Calculi
Trauma
Phimosis
Acquired Extrinsic Defects
Pregnant uterus
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Aortic aneurysm
Uterine leiomyomata
Carcinoma of uterus, prostate, bladder, colon, rectum
Lymphoma
Pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis
Accidental surgical ligation
Carcinoma of cervix, colon
Trauma
Trauma
Table 21-2
Pathophysiology of Bilateral Ureteral Obstruction
Hemodynamic Effects
Tubule Effects
Clinical Features
Acute
↑ Renal blood flow
↓ GFR
↓ Medullary blood flow
↑ Vasodilator prostaglandins, 
nitric oxide
↑ Ureteral and tubule pressures
↑ Reabsorption of Na+, urea, water
Pain (capsule distention)
Azotemia
Oliguria or anuria
Chronic
↓ Renal blood flow
↓↓ GFR
↑ Vasoconstrictor prostaglandins
↑ Renin-angiotensin production
↓ Medullary osmolarity
↓ Concentrating ability
Structural damage; parenchymal atrophy
↓ Transport functions for Na+, K+, H+
Azotemia
Hypertension
AVP-insensitive polyuria
Natriuresis
Hyperkalemic, hyperchloremic acidosis
Release of Obstruction
Slow ↑ in GFR (variable)
↓ Tubule pressure
↑ Solute load per nephron (urea, NaCl)
Natriuretic factors present
Postobstructive diuresis
Potential for volume depletion and electrolyte 
imbalance due to losses of Na+, K+, PO4
2-, 
Mg2+, and water
Abbreviations: AVP, arginine vasopressin; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
 
CHAPTER 21
Urinary Tract Obstruction
267
obstruction, as from a stone lodged in a ureter (see 
Chap. 9), is associated with excruciating pain, known 
as renal colic. This pain often radiates to the lower abdo-
men, testes, or labia. By contrast, more insidious causes 
of obstruction, such as chronic narrowing of the uretero-
pelvic junction, may produce little or no pain and yet 
result in total destruction of the affected kidney. Flank 
pain that occurs only with micturition is pathognomonic 
of vesicoureteral reflux. Hesitancy and straining to ini-
tiate the urinary stream, postvoid dribbling, urinary fre-
quency, and incontinence are common with obstruction 
at or below the level of the bladder.
Obstruction of urine flow results in an increase in 
hydrostatic pressures proximal to the site of obstruction. 
It is this buildup of pressure that leads to the accom-
panying pain, distention of the collecting system in the 
kidney, and elevated intratubular pressures that initiate 
tubular dysfunction. As the increased hydrostatic pres-
sure is expressed in the urinary space of the glomeruli, 
further filtration decreases or stops completely.
Azotemia develops when overall excretory function is 
impaired, often in the setting of bladder outlet obstruc-
tion, bilateral renal pelvic or ureteric obstruction, or 
unilateral disease in a patient with a solitary function-
ing kidney. Complete bilateral obstruction should be 
suspected when acute renal failure is accompanied by 
anuria. Any patient with renal failure otherwise unex-
plained, or with a history of nephrolithiasis, hematuria, 
diabetes mellitus, prostatic enlargement, pelvic surgery, 
trauma, or tumor should be evaluated for UTO.
In the acute setting, partial, bilateral obstruction may 
mimic prerenal azotemia with concentrated urine and 
sodium retention. However, with more prolonged 
obstruction, symptoms of polyuria and nocturia com-
monly accompany partial UTO and result from dimin-
ished renal concentrating ability. Impairment of transcel-
lular salt reabsorption in the proximal tubule, medullary 
thick ascending limb of Henle, and collecting duct cells 
is due to down regulation of transport proteins including 
the Na+, K+ adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), NaKCl2 
cotransporter (NKCC) in the thick ascending limb, and 
the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) in collecting duct cells. 
Consequences include failure to produce urine free of salt 
(natriuresis) and loss of medullary hypertonicity produc-
ing a urinary concentrating defect. In addition to direct 
effects on renal transport mechanisms, increased PGE2 
(due to induction of COX-2), angiotensin-II (with its 
downregulation of Na+ transporters), and atrial natriuretic 
peptide (ANP) (due to volume expansion in the azotemic 
patient) contribute to the decreased salt reabsorption along 
the nephron.
Dysregulation of aquaporin-2 water channels in the 
collecting duct contributes to the polyuria. The defect 
usually does not improve with administration of vaso-
pressin and is therefore a form of acquired nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus.
Wide fluctuations in urine output in a patient with 
azotemia should always raise the possibility of inter-
mittent or partial UTO. If fluid intake is inadequate, 
severe dehydration and hypernatremia may develop. 
However, as with other causes of poor renal function, 
excesses of salt and water intake may result in edema and 
hyponatremia.
Partial bilateral UTO often results in acquired distal 
renal tubular acidosis, hyperkalemia, and renal salt wasting. 
The H+-ATPase, situated on the apical membrane of 
the intercalated cells of the collecting duct, is critical for 
distal H+ secretion. The trafficking of intracellular H+ 
pumps from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane is dis-
rupted in UTO. The decreased function of the ENaC, 
in the apical membrane of neighboring collecting duct 
principal cells, contributes to decreased Na+ reabsorp-
tion (salt wasting), decreased electronegativity of the 
tubule lumen, and therefore decreased K+ secretion via 
K+ channels (hyperkalemia) and H+ secretion via the 
H+-ATPases [distal renal tubular acidosis (RTA)]. Prox-
imal tubule ammoniagenesis, important to the elimina-
tion of H+ as NH4+, is impaired. These defects in tubule 
function are often accompanied by renal tubulointersti-
tial damage. Azotemia with hyperkalemia and metabolic 
acidosis should prompt consideration of UTO.
The renal interstitium becomes edematous and infil-
trated with mononuclear inflammatory cells early in UTO. 
Later, interstitial fibrosis and atrophy of the papillae and 
medulla occur and precede these processes in the cortex. 
The increase in angiotensin-II noted in UTO contributes 
to the inflammatory response and fibroblast accumulation 
through mechanisms involving profibrotic cytokines. With 
time, this process leads to chronic kidney damage.
UTO must always be considered in patients with 
urinary tract infections or urolithiasis. Urinary stasis 
encourages the growth of organisms. Urea-splitting bac-
teria are associated with magnesium ammonium phos-
phate (struvite) calculi. Hypertension is frequent in acute 
and subacute unilateral obstruction and is usually a con-
sequence of increased release of renin by the involved 
kidney. Chronic kidney disease from bilateral UTO, 
often associated with extracellular volume expansion, 
may result in significant hypertension. Erythrocytosis, an 
infrequent complication of obstructive uropathy, is sec-
ondary to increased erythropoietin production.
Diagnosis
A history of difficulty in voiding, pain, infection, or 
change in urinary volume is common. Evidence for dis-
tention of the kidney or urinary bladder can often be 
obtained by palpation and percussion of the abdomen. 
A careful rectal and genital examination may reveal 
enlargement or nodularity of the prostate, abnormal rec-
tal sphincter tone, or a rectal or pelvic mass.
268
Section VI
Urinary Tract Infections and Obstruction
Urinalysis may reveal hematuria, pyuria, and bacte-
riuria. The urine sediment is often normal, even when 
obstruction leads to marked azotemia and extensive 
structural damage. An abdominal scout film may detect 
nephrocalcinosis or a radiopaque stone. As indicated 
in Fig. 21-1, if UTO is suspected, a bladder cath-
eter should be inserted. Abdominal ultrasonography 
should be performed to evaluate renal and bladder size, 
as well as pyelocalyceal contour. Ultrasonography is 
approximately 90% specific and sensitive for detection 
of hydronephrosis. False-positive results are associated 
with diuresis, renal cysts, or the presence of an extrare-
nal pelvis, a normal congenital variant. Congenital ure-
teropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction may be mistaken 
for renal cystic disease. Hydronephrosis may be absent 
on ultrasound when obstruction is less than 48 hours in 
duration or associated with volume contraction, stag-
horn calculi, retroperitoneal fibrosis, or infiltrative renal 
disease. Duplex Doppler ultrasonography may detect an 
increased resistive index in urinary obstruction.
Recent advances in technology have led to alterna-
tives to the once standard intravenous urogram in the 
further evaluation of UTO. The high-resolution mul-
tidetector row CT scan in particular has advantages of 
visualizing the retroperitoneum, as well as identifying 
both intrinsic and extrinsic sites of obstruction. Non-
contrast CT scans improve visualization of the uri-
nary tract in the patient with renal impairment and 
are safer for patients at risk for contrast nephropathy. 
MR urography is a promising technique but at this 
time not superior to the CT scan and carries the risk of 
certain gadolinium agents in patients with renal insuf-
ficiency, i.e., nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. The intra-
venous urogram may define the site of obstruction and 
demonstrate dilatation of the calyces, renal pelvis, and 
ureter above the obstruction. The ureter may be tortu-
ous in chronic obstruction. Radionuclide scans are able 
to give differential renal function but give less anatomic 
detail than CT or intravenous urography (IVU).
To facilitate visualization of a suspected lesion in a 
ureter or renal pelvis, retrograde or antegrade urography 
should be attempted. These procedures do not carry 
the risk of contrast-induced acute renal failure in patients 
with renal insufficiency. The retrograde approach 
involves catheterization of the involved ureter under 
cystoscopic control, while the antegrade technique 
necessitates percutaneous placement of a catheter 
into the renal pelvis. While the antegrade approach 
may provide immediate decompression of a unilateral 
obstructing lesion, many urologists initially attempt 
the retrograde approach unless the catheterization is 
unsuccessful.
Voiding cystourethrography is of value in the diag-
nosis of vesicoureteral reflux and bladder neck and 
urethral obstructions. Postvoiding films reveal residual 
urine. Endoscopic visualization by the urologist often 
permits precise identification of lesions involving the 
urethra, prostate, bladder, and ureteral orifices.

Urologic
evaluation
Unexplained renal failure
Insert bladder catheter
Do CT scan to identify
site and etiology of
obstruction
Negative
Diuresis
Obstruction below
bladder neck
High suspicion
Low suspicion
Hydronephrosis
No diuresis: do
ultrasound
Retrograde urography
and ureteral stent
considered
Antegrade urography
and percutaneous
nephrostomy considered
No further workup
for obstruction
No
hydronephrosis
Positive or negative
but still high suspicion
ALGORITHM OF THE DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH FOR
URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTION IN UNEXPLAINED RENAL FAILURE
Figure 21-1
Diagnostic approach for urinary tract obstruction in unexplained renal failure. CT, computed tomography.
 
CHAPTER 21
Urinary Tract Obstruction
269
Treatment	
Urinary Tract Obstruction
UTO complicated by infection requires immediate relief 
of obstruction to prevent the development of generalized 
sepsis and progressive renal damage. Sepsis necessi-
tates prompt urologic intervention. Drainage may be 
achieved by nephrostomy, ureterostomy, or ureteral, 
urethral, or suprapubic catheterization. Prolonged anti-
biotic treatment may be necessary. Chronic or recurrent 
infections in a poorly functioning obstructed kidney 
may necessitate nephrectomy. When infection is not 
present, surgery is often delayed until acid-base, fluid, 
and electrolyte status is restored. Nevertheless, the site 
of obstruction should be ascertained as soon as feasible. 
Elective relief of obstruction is usually recommended in 
patients with urinary retention, recurrent urinary tract 
infections, persistent pain, or progressive loss of renal 
function. Benign prostatic hypertrophy may be treated 
medically with a-adrenergic blockers and 5α-reductase 
inhibitors. Functional obstruction secondary to neuro-
genic bladder may be decreased with the combination 
of frequent voiding and cholinergic drugs.
Prognosis
With relief of obstruction, the prognosis regarding return 
of renal function depends largely on whether irrevers-
ible renal damage has occurred. When obstruction is not 
relieved, the course will depend mainly on whether the 
obstruction is complete or incomplete and bilateral or 
unilateral, as well as whether or not urinary tract infec-
tion is also present. Complete obstruction with infec-
tion can lead to total destruction of the kidney within 
days. Partial return of glomerular filtration rate may fol-
low relief of complete obstruction of 1 and 2 weeks’ 
duration, but after 8 weeks of obstruction, recovery is 
unlikely. In the absence of definitive evidence of irre-
versibility, every effort should be made to decompress 
the obstruction in the hope of restoring renal function at 
least partially. A renal radionuclide scan, performed after 
a prolonged period of decompression, may be used to 
predict the reversibility of renal dysfunction.
Postobstructive Diuresis
Relief of bilateral, but not unilateral, complete obstruc-
tion commonly results in polyuria, which may be mas-
sive. The urine is usually hypotonic and may contain 
large amounts of sodium chloride, potassium, phos-
phate, and magnesium. The natriuresis is due in part to 
the excretion of retained urea (osmotic diuresis), natri-
uretic factors accumulated during uremia and depressed 
salt and water reabsorption when urine flow is reestab-
lished. In the majority of patients this diuresis results in 
the appropriate excretion of the excesses of retained salt 
and water. When extracellular volume and composition 
return to normal, the diuresis usually abates spontane-
ously. Occasionally, iatrogenic expansion of extracel-
lular volume is responsible for or sustains the diuresis 
observed in the postobstructive period. Replacement 
with intravenous fluids in amounts less than urinary 
losses usually avoids this complication. More aggressive 
fluid management is required in the setting of hypovo-
lemia, hypotension, or disturbances in serum electrolyte 
concentrations.
The loss of electrolyte-free water with urea may 
result in hypernatremia. Serum and urine sodium and 
osmolal concentrations should guide the use of appro-
priate intravenous replacement. Often replacement with 
0.45% saline is required. Relief of obstruction may be 
followed by urinary salt and water losses severe enough 
to provoke profound dehydration and vascular collapse. 
In these patients, decreased tubule reabsorptive capacity 
is probably responsible for the marked diuresis. Appro-
priate therapy in such patients includes intravenous 
administration of salt-containing solutions to replace 
sodium and volume deficits.
This page intentionally left blank 
Section VII
Cancer of the Kidney 
and Urinary Tract
 howard i. Scher  I   robert J. Motzer 
272
 Bladder CanCer 
 A transitional cell epithelium lines the urinary tract from 
the renal pelvis to the ureter, urinary bladder, and the 
proximal two-thirds of the urethra. Cancers can occur 
at any point: 90% of malignancies develop in the blad-
der, 8% in the renal pelvis, and the remaining 2% in 
the ureter or urethra. Bladder cancer is the fourth most 
common cancer in men and the thirteenth in women, 
with an estimated 70,530 new cases and 14,680 deaths 
in the United States predicted for the year 2010. The 
almost 5:1 ratio of incidence to mortality refl ects the 
higher frequency of the less lethal superfi cial vari-
ants compared to the more lethal invasive and meta-
static variants. The incidence is three times higher in 
men than in women and twofold higher in whites than 
blacks, with a median age at diagnosis of 65 years. 
 Once diagnosed, urothelial tumors exhibit polychro-
notropism—the tendency to recur over time and in new 
locations in the urothelial tract. As long as urothelium is 
present, continuous monitoring of the tract is required. 
 ePiDemiology 
 Cigarette smoking is believed to contribute to up to 
50% of the diagnosed urothelial cancers in men and up 
to 40% in women. The risk of developing a urothelial 
malignancy in male smokers is increased two- to four-
fold relative to nonsmokers and continues for 10 years 
or longer after cessation. Other implicated agents 
include the aniline dyes, the drugs phenacetin and chlor-
naphazine, and external beam radiation. Chronic cyclo-
phosphamide exposure may also increase risk, whereas 
vitamin A supplements appear to be protective. Expo-
sure to  Schistosoma haematobium , a parasite found in many 
developing countries, is associated with an increase in 
both squamous and transitional cell carcinomas of the 
bladder. 
 BLADDER AND RENAL CELL CARCINOMAS 
 ChaPter 22 
 Pathology 
 Clinical subtypes are grouped into three categories: 75% 
are superfi cial, 20% invade muscle, and 5% are meta-
static at presentation. Staging of the tumor within the 
bladder is based on the pattern of growth and depth of 
invasion: Ta lesions grow as exophytic lesions; carci-
noma in situ (CIS) lesions start on the surface and tend 
to invade. The revised tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) 
staging system is illustrated in  Fig. 22-1 . About half of 
invasive tumors presented originally as superfi cial lesions 
that later progressed. Tumors are also rated by grade. 
Grade I lesions (highly differentiated tumors) rarely 
progress to a higher stage, whereas grade III tumors do. 
 More than 95% of urothelial tumors in the United 
States are transitional cell in origin. Pure squamous 
cancers with keratinization constitute 3%, adenocarci-
nomas 2%, and small cell tumors (with paraneoplastic 
syndromes) <1%. Adenocarcinomas develop primarily 
in the urachal remnant in the dome of the bladder or in 
the periurethral tissues; some assume a signet cell histol-
ogy. Lymphomas and melanomas are rare. Of the transi-
tional cell tumors, low-grade papillary lesions that grow 
on a central stalk are most common. These tumors are 
very friable, have a tendency to bleed, are at high risk 
for recurrence, and yet rarely progress to the more lethal 
invasive variety. In contrast, CIS is a high-grade tumor 
that is considered a precursor of the more lethal muscle-
invasive disease. 
 PathogeneSiS 
 The multicentric nature of the disease and high rate of 
recurrence has led to the hypothesis of a fi eld defect in 
the urothelium that results in a predisposition to cancer. 
Molecular genetic analyses suggest that the superfi cial 
and invasive lesions develop along distinct molecu-
lar pathways in which primary tumorigenic aberrations 
 
CHAPTER 22
Bladder and Renal Cell Carcinomas
273
precede secondary changes associated with progression 
to a more advanced stage. Low-grade papillary tumors 
that do not tend to invade or metastasize harbor con-
stitutive activation of the receptor-tyrosine kinase-Ras 
signal transduction pathway and a high frequency of 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) mutations. 
In contrast, CIS and invasive tumors have a higher fre-
quency of TP53 and RB gene alternations. Within all 
clinical stages, including Tis, T1, and T2 or greater 
lesions, tumors with alterations in p53, p21, and/or RB 
have a higher probability of recurrence, metastasis, and 
death from disease.
Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, 
and Staging
Hematuria occurs in 80–90% of patients and often 
reflects exophytic tumors. The bladder is the most com-
mon source of gross hematuria (40%), but benign cysti-
tis (22%) is a more common cause than bladder cancer 
(15%) (Chap. 3). Microscopic hematuria is more com-
monly of prostate origin (25%); only 2% of bladder 
cancers produce microscopic hematuria. Once hematu-
ria is documented, a urinary cytology, visualization of 
the urothelial tract by CT or intravenous pyelogram, 
and cystoscopy are recommended if no other etiology 
is found. Screening asymptomatic individuals for hema-
turia increases the diagnosis of tumors at an early stage 
but has not been shown to prolong life. After hematu-
ria, irritative symptoms are the next most common pre-
sentation, which may reflect in situ disease. Obstruction 
of the ureters may cause flank pain. Symptoms of meta-
static disease are rarely the first presenting sign.
The endoscopic evaluation includes an examina-
tion under anesthesia to determine whether a palpable 
mass is present. A flexible endoscope is inserted into 
the bladder, and bladder barbotage is performed. The 
visual inspection includes mapping the location, size, 
and number of lesions, as well as a description of the 
growth pattern (solid vs. papillary). An intraoperative 
STAGE
TNM
5-YEAR
SURVIVAL
Superficial
Superficial
Infiltrating
Invasion of
adjacent
structures
Lymph
node
invasion
Distant
extention
IV
IV
IV
I
II
III
T2
T1
Ta
Tis
T3a
T3b
T4
L.Nodes%
7-30
26
50
35-50%
10-20%
70%
90%
70
100
100
60
Ois
Oa
Figure 22-1
Bladder staging. TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
Section VII
Cancer of the Kidney and Urinary Tract
274
video is often recorded. All visible tumors should be 
resected, and a sample of the muscle underlying the 
tumor should be obtained to assess the depth of inva-
sion. Normal-appearing areas are biopsied at random to 
ensure no field defect. A notation is made as to whether 
a tumor was completely or incompletely resected. 
Selective catheterization and visualization of the upper 
tracts should be performed if the cytology is positive 
and no disease is visible in the bladder. Ultrasonogra-
phy, CT, and/or MRI may help to determine whether 
a tumor extends to perivesical fat (T3) and to document 
nodal spread. Distant metastases are assessed by CT of 
the chest and abdomen, MRI, or radionuclide imaging 
of the skeleton.
Treatment	
Bladder Cancer
Management depends on whether the tumor invades 
muscle and whether it has spread to the regional lymph 
nodes and beyond. The probability of spread increases 
with increasing T stage.
Superficial Disease  At a minimum, the man-
agement of a superficial tumor is complete endoscopic 
resection with or without intravesical therapy. The 
decision to recommend intravesical therapy depends 
on the histologic subtype, number of lesions, depth of 
invasion, presence or absence of CIS, and antecedent  
history. Recurrences develop in upward of 50% of cases, 
of which 5–20% progress to a more advanced stage. In 
general, solitary papillary lesions are managed by trans-
urethral surgery alone. CIS and recurrent disease are 
treated by transurethral surgery followed by intravesical 
therapy.
Intravesical therapies are used in two general con-
texts: as an adjuvant to a complete endoscopic resec-
tion to prevent recurrence or, less commonly, to elimi-
nate disease that cannot be controlled by endoscopic 
resection alone. Intravesical treatments are advised for 
patients with recurrent disease, >40% involvement of 
the bladder surface by tumor, diffuse CIS, or T1 disease. 
The standard intravesical therapy, based on randomized 
comparisons, is bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) in six 
weekly instillations, followed by monthly maintenance 
administrations for ≥1 year. Other agents with activity 
include mitomycin-C, interferon (IFN), and gemcitabine. 
The side effects of intravesical therapies include dysuria, 
urinary frequency, and, depending on the drug, myelo-
suppression or contact dermatitis. Rarely, intravesical 
BCG may produce a systemic illness associated with 
granulomatous infections in multiple sites that requires 
antituberculin therapy.
Following the endoscopic resection, patients are 
monitored for recurrence at 3-month intervals during 
the first year. Recurrence may develop anywhere along 
the urothelial tract, including the renal pelvis, ureter, or 
urethra. A consequence of the “successful” treatment of 
tumors in the bladder is an increase in the frequency of 
extravesical recurrences (e.g., urethra or ureter). Those 
with persistent disease in the bladder or new tumors 
are generally considered for a second course of BCG or 
for intravesical chemotherapy with valrubicin or gem-
citabine. In some cases, cystectomy is recommended, 
although the specific indications vary. Tumors in the 
ureter or renal pelvis are typically managed by resec-
tion during retrograde examination or, in some cases, by 
instillation through the renal pelvis. Tumors of the pros-
tatic urethra may require cystectomy if the tumor can-
not be resected completely.
Invasive Disease  The treatment of a tumor that 
has invaded muscle can be separated into control of the 
primary tumor and, depending on the pathologic find-
ings at surgery, systemic chemotherapy to treat micro-
metastatic disease. Radical cystectomy is the standard, 
although in selected cases a bladder-sparing approach 
is used; this approach includes complete endoscopic 
resection; partial cystectomy; or a combination of resec-
tion, systemic chemotherapy, and external beam radia-
tion therapy. In some countries, external beam radiation 
therapy is considered standard. In the United States, its 
role is limited to those patients deemed unfit for cystec-
tomy, those with unresectable local disease, or as part of 
an experimental bladder-sparing approach.
Indications for cystectomy include muscle-invading 
tumors not suitable for segmental resection; low-stage 
tumors unsuitable for conservative management (e.g., 
due to multicentric and frequent recurrences resistant 
to intravesical instillations); high-grade tumors (T1G3) 
associated with CIS; and bladder symptoms, such as fre-
quency or hemorrhage, that impair quality of life.
Radical cystectomy is major surgery that requires 
appropriate preoperative evaluation and management. 
The procedure involves removal of the bladder and pel-
vic lymph nodes and creation of a conduit or reservoir 
for urinary flow. Grossly abnormal lymph nodes are eval-
uated by frozen section. If metastases are confirmed, the 
procedure is often aborted. In males, radical cystectomy 
includes the removal of the prostate, seminal vesicles, 
and proximal urethra. Impotence is universal unless the 
nerves responsible for erectile function are preserved. In 
females, the procedure includes removal of the bladder, 
urethra, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, anterior vaginal 
wall, and surrounding fascia.
Previously, urine flow was managed by directing the 
ureters to the abdominal wall, where it was collected in 
an external appliance. Currently, most patients receive 
either a continent cutaneous reservoir constructed 
from detubularized bowel or an orthotopic neobladder. 
 
CHAPTER 22
Bladder and Renal Cell Carcinomas
275
Some 70% of men receive a neobladder. With a conti-
nent reservoir, 65–85% of men will be continent at night 
and 85–90% during the day. Cutaneous reservoirs are 
drained by intermittent catheterization; orthotopic neo-
bladders are drained more naturally. Contraindications 
to a neobladder include renal insufficiency, an inability 
to self-catheterize, or an exophytic tumor or CIS in the 
urethra. Diffuse CIS in the bladder is a relative contrain-
dication based on the risk of a urethral recurrence. Con-
current ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease may hinder 
the use of resected bowel.
A partial cystectomy may be considered when the 
disease is limited to the dome of the bladder, a mar-
gin of at least 2 cm can be achieved, there is no CIS in 
other sites, and the bladder capacity is adequate after 
the tumor has been removed. This occurs in 5–10% of 
cases. Carcinomas in the ureter or in the renal pelvis are 
treated with nephroureterectomy with a bladder cuff to 
remove the tumor.
The probability of recurrence following surgery 
is predicted on the basis of pathologic stage, pres-
ence or absence of lymphatic or vascular invasion, 
and nodal spread. Among those whose cancers recur, 
the recurrence develops in a median of 1 year (range  
0.04–11.1 years). Long-term outcomes vary by patho-
logic stage and histology (Table 22-1). The number of 
lymph nodes removed is also prognostic, whether or 
not the nodes contained tumor.
Chemotherapy (described in a later section) has 
been shown to prolong the survival of patients with 
invasive disease, but only when combined with defini-
tive treatment of the bladder by radical cystectomy or 
radiation therapy. Thus, for the majority of patients, che-
motherapy alone is inadequate to clear the bladder of 
disease. Experimental studies are evaluating bladder 
preservation strategies by combining chemotherapy 
and radiation therapy in patients whose tumors were 
endoscopically removed.
Metastatic 
Disease  The primary goal of 
treatment for metastatic disease is to achieve complete 
remission with chemotherapy alone or with a com-
bined-modality approach of chemotherapy followed 
by surgical resection of residual disease, as is done rou-
tinely for the treatment of germ cell tumors. One can 
define a goal in terms of cure or palliation on the basis 
of the probability of achieving a complete response to 
chemotherapy using prognostic factors, such as Kar-
nofsky Performance Status (KPS) (<80%), and whether 
the pattern of spread is nodal or visceral (liver, lung, 
or bone). For those with zero, one, or two risk factors, 
the probability of complete remission is 38, 25, and 
5%, respectively, and median survival is 33, 13.4, and  
9.3 months, respectively. Patients who are function-
ally compromised or who have visceral disease or bone 
metastases rarely achieve long-term survival. The toxici-
ties also vary as a function of risk, and treatment-related 
mortality rates are as high as 3–4% using some combi-
nations in these poor-risk patient groups.
Chemotherapy  A number of chemotherapeu-
tic drugs have shown activity as single agents; cisplatin, 
paclitaxel, and gemcitabine are considered most active. 
Standard therapy consists of two-, three-, or four-drug 
combinations. Overall response rates of >50% have 
been reported using combinations such as methotrex-
ate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (M-VAC); 
cisplatin and paclitaxel (PT); gemcitabine and cispla-
tin (GC); or gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and cisplatin (GTC). 
M-VAC was considered standard, but the toxicities of 
neutropenia and fever, mucositis, diminished renal and 
auditory function, and peripheral neuropathy led to the 
development of alternative regimens. At present, GC is 
used more commonly than M-VAC, based on the results 
of a comparative trial of M-VAC versus GC that showed 
less neutropenia and fever, and less mucositis for the 
GC regimen. Anemia and thrombocytopenia were more 
common with GC. GTC is not more effective than GC.
Chemotherapy has also been evaluated in the neo-
adjuvant and adjuvant settings. In a randomized trial, 
patients receiving three cycles of neoadjuvant M-VAC 
followed by cystectomy had a significantly better 
median (6.2 years) and 5-year survival (57%) compared 
to cystectomy alone (median survival 3.8 years; 5-year 
survival 42%). Similar results were obtained in an inter-
national study of three cycles of cisplatin, methotrexate, 
and vinblastine (CMV) followed by either radical cys-
tectomy or radiation therapy. The decision to adminis-
ter adjuvant therapy is based on the risk of recurrence 
after cystectomy. Indications for adjuvant chemother-
apy include the presence of nodal disease, extravesical 
tumor extension, or vascular invasion in the resected 
specimen. Another study of adjuvant therapy found 
that four cycles of CMV delayed recurrence, although 
an effect on survival was less clear. Additional trials are 
studying taxane- and gemcitabine-based combinations.
The management of bladder cancer is summarized in 
Table 22-2.
Table 22-1
Survival Following Surgery for Bladder 
Cancer
Pathologic Stage
5-Year 
Survival, %
10-Year 
Survival, %
T2,N0
89
87
T3a,N0
78
76
T3b,N0
62
61
T4,N0
50
45
Any T,N1
35
34
Section VII
Cancer of the Kidney and Urinary Tract
276
Carcinoma of the Renal Pelvis 
and Ureter
About 2500 cases of renal pelvis and ureter cancer 
occur each year; nearly all are transitional cell carcino-
mas similar to bladder cancer in biology and appearance. 
This tumor is also associated with chronic phenacetin 
abuse and with Balkan nephropathy, a chronic inter-
stitial nephritis endemic in Bulgaria, Greece, Bosnia- 
Herzegovina, and Romania.
The most common symptom is painless gross hema-
turia, and the disease is usually detected on intravenous 
pyelogram during the workup for hematuria. Patterns of 
spread are like those in bladder cancer. For low-grade 
disease localized to the renal pelvis and ureter, nephro-
ureterectomy (including excision of the distal ureter 
with a portion of the bladder) is associated with 5-year 
survival of 80–90%. More invasive or histologically 
poorly differentiated tumors are more likely to recur 
locally and to metastasize. Metastatic disease is treated 
with the chemotherapy used in bladder cancer, and the 
outcome is similar to that of metastatic transitional-cell 
cancer of bladder origin.
Renal Cell Carcinoma
Renal cell carcinomas account for 90–95% of malig-
nant neoplasms arising from the kidney. Notable fea-
tures include resistance to cytotoxic agents, infrequent 
responses to biologic response modifiers such as inter-
leukin (IL)-2, robust activity to antiangiogenesis targeted 
agents, and a variable clinical course for patients with 
metastatic disease, including anecdotal reports of spon-
taneous regression.
Epidemiology
The incidence of renal cell carcinoma continues to rise 
and is now nearly 58,000 cases annually in the United 
States, resulting in 13,000 deaths. The male-to-female 
ratio is 2:1. Incidence peaks between the ages of 50 and 
70 years, although this malignancy may be diagnosed 
at any age. Many environmental factors have been 
investigated as possible contributing causes; the stron-
gest association is with cigarette smoking. Risk is also 
increased for patients who have acquired cystic disease 
of the kidney associated with end-stage renal disease, 
and for those with tuberous sclerosis. Most cases are 
sporadic, although familial forms have been reported. 
One is associated with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syn-
drome. VHL syndrome is an autosomal dominant dis-
order. Genetic studies identified the VHL gene on the 
short arm of chromosome 3. Approximately 35% of 
individuals with VHL disease develop clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma. Other associated neoplasms include reti-
nal hemangioma, hemangioblastoma of the spinal cord 
and cerebellum, pheochromocytoma, neuroendocrine 
tumors and cysts, and cysts in the epididymis of the tes-
tis in men and the broad ligament in women. Subtypes 
vary according to low risk (type 1) or high risk (type 2) 
of developing pheochromocytoma.
Pathology and Genetics
Renal cell neoplasia represents a heterogeneous group of 
tumors with distinct histopathologic, genetic, and clini-
cal features ranging from benign to high-grade malig-
nant (Table 22-3). They are classified on the basis of 
morphology and histology. Categories include clear cell 
carcinoma (60% of cases), papillary tumors (5–15%), 
chromophobic tumors (5–10%), oncocytomas (5–10%), 
and collecting or Bellini duct tumors (<1%). Papillary 
Table 22-2
Management of Bladder Cancer
Nature of Lesion
Management Approach
Superficial
Endoscopic removal, usually with 
intravesical therapy
Invasive disease
Cystectomy ± systemic chemo-
therapy (before or after surgery)
Metastatic disease
Curative or palliative chemo-
therapy (based on prognostic 
factors) ± surgery
Table 22-3
Classification of Epithelial Neoplasms Arising From the Kidney
Carcinoma Type
Growth Pattern
Cell of Origin
Cytogenetics
Clear cell
Acinar or sarcomatoid
Proximal tubule
3p−
Papillary
Papillary or sarcomatoid
Proximal tubule
+7, +17, −Y
Chromophobic
Solid, tubular, or sarcomatoid
Cortical collecting duct
Hypodiploid
Oncocytic
Tumor nests
Cortical collecting duct
Undetermined
Collecting duct
Papillary or sarcomatoid
Medullary collecting duct
Undetermined
 
CHAPTER 22
Bladder and Renal Cell Carcinomas
277
tumors tend to be bilateral and multifocal. Chromo-
phobic tumors have a more indolent clinical course, 
and oncocytomas are considered benign neoplasms. In 
contrast, Bellini duct carcinomas, which are thought to 
arise from the collecting ducts within the renal medulla, 
are very rare but very aggressive. Clear cell tumors, the 
predominant histology, are found in >80% of patients 
who develop metastases. Clear cell tumors arise from 
the epithelial cells of the proximal tubules and usually 
show chromosome 3p deletions. Deletions of 3p21–26 
(where the VHL gene maps) are identified in patients 
with familial as well as sporadic tumors. VHL encodes a 
tumor-suppressor protein that is involved in regulating 
the transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and a 
number of other hypoxia-inducible proteins. Inactiva-
tion of VHL leads to overexpression of these agonists of 
the VEGF and PDGF receptors, which promote tumor 
angiogenesis and tumor growth. Agents that inhibit pro-
angiogenic growth factor activity show antitumor effects.
Clinical Presentation
The presenting signs and symptoms include hematuria, 
abdominal pain, and a flank or abdominal mass. This 
classic triad occurs in 10–20% of patients. Other symp-
toms are fever, weight loss, anemia, and a varicocele. 
The tumor is most commonly detected as an incidental 
finding on a radiograph. Widespread use of radiologic 
cross-sectional imaging procedures (CT, ultrasound, 
MRI) contributes to earlier detection, including inci-
dental renal masses detected during evaluation for other 
medical conditions. The increasing number of inciden-
tally discovered low-stage tumors has contributed to 
an improved 5-year survival for patients with renal cell 
carcinoma and increased use of nephron-sparing sur-
gery (partial nephrectomy). A spectrum of paraneoplastic 
syndromes has been associated with these malignancies, 
including erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia, nonmetastatic 
hepatic dysfunction (Stauffer syndrome), and acquired 
dysfibrinogenemia. Erythrocytosis is noted at presen-
tation in only about 3% of patients. Anemia, a sign of 
advanced disease, is more common.
The standard evaluation of patients with suspected 
renal cell tumors includes a CT scan of the abdomen 
and pelvis, chest radiograph, urine analysis, and urine 
cytology. If metastatic disease is suspected from the 
chest radiograph, a CT of the chest is warranted. MRI 
is useful in evaluating the inferior vena cava in cases of 
suspected tumor involvement or invasion by throm-
bus. In clinical practice, any solid renal masses should be 
considered malignant until proven otherwise; a defini-
tive diagnosis is required. If no metastases are dem-
onstrated, surgery is indicated, even if the renal vein 
is invaded. The differential diagnosis of a renal mass 
includes cysts, benign neoplasms (adenoma, angiomyoli-
poma, oncocytoma), inflammatory lesions (pyelonephri-
tis or abscesses), and other primary or metastatic cancers. 
Other malignancies that may involve the kidney include 
transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis, sarcoma, 
lymphoma, and Wilms’ tumor. All of these are less 
common causes of renal masses than is renal cell cancer.
Staging and Prognosis
Staging is based on the American Joint Commit-
tee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system (Fig. 22-2). 
Stage I tumors are <7 cm in greatest diameter and con-
fined to the kidney, stage II tumors are ≥7 cm and con-
fined to the kidney, stage III tumors extend through 
the renal capsule but are confined to Gerota’s fascia 
(IIIa) or involve a single hilar lymph node (N1), and 
stage IV disease includes tumors that have invaded adja-
cent organs (excluding the adrenal gland) or involve 
multiple lymph nodes or distant metastases. The rate of 
5-year survival varies by stage: >90% for stage I, 85% 
for stage II, 60% for stage III, and 10% for stage IV.
Treatment	
Renal Cell Carcinoma
Localized 
Tumors  The standard manage-
ment for stage I or II tumors and selected cases of 
stage III disease is radical nephrectomy. This procedure 
involves en bloc removal of Gerota’s fascia and its con-
tents, including the kidney, the ipsilateral adrenal gland, 
and adjacent hilar lymph nodes. The role of a regional 
lymphadenectomy is controversial. Extension into 
the renal vein or inferior vena cava (stage III disease) 
does not preclude resection even if cardiopulmonary 
bypass is required. If the tumor is resected, half of these 
patients have prolonged survival.
Nephron-sparing approaches via open or laparo-
scopic surgery may be appropriate for patients who 
have only one kidney, depending on the size and loca-
tion of the lesion. A nephron-sparing approach can also 
be used for patients with bilateral tumors, accompanied 
by a radical nephrectomy on the opposite side. Par-
tial nephrectomy techniques are applied electively to 
resect small masses for patients with a normal contra-
lateral kidney. Adjuvant therapy following this surgery 
does not improve outcome, even in cases with a poor 
prognosis.
Advanced Disease  Surgery has a limited role 
for patients with metastatic disease. However, long-
term survival may occur in patients who relapse after 
nephrectomy in a solitary site that can be removed. 
One indication for nephrectomy with metastases at ini-
tial presentation is to alleviate pain or hemorrhage of a 
Section VII
Cancer of the Kidney and Urinary Tract
278
Figure 22-2
Renal cell carcinoma staging. TNM, tumor, node, metastasis
 
CHAPTER 22
Bladder and Renal Cell Carcinomas
279
primary tumor. Also, a cytoreductive nephrectomy 
before systemic treatment improves survival for care-
fully selected patients with stage IV tumors.
Metastatic renal cell carcinoma is highly refractory to 
chemotherapy. Cytokine therapy with IL-2 or IFN-α pro-
duces regressions in 10–20% of patients. IL-2 produces 
durable complete remission in a small proportion of 
cases. In general, cytokine therapy is considered unsatis-
factory for most patients.
The situation changed dramatically when two large-
scale randomized trials established a role for antian-
giogenic therapy in this disease, as predicted by the 
genetic studies. These trials separately evaluated two 
orally administered antiangiogenic agents, sorafenib 
and sunitinib, that inhibited receptor tyrosine kinase 
signaling through the VEGF and PDGF receptors. Both 
showed efficacy as second-line treatment following 
progression during cytokine treatment, resulting in 
approval by regulatory authorities for the treatment 
of advanced renal cell carcinoma. A randomized phase 
3 trial comparing sunitinib to IFN-α showed superior 
efficacy for sunitinib with an acceptable safety pro-
file. The trial resulted in a change in the standard first-
line treatment from IFN to sunitinib. Sunitinib is usually 
given orally at a dose of 50 mg/d for 4 weeks out of 6. 
Diarrhea is the main toxicity. Sorafenib is usually given 
orally at a dose of 400 mg bid. In addition to diarrhea, 
toxicities include rash, fatigue, and hand-foot syndrome. 
Temsirolimus and everolimus, inhibitors of the mam-
malian target of rapamycin (mTOR), show activity in pa- 
tients with untreated poor-prognosis tumors and in 
sunitinib/sorafenib refractory tumors.
The prognosis of metastatic renal cell carcinoma is 
variable. In one analysis, no prior nephrectomy, a KPS 
<80, low hemoglobin, high corrected calcium, and 
abnormal lactate dehydrogenase were poor prognos-
tic factors. Patients with zero, one or two, and three 
or more factors had a median survival of 24, 12, and 
5 months, respectively. These tumors may follow an 
unpredictable and protracted clinical course. It may be 
best to document progression before considering sys-
temic treatment.
This page intentionally left blank 
 Alexander Kratz  I   Michael A. Pesce  I   Robert C. Basner  
I   Andrew J. Einstein 
281
 APPENDIX  
Table 1 
 Hematology and Coagulation 
analyte
SpeCimen
Si unitS
Conventional unitS
Activated clotting time
WB
70–180 s
70–180 s
Activated protein C resistance (factor V Leiden)
P
Not applicable
Ratio >2.1
ADAMTS13 activity
P
≥0.67
≥67%
ADAMTS13 inhibitor activity
P
Not applicable
≤0.4 U
ADAMTS13 antibody
P
Not applicable
≤18 U
Alpha 2 antiplasmin
P
0.87–1.55
87–155%
Antiphospholipid antibody panel
 PTT-LA (lupus anticoagulant screen)
P
Negative
Negative
 Platelet neutralization procedure
P
Negative
Negative
 Dilute viper venom screen
P
Negative
Negative
 Anticardiolipin antibody
S
  IgG
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 GPL
  IgM
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 MPL
 This Appendix contains tables of reference values for 
laboratory tests, special analytes, and special function 
tests. A variety of factors can inﬂ uence reference values. 
Such variables include the population studied, the dura-
tion and means of specimen transport, laboratory meth-
ods and instrumentation, and even the type of container 
used for the collection of the specimen. The reference 
or “normal” ranges given in this appendix may there-
fore not be appropriate for all laboratories, and these 
values should only be used as general guidelines. When-
ever possible, reference values provided by the labora-
tory performing the testing should be utilized in the 
interpretation of laboratory data. Values supplied in 
this Appendix reﬂ ect typical reference ranges in adults. 
Pediatric reference ranges may vary signiﬁ cantly from 
adult values. 
 In preparing the Appendix, the authors have taken 
into account the fact that the system of international 
units (SI, système international d’unités) is used in most 
countries and in some medical journals. However, 
clinical laboratories may continue to report values in 
“traditional” or conventional units. Therefore, both 
systems are provided in the Appendix. The dual system 
is also used in the text except for (1) those instances in 
which the numbers remain the same but only the ter-
minology is changed (mmol/L for meq/L or IU/L for 
mIU/mL), when only the SI units are given; and (2) 
most pressure measurements (e.g., blood and cerebrospi-
nal ﬂ uid pressures), when the traditional units (mmHg, 
mmH 2 O) are used. In all other instances in the text the 
SI unit is followed by the traditional unit in parentheses.
 REFERENCE VALUES FOR 
LABORATORY TESTS 
(continued)
 LABORATORY VALUES OF CLINICAL 
IMPORTANCE 
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
282
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Antithrombin III
P
  Antigenic
220–390 mg/L
22–39 mg/dL
  Functional
0.7–1.30 U/L
70–130%
Anti-Xa assay (heparin assay)
P
  Unfractionated heparin
0.3–0.7 kIU/L
0.3–0.7 IU/mL
  Low-molecular-weight heparin
0.5–1.0 kIU/L
0.5–1.0 IU/mL
  Danaparoid (Orgaran)
0.5–0.8 kIU/L
0.5–0.8 IU/mL
Autohemolysis test
WB
0.004–0.045
0.4–4.50%
Autohemolysis test with glucose
WB
0.003–0.007
0.3–0.7%
Bleeding time (adult)
<7.1 min
<7.1 min
Bone marrow
Clot retraction
WB
0.50–1.00/2 h
50–100%/2 h
Cryofibrinogen
P
Negative
Negative
D-dimer
P
220–740 ng/mL FEU
220–740 ng/mL FEU
Differential blood count
WB
Relative counts:
  Neutrophils
0.40–0.70
40–70%
  Bands
0.0–0.05
0–5%
  Lymphocytes
0.20–0.50
20–50%
  Monocytes
0.04–0.08
4–8%
  Eosinophils
0.0–0.6
0–6%
  Basophils
0.0–0.02
0–2%
Absolute counts:
  Neutrophils
1.42–6.34 × 109/L
1420–6340/mm3
  Bands
0–0.45 × 109/L
0–450/mm3
  Lymphocytes
0.71–4.53 × 109/L
710–4530/mm3
  Monocytes
0.14–0.72 × 109/L
140–720/mm3
  Eosinophils
0–0.54 × 109/L
0–540/mm3
  Basophils
0–0.18 × 109/L
0–180/mm3
Erythrocyte count
WB
  Adult males
4.30–5.60 × 1012/L
4.30–5.60 × 106/mm3
  Adult females
4.00–5.20 × 1012/L
4.00–5.20 × 106/mm3
Erythrocyte life span
WB
  Normal survival
120 days
120 days
  Chromium labeled, half-life (t1/2)
25–35 days
25–35 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
WB
  Females
0–20 mm/h
0–20 mm/h
  Males
0–15 mm/h
0–15 mm/h
Euglobulin lysis time
P
7200–14,400 s
120–240 min
Factor II, prothrombin
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor V
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VIII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor IX
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor X
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XI
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XIII screen
P
Not applicable
Present
Factor inhibitor assay
P
<0.5 Bethesda Units
<0.5 Bethesda Units
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
P
0–1 mg/L
0–1 μg/mL
Fibrinogen
P
2.33–4.96 g/L
233–496 mg/dL
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (erythrocyte)
WB
<2400 s
<40 min
Ham’s test (acid serum)
WB
Negative
Negative
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
283
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Hematocrit
WB
  Adult males
0.388–0.464
38.8–46.4
  Adult females
0.354–0.444
35.4–44.4
Hemoglobin
  Plasma
P
6–50 mg/L
0.6–5.0 mg/dL
  Whole blood:
WB
    Adult males
133–162 g/L
13.3–16.2 g/dL
    Adult females
120–158 g/L
12.0–15.8 g/dL
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
WB
  Hemoglobin A
0.95–0.98
95–98%
  Hemoglobin A2
0.015–0.031
1.5–3.1%
  Hemoglobin F
0–0.02
0–2.0%
  Hemoglobins other than A, A2, or F
Absent
Absent
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibody
P
Negative
Negative
Immature platelet fraction (IPF)
WB
0.011–0.061
1.1–6.1%
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Leukocytes
  Alkaline phosphatase (LAP)
WB
0.2–1.6 μkat/L
13–100 μ/L
  Count (WBC)
WB
3.54–9.06 × 109/L
3.54–9.06 × 103/mm3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
WB
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
WB
323–359 g/L
32.3–35.9 g/dL
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin of reticulocytes (CH)
WB
24–36 pg
24–36 pg
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
WB
79–93.3 fL
79–93.3 μm3
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
WB
9.00–12.95 fL
9.00–12.95
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
WB
  Direct
0.0035–0.0045
0.35–0.45%
  Indirect
0.0030–0.0065
0.30–0.65%
Partial thromboplastin time, activated
P
26.3–39.4 s
26.3–39.4 s
Plasminogen
P
  Antigen
84–140 mg/L
8.4–14.0 mg/dL
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
P
4–43 μg/L
4–43 ng/mL
Platelet aggregation
PRP
Not applicable
>65% aggregation in 
response to adenosine 
diphosphate, epinephrine, 
collagen, ristocetin, and ara-
chidonic acid
Platelet count
WB
165–415 × 109/L
165–415 × 103/mm3
Platelet, mean volume
WB
6.4–11 fL
6.4–11.0 μm3
Prekallikrein assay
P
0.50–1.5
50–150%
Prekallikrein screen
P
No deficiency detected
Protein C
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Protein S
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.65–1.40
65–140%
  Free antigen P
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A
WB
Not applicable
Not present
Prothrombin time
P
12.7–15.4 s
12.7–15.4 s
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
284
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
WB
0.28–0.64 μmol/L of 
red blood cells
16–36 μg/dL of red blood cells
Red cell distribution width
WB
<0.145
<14.5%
Reptilase time
P
16–23.6 s
16–23.6 s
Reticulocyte count
WB
  Adult males
0.008–0.023 red cells
0.8–2.3% red cells
  Adult females
0.008–0.020 red cells
0.8–2.0% red cells
Reticulocyte hemoglobin content
WB
>26 pg/cell
>26 pg/cell
Ristocetin cofactor (functional von Willebrand factor)
P
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
Serotonin release assay
S
<0.2 release
<20% release
Sickle cell test
WB
Negative
Negative
Sucrose hemolysis
WB
<0.1
<10% hemolysis
Thrombin time
P
15.3–18.5 s
15.3–18.5 s
Total eosinophils
WB
150–300 × 106/L
150–300/mm3
Transferrin receptor
S, P
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
Viscosity
  Plasma
P
1.7–2.1
1.7–2.1
  Serum
S
1.4–1.8
1.4–1.8
von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen (factor VIII:R  
antigen)
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
von Willebrand factor multimers
P
Normal distribution
Normal distribution
White blood cells: see “Leukocytes”
Abbreviations: JF, joint fluid; P, plasma; PRP, platelet-rich plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetoacetate
P
49–294 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 mg/dL
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
P
1.3–16.7 pmol/L
6.0–76.0 pg/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)
S
0.12–0.70 μkat/L
7–41 U/L
Albumin
S
40–50 g/L
4.0–5.0 mg/dL
Aldolase
S
26–138 nkat/L
1.5–8.1 U/L
Aldosterone (adult)
  Supine, normal sodium diet
S, P
<443 pmol/L
<16 ng/dL
  Upright, normal
S, P
111–858 pmol/L
4–31 ng/dL
Alpha fetoprotein (adult)
S
0–8.5 μg/L
0–8.5 ng/mL
Alpha1 antitrypsin
S
1.0–2.0 g/L
100–200 mg/dL
Ammonia, as NH3
P
11–35 μmol/L
19–60 μg/dL
Amylase (method dependent)
S
0.34–1.6 μkat/L
20–96 U/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
285
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Androstendione (adult)
S
  Males
0.81–3.1 nmol/L
23–89 ng/dL
  Females
    Premenopausal
0.91–7.5 nmol/L
26–214 ng/dL
    Postmenopausal
0.46–2.9 nmol/L
13–82 ng/dL
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
S
0.15–1.1 μkat/L
9–67 U/L
Anion gap
S
7–16 mmol/L
7–16 mmol/L
Apolipoprotein A-1
  Male
  Female
S
0.94–1.78 g/L
1.01–1.99 g/L
94–178 mg/dL
101–199 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein B
  Male
  Female
S
0.55–1.40 g/L
0.55–1.25 g/L
55–140 mg/dL
55–125 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases
  [HCO3
–]
  PCO2
  pH
  Po2
WB
22–30 mmol/L
4.3–6.0 kPa
7.35–7.45
9.6–13.8 kPa
22–30 meq/L
32–45 mmHg
7.35–7.45
72–104 mmHg
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT)
S
0.20–0.65 μkat/L
12–38 U/L
Autoantibodies
  Anti-centromere antibody IgG
  Anti-double-strand (native) DNA
  Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies
    Qualitative IgG, IgA
    Quantitative IgG antibody
  Anti-histone antibodies
  Anti-Jo-1 antibody
  Anti-mitochondrial antibody
    Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies
    Serine proteinase 3 antibodies
    Myeloperoxidase antibodies
  Antinuclear antibody
  Anti-parietal cell antibody
  Anti-RNP antibody
  Anti-Scl 70 antibody
  Anti-Smith antibody
  Anti–smooth muscle antibody
  Anti-SSA antibody
  Anti-SSB antibody
  Anti-thyroglobulin antibody
  Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody
S
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
<40 KIU/L
<35 KIU/L
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
<20 Units
<1:20
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Negative at 1:40
None detected
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
Negative
<40 IU/mL
<35 IU/mL
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
P
Age and gender specific: 
<100 ng/L
Age and gender specific:  
<100 pg/mL
Bence Jones protein, serum qualitative
S
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, serum quantitative
  Free kappa
  Free lambda
K/L ratio
S
3.3–19.4 mg/L
5.7–26.3 mg/L
0.26–1.65
0.33–1.94 mg/dL
0.57–2.63 mg/dL
0.26–1.65
Beta-2-microglobulin
S
1.1–2.4 mg/L
1.1–2.4 mg/L
Bilirubin
  Total
  Direct
  Indirect
S
5.1–22 μmol/L
1.7–6.8 μmol/L
3.4–15.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.3 mg/dL
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
0.2–0.9 mg/dL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
286
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
C peptide
S
0.27–1.19 nmol/L
0.8–3.5 ng/mL
C1-esterase-inhibitor protein
S
210–390 mg/L
21–39 mg/dL
CA 125
S
<35 kU/L
<35 U/mL
CA 19-9
S
<37 kU/L
<37 U/mL
CA 15-3
S
<33 kU/L
<33 U/mL
CA 27-29
S
0–40 kU/L
0–40 U/mL
Calcitonin
  Male
  Female
S
0–7.5 ng/L
0–5.1 ng/L
0–7.5 pg/mL
0–5.1 pg/mL
Calcium
S
2.2–2.6 mmol/L
8.7–10.2 mg/dL
Calcium, ionized
WB
1.12–1.32 mmol/L
4.5–5.3 mg/dL
Carbon dioxide content (TCO2)
P (sea level)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
  Loss of consciousness and death
WB
0.0–0.015
0.04–0.09
>0.50
0–1.5%
4–9%
>50%
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
S
0.0–3.0 μg/L
0.0–5.0 μg/L
0.0–3.0 ng/mL
0.0–5.0 ng/mL
Ceruloplasmin
S
250–630 mg/L
25–63 mg/dL
Chloride
S
102–109 mmol/L
102–109 meq/L
Cholesterol: see Table 5
Cholinesterase
S
5–12 kU/L
5–12 U/mL
Chromogranin A
S
0–50 μg/L
0–50 ng/mL
Complement
  C3
  C4
  Complement total
S
0.83–1.77 g/L
0.16–0.47 g/L
60–144 CAE units
83–177 mg/dL
16–47 mg/dL
60–144 CAE units
Cortisol
  Fasting, 8 a.m.–12 noon
  12 noon–8 p.m.
  8 p.m.–8 a.m.
S
138–690 nmol/L
138–414 nmol/L
0–276 nmol/L
5–25 μg/dL
5–15 μg/dL
0–10 μg/dL
C-reactive protein
S
<10 mg/L
<10 mg/L
C-reactive protein, high sensitivity
S
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (total)
  Females
  Males
S
0.66–4.0 μkat/L
0.87–5.0 μkat/L
39–238 U/L
51–294 U/L
Creatine kinase-MB
  Mass
  Fraction of total activity (by electrophoresis)
S
0.0–5.5 μg/L
0–0.04
0.0–5.5 ng/mL
0–4.0%
Creatinine
  Female
  Male
S
44–80 μmol/L
53–106 μmol/L
0.5–0.9 mg/dL
0.6–1.2 mg/dL
Cryoglobulins
S
Not applicable
None detected
Cystatin C
S
0.5–1.0 mg/L
0.5–1.0 mg/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
287
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
6.2–43.4 nmol/L
4.5–34.0 nmol/L
180–1250 ng/dL
130–980 ng/dL
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate
  Male (adult)
  Female (adult, premenopausal)
  Female (adult, postmenopausal)
S
100–6190 μg/L
120–5350 μg/L
300–2600 μg/L
10–619 μg/dL
12–535 μg/dL
30–260 μg/dL
11-Deoxycortisol (adult) (compound S)
S
0.34–4.56 nmol/L
12–158 ng/dL
Dihydrotestosterone
  Male
  Female
S, P
1.03–2.92 nmol/L
0.14–0.76 nmol/L
30–85 ng/dL
4–22 ng/dL
Dopamine
P
0–130 pmol/L
0–20 pg/mL
Epinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
<273 pmol/L
<328 pmol/L
<491 pmol/L
<50 pg/mL
<60 pg/mL
<90 pg/mL
Erythropoietin
S
4–27 U/L
4–27 U/L
Estradiol
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Midcycle peak
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
74–532 pmol/L
411–1626 pmol/L
74–885 pmol/L
217 pmol/L
74 pmol/L
<20–145 pg/mL
112–443 pg/mL
<20–241 pg/mL
<59 pg/mL
<20 pg/mL
Estrone
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
<555 pmol/L
<740 pmol/L
11–118 pmol/L
33–133 pmol/L
<150 pg/mL
<200 pg/mL
3–32 pg/mL
9–36 pg/mL
Fatty acids, free (nonesterified)
P
0.1–0.6 mmol/L
2.8–16.8 mg/dL
Ferritin
  Female
  Male
S
10–150 μg/L
29–248 μg/L
10–150 ng/mL
29–248 ng/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
  Female
    Menstruating
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
3.0–20.0 IU/L
9.0–26.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
18.0–153.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
3.0–20.0 mIU/mL
9.0–26.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
18.0–153.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Fructosamine
S
<285 umol/L
<285 umol/L
Gamma glutamyltransferase
S
0.15–0.99 μkat/L
9–58 U/L
Gastrin
S
<100 ng/L
<100 pg/mL
Glucagon
P
40–130 ng/L
40–130 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
288
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Glucose
Glucose (fasting)
  Normal
  Increased risk for diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
P
3.6–5.3 mmol/L
4.2–5.6 mmol/L
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
Fasting >7.0 mmol/L
A 2-hour level of >11.1 
mmol/L during an oral 
glucose tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥11.1 mmol/L in patients 
with symptoms of hyper-
glycemia
65–95 mg/dL
75–100 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
Fasting >126 mg/dL
A 2-hour level of ≥200 mg/dL 
during an oral glucose  
tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥200 mg/dL in patients with 
symptoms of hyperglycemia
Growth hormone
S
0–5 μg/L
0–5 ng/mL
Hemoglobin Alc
  Pre-diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
0.04–0.06 HgB fraction
0.057–0.064 HgB fraction
A hemoglobin A1c level 
of ≥0.065 Hgb fraction 
as suggested by the  
American Diabetes 
Association
4.0–5.6%
5.7–6.4%
A hemoglobin A1c level of 
≥6.5% as suggested by 
the American Diabetes  
Association
Hemoglobin A1c with estimated average glucose 
(eAg)
WB
eAg mmoL/L = 1.59 × 
HbA1c − 2.59
eAg (mg/dL) = 28.7 × HbA1c 
− 46.7
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) (see Table 5)
Homocysteine
P
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
  Nonpregnant female
  1–2 weeks postconception
  2–3 weeks postconception
  3–4 weeks postconception
  4–5 weeks postconception
  5–10 weeks postconception
  10–14 weeks postconception
  Second trimester
  Third trimester
S
<5 IU/L
9–130 IU/L
75–2600 IU/L
850–20,800 IU/L
4000–100,200 IU/L
11,500–289,000 IU/L
18,300–137,000 IU/L
1400–53,000 IU/L
940–60,000 IU/L
<5 mIU/mL
9–130 mIU/mL
75–2600 mIU/mL
850–20,800 mIU/mL
4000–100,200 mIU/mL
11,500–289,000 mIU/mL
18,300–137,000 mIU/mL
1400–53,000 mIU/mL
940–60,000 mIU/mL
b-Hydroxybutyrate
P
60–170 μmol/L
0.6–1.8 mg/dL
17-Hydroxyprogesterone (adult)
  Male
  Female
    Follicular phase
    Luteal phase
S
<4.17 nmol/L
0.45–2.1 nmol/L
1.05–8.7 nmol/L
<139 ng/dL
15–70 ng/dL
35–290 ng/dL
Immunofixation
S
Not applicable
No bands detected
Immunoglobulin, quantitation (adult)
  IgA
  IgD
  IgE
  IgG
    IgG1
    IgG2
    IgG3
    IgG4
  IgM
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
0.70–3.50 g/L
0–140 mg/L
1–87 KIU/L
7.0–17.0 g/L
2.7–17.4 g/L
0.3–6.3 g/L
0.13–3.2 g/L
0.11–6.2 g/L
0.50–3.0 g/L
70–350 mg/dL
0–14 mg/dL
1–87 IU/mL
700–1700 mg/dL
270–1740 mg/dL
30–630 mg/dL
13–320 mg/dL
11–620 mg/dL
50–300 mg/dL
Insulin
S, P
14.35–143.5 pmol/L
2–20 μU/mL
Iron
S
7–25 μmol/L
41–141 μg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
289
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Iron-binding capacity
S
45–73 μmol/L
251–406 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity saturation
S
0.16–0.35
16–35%
Ischemia modified albumin
S
<85 KU/L
<85 U/mL
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Ketone (acetone)
S
Negative
Negative
Lactate
P, arterial
P, venous
0.5–1.6 mmol/L
0.5–2.2 mmol/L
4.5–14.4 mg/dL
4.5–19.8 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase
S
2.0–3.8 μkat/L
115–221 U/L
Lipase
S
0.51–0.73 μkat/L
3–43 U/L
Lipids: see Table 5
Lipoprotein (a)
S
0–300 mg/L
0–30 mg/dL
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (see Table 5)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
  Female
    Menstruating
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
Male
S, P
2.0–15.0 U/L
22.0–105.0 U/L
0.6–19.0 U/L
16.0–64.0 U/L
2.0–12.0 U/L
2.0–15.0 mIU/mL
22.0–105.0 mIU/mL
0.6–19.0 mIU/mL
16.0–64.0 mIU/mL
2.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Magnesium
S
0.62–0.95 mmol/L
1.5–2.3 mg/dL
Metanephrine
P
<0.5 nmol/L
<100 pg/mL
Methemoglobin
WB
0.0–0.01
0–1%
Myoglobin
  Male
  Female
S
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
Norepinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
650–2423 pmol/L
709–4019 pmol/L
739–4137 pmol/L
110–410 pg/mL
120–680 pg/mL
125–700 pg/mL
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
S
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
NT-Pro BNP
S, P
<125 ng/L up to 75 years
<450 ng/L >75 years
<125 pg/mL up to 75 years
<450 pg/mL >75 years
5′ Nucleotidase
S
0.00–0.19 μkat/L
0–11 U/L
Osmolality
P
275–295 mosmol/kg 
serum water
275–295 mosmol/kg serum 
water
Osteocalcin
S
11–50 μg/L
11–50 ng/mL
Oxygen content
  Arterial (sea level)
  Venous (sea level)
WB
17–21
10–16
17–21 vol%
10–16 vol%
Oxygen saturation (sea level)
  Arterial
  Venous, arm
WB
Fraction:
0.94–1.0
0.60–0.85
Percent:
94–100%
60–85%
Parathyroid hormone (intact)
S
8–51 ng/L
8–51 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
290
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Phosphatase, alkaline
S
0.56–1.63 μkat/L
33–96 U/L
Phosphorus, inorganic
S
0.81–1.4 mmol/L
2.5–4.3 mg/dL
Potassium
S
3.5–5.0 mmol/L
3.5–5.0 meq/L
Prealbumin
S
170–340 mg/L
17–34 mg/dL
Procalcitonin
S
<0.1 μg/L
<0.1 ng/mL
Progesterone
  Female: Follicular
  Midluteal
  Male
S, P
<3.18 nmol/L
9.54–63.6 nmol/L
<3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
3–20 ng/mL
<1.0 ng/mL
Prolactin
  Male
  Female
S
53–360 mg/L
40–530 mg/L
2.5–17 ng/mL
1.9–25 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
S
0.0–4.0 μg/L
0.0–4.0 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen, free
S
With total PSA between 
4 and 10 μg/L and when 
the free PSA is:
>0.25 decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<0.10 increased risk of 
prostate cancer
With total PSA between 4 and 
10 ng/mL and when the free
PSA is:
>25% decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<10% increased risk of 
prostate cancer
Protein fractions:
  Albumin
  Globulin
  Alpha1
  Alpha2
  Beta
  Gamma
S
35–55 g/L
20–35 g/L
2–4 g/L
5–9 g/L
6–11 g/L
7–17 g/L
3.5–5.5 g/dL (50–60%)
2.0–3.5 g/dL (40–50%)
0.2–0.4 g/dL (4.2–7.2%)
0.5–0.9 g/dL (6.8–12%)
0.6–1.1 g/dL (9.3–15%)
0.7–1.7 g/dL (13–23%)
Protein, total
S
67–86 g/L
6.7–8.6 g/dL
Pyruvate
P
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
Rheumatoid factor
S
<15 kIU/L
<15 IU/mL
Serotonin
WB
0.28–1.14 umol/L
50–200 ng/mL
Serum protein electrophoresis
S
Not applicable
Normal pattern
Sex hormone–binding globulin (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
Sodium
S
136–146 mmol/L
136–146 meq/L
Somatomedin-C (IGF-1) (adult)
  16 years
  17 years
  18 years
  19 years
  20 years
  21–25 years
  26–30 years
  31–35 years
  36–40 years
  41–45 years
  46–50 years
  51–55 years
  56–60 years
  61–65 years
S
226–903 μg/L
193–731 μg/L
163–584 μg/L
141–483 μg/L
127–424 μg/L
116–358 μg/L
117–329 μg/L
115–307 μg/L
119–204 μg/L
101–267 μg/L
94–252 μg/L
87–238 μg/L
81–225 μg/L
75–212 μg/L
226–903 ng/mL
193–731 ng/mL
163–584 ng/mL
141–483 ng/mL
127–424 ng/mL
116–358 ng/mL
117–329 ng/mL
115–307 ng/mL
119–204 ng/mL
101–267 ng/mL
94–252 ng/mL
87–238 ng/mL
81–225 ng/mL
75–212 ng/mL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
291
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
  66–70 years
  71–75 years
  76–80 years
  81–85 years
69–200 μg/L
64–188 μg/L
59–177 μg/L
55–166 μg/L
69–200 ng/mL
64–188 ng/mL
59–177 ng/mL
55–166 ng/mL
Somatostatin
P
<25 ng/L
<25 pg/mL
Testosterone, free
  Female, adult
  Male, adult
S
10.4–65.9 pmol/L
312–1041 pmol/L
3–19 pg/mL
90–300 pg/mL
Testosterone, total,
  Female
  Male
S
0.21–2.98 nmol/L
9.36–37.10 nmol/L
6–86 ng/dL
270–1070 ng/dL
Thyroglobulin
S
1.3–31.8 μg/L
1.3–31.8 ng/mL
Thyroid-binding globulin
S
13–30 mg/L
1.3–3.0 mg/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
S
0.34–4.25 mIU/L
0.34–4.25 μIU/mL
Thyroxine, free (fT4)
S
9.0–16 pmol/L
0.7–1.24 ng/dL
Thyroxine, total (T4)
S
70–151 nmol/L
5.4–11.7 μg/dL
Thyroxine index (free)
S
6.7–10.9
6.7–10.9
Transferrin
S
2.0–4.0 g/L
200–400 mg/dL
Triglycerides (see Table 5)
S
0.34–2.26 mmol/L
30–200 mg/dL
Triiodothyronine, free (fT3)
S
3.7–6.5 pmol/L
2.4–4.2 pg/mL
Triiodothyronine, total (T3)
S
1.2–2.1 nmol/L
77–135 ng/dL
Troponin I (method dependent)
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.04 μg/L
0–0.04 ng/mL
Troponin T
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.01 μg/L
0–0.01 ng/mL
Urea nitrogen
S
2.5–7.1 mmol/L
7–20 mg/dL
Uric acid
  Females
  Males
S
0.15–0.33 mmol/L
0.18–0.41 mmol/L
2.5–5.6 mg/dL
3.1–7.0 mg/dL
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
P
0–60 ng/L
0–60 pg/mL
Zinc protoporphyrin
WB
0–400 μg/L
0–40 μg/dL
Zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP)-to-heme ratio
WB
0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme 0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme
Abbreviations: P, plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
292
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetaminophen
66–199 μmol/L
10–30 μg/mL
>1320 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Amikacin
  Peak
  Trough
34–51 μmol/L
0–17 μmol/L
20–30 μg/mL
0–10 μg/mL
>60 μmol/L
>17 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
>10 μg/mL
Amitriptyline/nortriptyline  
(total drug)
430–900 nmol/L
120–250 ng/mL
>1800 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Amphetamine
150–220 nmol/L
20–30 ng/mL
>1500 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Bromide
  Mild toxicity
  Severe toxicity
  Lethal
9.4–18.7 mmol/L
75–150 mg/dL
>18.8 mmol/L
6.4–18.8 
mmol/L
>18.8 mmol/L
>37.5 mmol/L
>150 mg/dL
51–150 mg/dL
>150 mg/dL
>300 mg/dL
Caffeine
25.8–103 μmol/L
5–20 μg/mL
>206 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Carbamazepine
17–42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
>85 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Chloramphenicol
  Peak
  Trough
31–62 μmol/L
15–31 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
5–10 μg/mL
>77 μmol/L
>46 μmol/L
>25 μg/mL
>15 μg/mL
Chlordiazepoxide
1.7–10 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 μg/mL
>17 μmol/L
>5.0 μg/mL
Clonazepam
32–240 nmol/L
10–75 ng/mL
>320 nmol/L
>100 ng/mL
Clozapine
0.6–2.1 μmol/L
200–700 ng/mL
>3.7 μmol/L
>1200 ng/mL
Cocaine
>3.3 μmol/L
>1.0 μg/mL
Codeine
43–110 nmol/mL
13–33 ng/mL
>3700 nmol/mL
>1100 ng/mL (lethal)
Cyclosporine
  Renal transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
  Cardiac transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
208–312 nmol/L
166–250 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
125–208 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
250–375 ng/mL
200–300 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
150–250 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
>312 nmol/L
>250 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>208 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>375 ng/mL
>300 ng/mL
>150 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>250 ng/mL
150 ng/mL
  Lung transplant 
    0–6 months
  Liver transplant
    Initiation
    Maintenance
250–374 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
83–166 nmol/L
300–450 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
100–200 ng/mL
>374 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>166 nmol/L
>450 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>200 ng/mL
Desipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Diazepam (and metabolite)
  Diazepam
  Nordiazepam
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
0.4–6.6 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
0.1–1.8 μg/mL
>7.0 μmol/L
>9.2 μmol/L
>2.0 μg/mL
>2.5 μg/mL
Digoxin
0.64–2.6 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
>5.0 nmol/L
>3.9 ng/mL
Disopyramide
5.3–14.7 μmol/L
2–5 μg/mL
>20.6 μmol/L
>7 μg/mL
Doxepin and nordoxepin
    Doxepin
    Nordoxepin
0.36–0.98 μmol/L
0.38–1.04 μmol/L
101–274 ng/mL
106–291 ng/mL
>1.8 μmol/L
>1.9 μmol/L
>503 ng/mL
>531 ng/mL
Ethanol
  Behavioral changes
  Legal limit
  Critical with acute exposure
>4.3 mmol/L
≥17 mmol/L
>54 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
≥80 mg/dL
>250 mg/dL
Ethylene glycol
  Toxic
  Lethal
>2 mmol/L
>20 mmol/L
>12 mg/dL
>120 mg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
293
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Ethosuximide
280–700 μmol/L
40–100 μg/mL
>700 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Everolimus
3.13–8.35 nmol/L
3–8 ng/mL
>12.5 nmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Flecainide
0.5–2.4 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>3.6 μmol/L
>1.5 μg/mL
Gentamicin
  Peak
  Trough
10–21 μmol/mL
0–4.2 μmol/mL
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>25 μmol/mL
>4.2 μmol/mL
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Heroin (diacetyl morphine)
>700 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL (as morphine)
Ibuprofen
49–243 μmol/L
10–50 μg/mL
>970 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Imipramine (and metabolite)
  Desimipramine
  Total imipramine + 
  desimipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
563–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
150–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
>500 ng/mL
Lamotrigine
11.7–54.7 μmol/L
3–14 μg/mL
>58.7 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Lidocaine
5.1–21.3 μmol/L
1.2–5.0 μg/mL
>38.4 μmol/L
>9.0 μg/mL
Lithium
0.5–1.3 mmol/L
0.5–1.3 meq/L
>2 mmol/L
>2 meq/L
Methadone
1.0–3.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.0 μg/mL
>6.5 μmol/L
>2 μg/mL
Methamphetamine
0.07–0.34 μmol/L
0.01–0.05 μg/mL
>3.35 μmol/L
>0.5μg/mL
Methanol
>6 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
Methotrexate
  Low-dose
  High-dose (24 h)
  High-dose (48 h)
  High-dose (72 h)
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
Morphine
232–286 μmol/L
65–80 ng/mL
>720 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Mycophenolic acid
3.1–10.9 μmol/L
1.0–3.5 ng/mL
>37 μmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Nitroprusside (as thiocyanate)
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Nortriptyline
190–569 nmol/L
50–150 ng/mL
>1900 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>258 μmol/L
>60 μg/mL
Phenytoin
40–79 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>158 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Phenytoin, free
  % Free
4.0–7.9 μg/mL
0.08–0.14
1–2 μg/mL
8–14%
>13.9 μg/mL
>3.5 μg/mL
Primidone and metabolite
  Primidone
  Phenobarbital
23–55 μmol/L
65–172 μmol/L
5–12 μg/mL
15–40 μg/mL
>69 μmol/L
>215 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
>50 μg/mL
Procainamide
  Procainamide
  NAPA (N-acetylprocainamide)
17–42 μmol/L
22–72 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
6–20 μg/mL
>43 μmol/L
>126 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
>35 μg/mL
Quinidine
6.2–15.4 μmol/L
2.0–5.0 μg/mL
>19 μmol/L
>6 μg/mL
Salicylates
145–2100 μmol/L
2–29 mg/dL
>2900 μmol/L
>40 mg/dL
Sirolimus (trough level) 
  Kidney transplant
4.4–15.4 nmol/L
4–14 ng/mL
>16 nmol/L
>15 ng/mL
Tacrolimus (FK506) (trough)
  Kidney and liver
    Initiation
    Maintenance
  Heart
    Initiation
    Maintenance
12–19 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
19–25 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
15–20 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
>20 ng/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
294
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Theophylline
56–111 μg/mL
10–20 μg/mL
>168 μg/mL
>30 μg/mL
Thiocyanate
  After nitroprusside infusion
  Nonsmoker
  Smoker
103–499 μmol/L
17–69 μmol/L
52–206 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
1–4 μg/mL
3–12 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Tobramycin
  Peak
  Trough
11–22 μg/L
0–4.3 μg/L
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>26 μg/L
>4.3 μg/L
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Valproic acid
346–693 μmol/L
50–100 μg/mL
>693 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Vancomycin
  Peak
  Trough
14–28 μmol/L
3.5–10.4 μmol/L
20–40 μg/mL
5–15 μg/mL
>55 μmol/L
>14 μmol/L
>80 μg/mL
>20 μg/mL
Table 4 
Vitamins and Selected Trace Minerals
Reference Range
Specimen
Analyte
SI Units
Conventional Units
Aluminum
S
<0.2 μmol/L
<5.41 μg/L
Arsenic
WB
0.03–0.31 μmol/L
2–23 μg/L
Cadmium
WB
<44.5 nmol/L
<5.0 μg/L
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone)
P
433–1532 μg/L
433–1532 μg/L
β-Carotene
S
0.07–1.43 μmol/L
4–77 μg/dL
Copper
S
11–22 μmol/L
70–140 μg/dL
Folic acid
RC
340–1020 nmol/L cells
150–450 ng/mL cells
Folic acid
S
12.2–40.8 nmol/L
5.4–18.0 ng/mL
Lead (adult)
S
<0.5 μmol/L
<10 μg/dL
Mercury
WB
3.0–294 nmol/L
0.6–59 μg/L
Selenium
S
0.8–2.0 umol/L
63–160 μg/L
Vitamin A
S
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
20–100 μg/dL
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
S
0–75 nmol/L
0–2 μg/dL
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
S
106–638 nmol/L
4–24 μg/dL
Vitamin B6
P
20–121 nmol/L
5–30 ng/mL
Vitamin B12
S
206–735 pmol/L
279–996 pg/mL
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
S
23–57 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D3,1,25-dihydroxy, total
S, P
36–180 pmol/L
15–75 pg/mL
Vitamin D3, 25-hydroxy, total
P
75–250 nmol/L
30–100 ng/mL
Vitamin E
S
12–42 μmol/L
5–18 μg/mL
Vitamin K
S
0.29–2.64 nmol/L
0.13–1.19 ng/mL
Zinc
S
11.5–18.4 μmol/L
75–120 μg/dL
Abbreviations: P, plasma; RC, red cells; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
295
Table 5 
Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL 
Cholesterol
LDL Cholesterol
  <70 mg/dL
Therapeutic option for very high 
risk patients
  <100 mg/dL
Optimal
  100–129 mg/dL
Near optimal/above optimal
  130–159 mg/dL
Borderline high
  160–189 mg/dL
High
  ≥190 mg/dL
Very high
Total Cholesterol
  <200 mg/dL
Desirable
  200–239 mg/dL
Borderline high
  ≥240 mg/dL
High
HDL Cholesterol
  <40 mg/dL
Low
  ≥60 mg/dL
High
Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density 
lipoprotein.
Source: Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) expert panel on detec-
tion, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in 
adults (adult treatment panel III). JAMA 2001;285:2486–97. 
SM Grundy et al for the Coordinating Committee of the 
National 
Cholesterol 
Education 
Program: 
Implications 
of 
recent clinical trials for the National Cholesterol Education 
Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. Circulation 2004; 
110:227.
Table 6
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acidity, titratable
20–40 mmol/d
20–40 meq/d
Aldosterone
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Aluminum
0.19–1.11 μmol/L
5–30 μg/L
Ammonia
30–50 mmol/d
30–50 meq/d
Amylase
4–400 U/L
Amylase/creatinine clearance ratio  
[(Clam/Clcr) × 100]
1–5
1–5
Arsenic
0.07–0.67 μmol/d
5–50 μg/d
Bence Jones protein, urine, qualitative
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, urine, quantitative
  Free kappa
  Free lambda
  K/L ratio
1.4–24.2 mg/L
0.2–6.7 mg/L
2.04–10.37
0.14–2.42 mg/dL
0.02–0.67 mg/dL
2.04–10.37
Calcium (10 meq/d or 200 mg/d dietary 
calcium)
<7.5 mmol/d
<300 mg/d
Chloride
140–250 mmol/d
140–250 mmol/d
Citrate
320–1240 mg/d
320–1240 mg/d
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
296
(continued)
Table 6
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests (CONTINUED)
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Copper
<0.95 μmol/d
<60 μg/d
Coproporphyrins (types I and III)
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
Cortisol, free
55–193 nmol/d
20–70 μg/d
Creatine, as creatinine
  Female
  Male
<760 μmol/d
<380 μmol/d
<100 mg/d
<50 mg/d
Creatinine
8.8–14 mmol/d
1.0–1.6 g/d
Dopamine
392–2876 nmol/d
60–440 μg/d
Eosinophils
<100 eosinophils/mL
<100 eosinophils/mL
Epinephrine
0–109 nmol/d
0–20 μg/d
Glomerular filtration rate
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the 
result by 1.21
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the result by 
1.21
Glucose (glucose oxidase method)
0.3–1.7 mmol/d
50–300 mg/d
5-Hydroindoleacetic acid [5-HIAA]
0–78.8 μmol/d
0–15 mg/d
Hydroxyproline
53–328 μmol/d
53–328 μmol/d
Iodine, spot urine
  WHO classification of iodine deficiency:
    Not iodine deficient
    Mild iodine deficiency
    Moderate iodine deficiency
    Severe iodine deficiency
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
Ketone (acetone)
Negative
Negative
17 Ketosteroids
3–12 mg/d
3–12 mg/d
Metanephrines
  Metanephrine
  Normetanephrine
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
Microalbumin
  Normal
  Microalbuminuria
  Clinical albuminuria
0.0–0.03 g/d
0.03–0.30 g/d
>0.3 g/d
0–30 mg/d
30–300 mg/d
>300 mg/d
Microalbumin/creatinine ratio
  Normal
  Microalbuminuria
  Clinical albuminuria
0–3.4 g/mol creatinine
3.4–34 g/mol creatinine
>34 g/mol creatinine
0–30 μg/mg creatinine
30–300 μg/mg creatinine
>300 μg/mg creatinine
β2-Microglobulin
0–160 μg/L
0–160 μg/L
Norepinephrine
89–473 nmol/d
15–80 μg/d
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Female, postmenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
Osmolality
100–800 mosm/kg
100–800 mosm/kg
Oxalate
  Male
  Female
80–500 μmol/d
45–350 μmol/d
7–44 mg/d
4–31 mg/d
pH
5.0–9.0
5.0–9.0
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
297
Table 6
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests (CONTINUED)
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Phosphate (phosphorus) (varies with 
intake)
12.9–42.0 mmol/d
400–1300 mg/d
Porphobilinogen
None
None
Potassium (varies with intake)
25–100 mmol/d
25–100 meq/d
Protein
<0.15 g/d
<150 mg/d
Protein/creatinine ratio
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Sediment
  Red blood cells
  White blood cells
  Bacteria
  Crystals
  Bladder cells
  Squamous cells
  Tubular cells
  Broad casts
  Epithelial cell casts
  Granular casts
  Hyaline casts
  Red blood cell casts
  Waxy casts
  White cell casts
0–2/high-power field
0–2/high-power field
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
0–5/low-power field
None
None
None
Sodium (varies with intake)
100–260 mmol/d
100–260 meq/d
Specific gravity:
  After 12-h fluid restriction
  After 12-h deliberate water intake
>1.025
≤1.003
>1.025
≤1.003
Tubular reabsorption, phosphorus
0.79–0.94 of filtered load
79–94% of filtered load
Urea nitrogen
214–607 mmol/d
6–17 g/d
Uric acid (normal diet)
1.49–4.76 mmol/d
250–800 mg/d
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
<30 μmol/d
<6 mg/d
Acknowledgment
The contributions of Drs. Daniel J. Fink, Patrick M. Sluss, 
James L. Januzzi, and Kent B. Lewandrowski to this chapter in 
previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 
are gratefully acknowledged. We also express our gratitude to 
Drs. Amudha Palanisamy and Scott Fink for careful review of 
tables and helpful suggestions.
This page intentionally left blank 
299
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to each 
question.
  1.	Which of the following is a potential etiology for 
ischemic acute renal failure?
A.	Apoptosis and necrosis of tubular cells
B.	Decreased glomerular vasodilation in response to nitric 
oxide
C.	Increased glomerular vasoconstriction in response to 
elevated endothelin levels
D.	Increased leukocyte adhesion within the glomerulus
E.	All of the above
  2.	A 47-year-old man with a history of diabetes mel-
litus, hyperlipidemia, tobacco abuse, and coronary 
artery disease undergoes emergency appendectomy. 
Which of the following conditions predisposes this 
patient to postoperative acute kidney injury?
A.	Abdominal procedure, emergency surgery, and 
hyperlipidemia
B.	Age greater than 40, abdominal procedure, and emergency 
surgery
C.	Age greater than 40, emergency surgery, and diabetes 
mellitus
D.	Coronary artery disease, tobacco abuse, and abdominal 
procedure
E.	Diabetes mellitus and emergency procedure
  3.	A 57-year-old man with a history of diabetes melli-
tus and chronic kidney disease with a baseline creati-
nine of 1.8 mg/dL undergoes cardiac catheterization 
for acute myocardial infarction. He is subsequently 
diagnosed with acute kidney injury related to iodin-
ated contrast. All of the following statements are true 
regarding his kidney injury EXCEPT:
A.	Fractional excretion of sodium will be low.
B.	His creatinine is likely to peak within 3–5 days.
C.	His diabetes mellitus predisposed him to develop contrast 
nephropathy.
  3.	(Continued)
D.	Transient tubule obstruction with precipitated iodin-
ated contrast contributed to the development of his 
acute kidney injury.
E.	White blood cell casts are likely on microscopic 
examination of urinary sediment.
  4.	Which of the following acute kidney injury patients 
is most likely to have evidence of hydronephrosis on 
ultrasound evaluation of the kidneys?
A.	A 19-year-old man with purpura fulminans associated 
with gonococcal sepsis
B.	A 37-year-old woman undergoing chemotherapy and 
radiation for advanced cervical cancer
C.	A 53-year-old man with E. coli 0157:H7–associated 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
D.	An 85-year-old nursing home resident with pyelone-
phritis and sepsis
E.	None of the above
  5.	In evaluation for acute kidney injury in a patient who 
has recently undergone cardiopulmonary bypass dur-
ing mitral valve replacement, which of the following 
findings on urine microscopy is most suggestive of 
cholesterol emboli as the source of renal failure?
A.	Calcium oxalate crystals
B.	Eosinophiluria
C.	Granular casts
D.	Normal sediment
E.	White blood cell casts
  6.	A 54-year-old man is admitted to the medical inten-
sive care unit with sepsis associated with pneumococ-
cal pneumonia. He requires mechanical ventilation 
as well as norepinephrine to maintain a mean arterial 
pressure greater than 60 mmHg. Invasive hemody-
namics show adequate left-heart filling pressures, and 
he is not known to have left ventricular dysfunction. 
On the third hospital day, his urine output drops and 
his creatinine increases to 3.4 mg/dL. Acute tubular 
REVIEW AND 
SELF-ASSESSMENTa
Charles Wiener    n    Cynthia D. Brown    n    Anna R. Hemnes
QUESTIONS
aQuestions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2012.
Review and Self-Assessment
300
  6.	(Continued)
	
injury is diagnosed. Which of the following agents 
has been shown to improve outcomes associated with 
his acute tubular injury?
A.	Furosemide
B.	Bosentan
C.	Low-dose dopamine
D.	Insulin-like growth factor
E.	None of the above
  7.	It is hospital day 5 for a 65-year-old patient with pre-
renal azotemia secondary to dehydration. His creati-
nine was initially 3.6 mg/dL on admission, but it has 
improved today to 2.1 mg/dL. He complains of mild 
lower back pain, and you prescribe naproxen to be 
taken intermittently. By what mechanism might this 
drug further impair his renal function?
A.	Afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction
B.	Afferent arteriolar vasodilatation
C.	Efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction
D.	Proximal tubular toxicity
E.	Ureteral obstruction
  8.	Preoperative assessment of a 55-year-old male patient 
for coronary angiography shows an estimated glo-
merular filtration rate of 33 mL/min per 1.73 m2 
and poorly controlled diabetes. He is currently on no 
nephrotoxic medications, and the nephrologist assures 
you that he does not currently have acute renal failure. 
The surgery is due to begin in 4 hours, and you would 
like to prevent contrast nephropathy. Which agent 
will definitely reduce the risk of contrast nephropathy?
A.	Dopamine
B.	Fenoldopam
C.	Indomethacin
D.	N-acetylcysteine
E.	Sodium bicarbonate
  9.	In stage 5 chronic kidney disease the glomerular fil-
tration rate is below:
A.	50 mL/min per 1.73 m2
B.	25 mL/min per 1.73 m2
C.	15 mL/min per 1.73 m2
D.	5 mL/min per 1.73 m2
E.	0 mL/min per 1.73 m2 (anuria)
10.	What is the leading cause of death in patients with 
chronic kidney disease?
A.	Cardiovascular disease
B.	Hyperkalemia
10.	(Continued)
C.	Infection
D.	Malignancy
E.	Uremia
11.	All of the following statements regarding the use of 
exogenous erythropoietin in patients with chronic 
kidney disease are true EXCEPT:
A.	Exogenous erythropoietin should be administered with 
a target hemoglobin concentration of 100–115 g/L.
B.	The use of exogenous erythropoietin is associated with 
improved cardiovascular outcomes.
C.	The use of exogenous erythropoietin is associated with 
increased risk of stroke in patients with concomitant 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
D.	The use of exogenous erythropoietin may be associ-
ated with faster progression to the need for dialysis.
E.	The use of exogenous erythropoietin is associated with 
an increased incidence of thromboembolic events.
12.	A patient is followed closely by her nephrologist for 
stage IV chronic kidney disease associated with focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis. Which of the follow-
ing is an indication for initiation of maintenance 
hemodialysis?
A.	Acidosis controlled with daily bicarbonate administra-
tion
B.	Bleeding diathesis
C.	BUN greater than 110 mg/dL without symptoms
D.	Creatinine greater than 5 mg/dL without symptoms
E.	Hyperkalemia controlled with sodium polystyrene
13.	A 27-year-old woman with chronic kidney disease 
is undergoing hemodialysis and is found to be hypo-
tensive during her treatment. Which of the follow-
ing are potential mechanisms for hypotension during 
hemodialysis?
A.	Antihypertensive agents
B.	Excessive ultrafiltration
C.	Impaired autonomic responses
D.	Osmolar shifts
E.	All of the above
14.	A 35-year-old woman with hypertensive kidney dis-
ease progresses to end-stage renal disease. She was 
initiated on peritoneal dialysis 1 year ago and has 
done well with relief of her uremic symptoms. She 
is brought to the emergency department with fever, 
altered mental status, diffuse abdominal pain, and 
cloudy dialysate. Her peritoneal fluid is withdrawn 
through her catheter and sent to the laboratory for 
analysis. The fluid white blood cell count is 125/mm3
299
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to each 
question.
  1.	Which of the following is a potential etiology for 
ischemic acute renal failure?
A.	Apoptosis and necrosis of tubular cells
B.	Decreased glomerular vasodilation in response to nitric 
oxide
C.	Increased glomerular vasoconstriction in response to 
elevated endothelin levels
D.	Increased leukocyte adhesion within the glomerulus
E.	All of the above
  2.	A 47-year-old man with a history of diabetes mel-
litus, hyperlipidemia, tobacco abuse, and coronary 
artery disease undergoes emergency appendectomy. 
Which of the following conditions predisposes this 
patient to postoperative acute kidney injury?
A.	Abdominal procedure, emergency surgery, and 
hyperlipidemia
B.	Age greater than 40, abdominal procedure, and emergency 
surgery
C.	Age greater than 40, emergency surgery, and diabetes 
mellitus
D.	Coronary artery disease, tobacco abuse, and abdominal 
procedure
E.	Diabetes mellitus and emergency procedure
  3.	A 57-year-old man with a history of diabetes melli-
tus and chronic kidney disease with a baseline creati-
nine of 1.8 mg/dL undergoes cardiac catheterization 
for acute myocardial infarction. He is subsequently 
diagnosed with acute kidney injury related to iodin-
ated contrast. All of the following statements are true 
regarding his kidney injury EXCEPT:
A.	Fractional excretion of sodium will be low.
B.	His creatinine is likely to peak within 3–5 days.
C.	His diabetes mellitus predisposed him to develop contrast 
nephropathy.
  3.	(Continued)
D.	Transient tubule obstruction with precipitated iodin-
ated contrast contributed to the development of his 
acute kidney injury.
E.	White blood cell casts are likely on microscopic 
examination of urinary sediment.
  4.	Which of the following acute kidney injury patients 
is most likely to have evidence of hydronephrosis on 
ultrasound evaluation of the kidneys?
A.	A 19-year-old man with purpura fulminans associated 
with gonococcal sepsis
B.	A 37-year-old woman undergoing chemotherapy and 
radiation for advanced cervical cancer
C.	A 53-year-old man with E. coli 0157:H7–associated 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
D.	An 85-year-old nursing home resident with pyelone-
phritis and sepsis
E.	None of the above
  5.	In evaluation for acute kidney injury in a patient who 
has recently undergone cardiopulmonary bypass dur-
ing mitral valve replacement, which of the following 
findings on urine microscopy is most suggestive of 
cholesterol emboli as the source of renal failure?
A.	Calcium oxalate crystals
B.	Eosinophiluria
C.	Granular casts
D.	Normal sediment
E.	White blood cell casts
  6.	A 54-year-old man is admitted to the medical inten-
sive care unit with sepsis associated with pneumococ-
cal pneumonia. He requires mechanical ventilation 
as well as norepinephrine to maintain a mean arterial 
pressure greater than 60 mmHg. Invasive hemody-
namics show adequate left-heart filling pressures, and 
he is not known to have left ventricular dysfunction. 
On the third hospital day, his urine output drops and 
his creatinine increases to 3.4 mg/dL. Acute tubular 
REVIEW AND 
SELF-ASSESSMENTa
Charles Wiener    n    Cynthia D. Brown    n    Anna R. Hemnes
QUESTIONS
aQuestions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2012.
Review and Self-Assessment
302
22.	Which of the following is an extrarenal manifestation 
of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease?
A.	Aortic regurgitation
B.	Aortic root dilation
C.	Colonic diverticulae
D.	Intracranial aneurysm
E.	All of the above
23.	A 21-year-old male college student is evaluated for 
profound fatigue that has been present for several 
years but has recently become debilitating. He also 
reports several foot spasms and cramps, and occasional 
sustained muscle contractions that are uncontrollable. 
He is otherwise healthy, takes no medications, and 
denies tobacco or alcohol use. On examination he 
is well developed with normal vital signs including 
blood pressure. The remainder of the examination 
is normal. Laboratory evaluation shows a sodium of 
138 meq/L, potassium of 2.8 meq/L, chloride of 
90 meq/L, and bicarbonate of 30 mmol/L. Magne-
sium level is normal. Urine screen for diuretics is 
negative, and urine chloride is elevated. Which of the 
following is the most likely diagnosis?
A.	Bulimia nervosa
B.	Diuretic abuse
C.	Gitelman’s syndrome
D.	Liddle’s syndrome
E.	Type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism
24.	A 28-year-old woman was recently diagnosed with 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease after 
an episode of hematuria. She is concerned about her 
intracranial aneurysm risk. Which of the following 
statements is true regarding this risk?
24.	(Continued)
A.	Family history of ruptured intracranial aneurysms does 
not increase risk of rupture.
B.	Prior intracranial hemorrhage does not increase risk of 
subsequent hemorrhage.
C.	The size of the aneurysm does not correlate with its 
risk of spontaneous rupture.
D.	There is no increased risk of intracranial aneurysm in 
this condition.
E.	Uncontrolled hypertension augments the risk of 
spontaneous rupture.
25.	A patient with a history of Sjögren’s syndrome has 
the following laboratory findings: plasma sodium 
139 meq/L, chloride 112 meq/L, bicarbonate 15 meq/L, 
and potassium 3.0 meq/L; urine studies show a pH of 
6.0, sodium of 15 meq/L, potassium of 10 meq/L, and 
chloride of 12 meq/L. The most likely diagnosis is:
A.	Type I renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
B.	Type II RTA
C.	Type III RTA
D.	Type IV RTA
E.	Chronic diarrhea
26.	A 16-year-old female star gymnast presents to your 
office complaining of fatigue, diffuse weakness, and 
muscle cramps. She has no previous medical history 
and denies tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use. There 
is no significant family history. Examination shows a 
thin female with normal blood pressure. Body mass 
index (BMI) is 18 kg/m2. Oral examination shows 
poor dentition. Muscle tone is normal, and neu-
rologic examination is normal. Laboratory studies 
show hematocrit of 38.5%, creatinine of 0.6 mg/dL, 
serum bicarbonate of 30 meq/L, and potassium of 
2.7 meq/L. Further evaluation should include which 
of the following?
A.	Urinalysis and urine culture
B.	Plasma renin and aldosterone levels
C.	Urine toxicology screen for opiates
D.	Urine toxicology screen for diuretics
E.	Serum magnesium level
27.	In which of the following cases would treatment 
for biopsy-proven interstitial nephritis with corti-
costeroids be most likely to impact long-term renal 
recovery?
A.	A 37-year-old woman with sarcoidosis
B.	A 48-year-old man with slowly progressing interstitial 
nephritis over 2 months with fibrosis found on biopsy
C.	A 54-year-old man with diabetes mellitus and recent 
salmonella infection
Figure 21
Review and Self-Assessment
303
27.	(Continued)
D.	A 63-year-old man with allergic interstitial nephritis 
after cephalosporin antibiotic use
E.	None of the above
28.	A 58-year-old woman undergoes a hysterectomy and 
postoperatively develops acute respiratory distress syn-
drome. She is treated with mechanical ventilation and 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Aside from hypothyroid-
ism, she has no underlying medical conditions. On day 
5 of her hospitalization her urine output is noted to 
fall and her serum creatinine rises from 1.2 mg/dL to 
2.5 mg/dL. Allergic interstitial nephritis from cephalo-
sporin antibiotics is suspected. Which of the following 
findings will confirm this diagnosis?
A.	Hematuria
B.	Peripheral blood eosinophilia
C.	Urinary eosinophils on urine microscopy
D.	White blood cell casts on urine microscopy
E.	None of the above
29.	A 44-year-old obese woman undergoes elective cho-
lecystectomy for cholelithiasis. Postoperatively she 
does well and is discharged after 3 days. Two days 
after discharge she develops altered mental status and 
fever, and is brought to the emergency department 
by her family. She takes an antidepressant, but is 
otherwise healthy. Her temperature is 103°F, pulse 
is 127 beats/min, blood pressure is 110/78 mmHg, 
and respiratory rate and oxygen saturation are nor-
mal. Examination is notable for confusion and a 
well-healed surgical incision. Routine chemistries 
are drawn and show normal electrolytes, BUN of 80 
mg/dL, creatinine of 2.5 mg/dL, white blood cell 
count of 17.3 thousand/μL, hematocrit of 30%, and 
platelet count of 25 thousand/μL. A peripheral blood 
smear shows schistocytes and confirms low platelets 
without clumping. Which of the following state-
ments regarding her condition is true?
A.	Low activity of the metalloprotease ADAMTS13 is 
likely present in her peripheral blood.
B.	Plasma exchange is unlikely to be helpful.
C.	This was likely caused by an occult E. coli 0157:H7 
infection.
D.	This condition is more common in men than women.
E.	Untreated mortality from this condition is low.
30.	A 35-year-old female presents with complaints of 
bilateral lower extremity edema, polyuria, and mod-
erate left-sided flank pain that began approximately 
2 weeks ago. There is no past medical history. She is 
taking no medications and denies tobacco, alcohol, or 
illicit drug use. Examination shows normal vital signs, 
30.	(Continued)
	
including normal blood pressure. There is 2+ edema 
in the bilateral lower extremities. The 24-hour urine 
collection is significant for 3.5 g of protein. Urinalysis 
is bland except for the proteinuria. Serum creatinine 
is 0.7 mg/dL, and ultrasound examination shows the 
left kidney measuring 13 cm and the right kidney 
measuring 11.5 cm. You are concerned about renal 
vein thrombosis. What test do you choose for the 
evaluation?
A.	Computed tomography of the renal veins
B.	Contrast venography
C.	Magnetic resonance venography
D.	99Tc-labeled pentetic acid (DPTA) imaging
E.	Ultrasound with Doppler evaluation of the renal veins
31.	A 48-year-old man with diabetes mellitus and hyper-
lipidemia presents to the emergency department for 
evaluation of right flank pain and groin pain that has 
been severe and present for approximately 3 hours. 
He is diagnosed with a kidney stone. Which of the 
following is most likely to be found as the constituent 
of his stone?
A.	Calcium
B.	Cysteine
C.	Oxalic acid
D.	Struvite
E.	Uric acid
32.	A 54-year-old woman with a history of colon can-
cer treated with resection 2 years prior and chemo-
therapy is admitted to the hospital after routine lab 
work at her primary care physician’s office showed 
a BUN of 65 mg/dL and a creatinine of 4.5 mg/dL. 
She reports mild fatigue and recent lower back pain, 
but otherwise feels well. She does admit to recent 
NSAID use, but has not taken more than the recom-
mended quantity. Aside from stopping NSAIDs and 
avoiding nephrotoxins, which of the following stud-
ies should be ordered first?
A.	CT of the abdomen/pelvis with oral contrast
B.	Post-void residual volume of bladder
C.	Retrograde urography
D.	Ultrasound of the abdomen/kidney
E.	Urinary fractional excretion of sodium
33.	A 67-year-old man presents to the emergency depart-
ment with severe abdominal distention and pain. He 
is found to have a palpable bladder, and after Foley 
catheter placement 1.5 L of urine passes. His prostate-
specific antigen (PSA) is not elevated, but he does 
report that he has had difficulty passing his urine for 
Review and Self-Assessment
304
33.	(Continued)
	
several weeks, culminating in no urination for 2 days. 
His BUN is 89 mg/dL and creatinine is 6.4 mg/dL. 
Over the next 4 days of hospitalization, his BUN and 
Cr fall, but his urine output is found to be rising. He is 
not receiving intravenous fluids. He passes 6 L of urine 
on the third and fourth hospital days. Which is the 
most likely explanation for the increased urine output?
A.	Cerebral salt wasting
B.	Decreased medullary osmolarity
C.	Increased activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system
D.	Increased tubule pressure
E.	Postobstructive diuresis
34.	The patient in question 33 is at risk for which of the 
following complications?
A.	Erythrocytosis
B.	Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
C.	Hyperkalemia
D.	Prerenal azotemia
E.	Systemic hypertension
35.	The pain associated with acute urinary tract obstruc-
tion is a result of which of the following?
A.	Compensatory natriuresis
B.	Decreased medullary blood flow
C.	Increased renal blood flow
D.	Vasodilatory prostaglandins
36.	You are evaluating a 28-year-old man from Peru with 
abdominal pain. As part of the diagnostic workup, an 
abdominal ultrasound shows bilateral hydronephrosis 
and hydroureters. Which of the following conditions 
is least likely in this patient?
A.	Lymphoma
B.	Meatal stenosis
C.	Phimosis
D.	Retroperitoneal fibrosis
37.	During the first 2 weeks after solid organ transplanta-
tion, which family of infection is most common?
A.	Cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus reactivation
B.	Humoral immunodeficiency–associated infections 
(e.g., meningococcemia, invasive Streptococcus pneumoniae 
infection)
C.	Neutropenia-associated infection (e.g., aspergillosis, 
candidemia)
D.	T-cell deficiency–associated infections (e.g., Pneumocystis 
jiroveci, nocardiosis, cryptococcosis)
37.	(Continued)
E.	Typical hospital-acquired infections (e.g., central line 
infection, hospital-acquired pneumonia, urinary tract 
infection)
38.	A 22-year-old woman underwent cadaveric renal 
transplantation 3 months ago for congenital obstruc-
tive uropathy. After a demanding college examination 
schedule during which she forgot to take some of her 
medications, she is admitted to the hospital with a 
temperature of 102°F, arthralgias, lymphopenia, and 
a rise in creatinine from her baseline of 1.2 mg/dL to 
2.4 mg/dL. Which of the following medications did 
she most likely forget?
A.	Acyclovir
B.	Isoniazid
C.	Itraconazole
D.	Trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole
E.	Valganciclovir
39.	A 63-year-old man complains of notable pink-tinged 
urine for the past month. At first he thought it was 
caused by eating beets, but it has not cleared. His med-
ical history is notable for hypertension and cigarette 
smoking. He does report some worsening urinary 
frequency and hesitancy over the past 2 years. Physi-
cal examination is unremarkable. Urinalysis is notable 
for gross hematuria with no white blood cells or casts. 
Renal function is normal. Which of the following 
statements regarding this patient is true?
A.	Cigarette smoking is not a risk for bladder cancer.
B.	Gross hematuria makes prostate cancer more likely 
than bladder cancer.
C.	If invasive bladder cancer with nodal involvement  
but no distant metastases is found, the 5-year survival 
is 20%.
D.	If superficial bladder cancer is found, intravesicular 
BCG may be used as adjuvant therapy.
E.	Radical cystectomy is generally recommended for 
invasive bladder cancer.
40.	A 68-year-old man comes to his physician complaining 
of 2 months of increasing right flank pain with 1 month 
of worsening hematuria. He was treated for cystitis at a 
walk-in clinic 3 weeks ago with no improvement. He 
also reports poor appetite and 5 lb of weight loss. His 
physical examination is notable for a palpable mass in 
the right flank measuring greater than 5 cm. His renal 
function is normal. All of the following are true about 
this patient’s likely diagnosis EXCEPT:
A.	Anemia is more common than erythrocytosis.
B.	Cigarette smoking increased his risk.
Review and Self-Assessment
305
ANSWERS
40.	(Continued)
C.	If his disease has metastasized, with best therapy 5-year 
survival is greater than 50%.
D.	If his disease is confined to the kidney, 5-year survival 
is greater than 80%.
E.	The most likely pathology is clear cell carcinoma.
41.	In the patient described in question 40, imaging shows 
a 10-cm solid mass in the right kidney and multiple 
nodules in the lungs consistent with metastatic disease. 
41.	(Continued)
	
Needle biopsy of a lung lesion confirms the diagno-
sis of renal cell carcinoma. Which of the following is 
recommended therapy?
A.	Gemcitabine
B.	Interferon-gamma
C.	Interleukin-2
D.	Radical nephrectomy
E.	Sunitinib
  1.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) Ischemic acute renal failure has many potential 
etiologies. Microvascular disorders include increased vaso-
constriction from endothelin and other mediators, decreased 
nitric oxide, prostaglandin- or bradykinin-mediated vaso-
dilation, increased endothelial and vascular smooth muscle 
cell damage, and increased leukocyte adhesion. Tubular 
factors include cytoskeletal breakdown, loss of polarity, 
apoptosis and necrosis, desquamation of viable and necrotic 
cells, tubular obstruction, and backleak. Inflammatory and 
vasoactive mediators may affect both tubular and microvas-
cular pathophysiologic mechanisms.
  2.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) The risk for acute kidney injury is less well stud-
ied for abdominal procedures compared to cardiac surgery, 
but appears to be relatively comparable. Abdominal pro-
cedures, however, are not thought to be of particular risk 
compared with other major chest or orthopedic procedures. 
Common risk factors for postoperative acute kidney injury 
include underlying chronic kidney disease, older age, diabe-
tes mellitus, congestive heart failure, and emergency proce-
dures. Most commonly, postoperative acute kidney injury 
is multifactorial.
  3.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) Iodinated contrast agents that are commonly used 
in cardiovascular and CT imaging are a major cause of acute 
kidney injury. Underlying mechanisms leading to kidney 
injury include transient tubular obstruction by contrast mate-
rial, hypoxia in the other renal medulla due to alterations 
in renal microcirculation and occlusion of small vessels, and 
cytotoxic damage to the tubules directly or through the gen-
eration of free radicals by contrast material. Risk factors for 
contrast-associated nephropathy include diabetes mellitus, 
congestive heart failure, preexisting chronic kidney disease, 
and multiple myeloma–associated renal failure. Serum creati-
nine begins to rise at 24–48 hours and will peak at 3–5 days, 
usually with resolution within a week. Urinary sediment 
is bland, without casts. The fractional excretion of sodium is 
low in many cases, particularly early before tubular injury is 
extensive because of the microvascular source of injury.
  4.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 10) Postrenal obstruction is an important and poten-
tially reversible cause of acute kidney injury. Ultrasound 
evaluation of the kidneys classically demonstrates bilateral 
hydronephrosis, as unilateral obstruction is unlikely to 
cause kidney injury unless a single functioning kidney is 
present, chronic kidney disease preexists, or rarely there 
is reflex vasospasm of the unobstructed kidney. Advanced 
cervical cancer with invasion into the urinary system or 
retroperitoneum is a common cause of obstructive uropa-
thy. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), dis-
seminated gonococcus with sepsis, and pyelonephritis are 
intrinsic causes of acute kidney failure and will not cause 
bilateral hydronephrosis.
  5.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 10) Cholesterol emboli are an important cause of 
acute kidney injury in patients who have undergone car-
diac procedures that may disrupt aortic atherosclerotic dis-
ease and shower cholesterol emboli. Livedo reticularis is a 
common finding on physical examination, and peripheral 
blood eosinophilia may be present. When found, eosin-
ophiluria is highly suggestive. The other major cause of 
eosinophiluria is acute interstitial nephritis. White blood 
cell casts suggest interstitial nephritis, pyelonephritis, glo-
merulonephritis, or malignant infiltration of the kidney; 
calcium oxalate crystals are found in ethylene glycol intox-
ication; and granular casts are suggestive of acute ischemic 
kidney injury (acute tubular necrosis), glomerulonephritis, 
vasculitis, or tubulointerstitial nephritis.
  6.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) Multiple studies have demonstrated that acute 
kidney injury is an independent poor prognostic indicator 
in critically ill patients with multiple medical conditions. 
Unfortunately, care of critically ill patients with acute kidney 
injury is supportive, as no specific therapy has been shown 
to improve outcomes. Agents that have specifically been 
shown to have no benefit in the treatment of acute tubular 
injury include atrial natriuretic peptide, low-dose dopa-
mine, endothelin antagonists, loop diuretics, calcium chan-
nel blockers, α-adrenergic receptor blockers, prostaglandin 
Review and Self-Assessment
306
analogs, antioxidants, insulin-like growth factor, and anti-
bodies against leukocyte adhesion molecules. Volume 
repletion is critical to ensure adequate perfusion, and 
diuretics are only indicated in patients with replete fluid 
status and low urinary flow rates.
  7.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 
10) 
Nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory 
drugs 
(NSAIDs) do not alter glomerular filtration rate in normal 
individuals. However, in states of mild to moderate hypo-
perfusion (as in prerenal azotemia) or in the presence of 
chronic kidney disease, glomerular perfusion and filtra-
tion fraction are preserved through several compensa-
tory mechanisms. In response to a reduction in perfusion 
pressures, stretch receptors in afferent arterioles trigger a 
cascade of events that lead to afferent arteriolar dilatation 
and efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction, thereby preserving 
glomerular filtration fraction. These mechanisms are partly 
mediated by the vasodilators prostaglandin E2 and prosta-
cyclin. NSAIDs can impair the kidney’s ability to com-
pensate for a low perfusion pressure by interfering with 
local prostaglandin synthesis and inhibiting these protec-
tive responses. Ureteral obstruction is not the mechanism 
by which NSAIDs impair renal function in this scenario. 
NSAIDs are not known to be proximal tubule toxins.
  8.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) Radiocontrast agents cause renal injury through 
intrarenal vasoconstriction and the generation of oxygen 
radicals, causing acute tubular necrosis. These medications 
cause an acute decrease in renal blood flow and glomerular 
filtration rate. Patients with chronic kidney disease, diabe-
tes mellitus, heart failure, multiple myeloma, and volume 
depletion are at the highest risk of contrast nephropathy. 
It is clear that hydration with normal saline is an effec-
tive measure to prevent contrast nephropathy. Of the 
other measures mentioned here, only sodium bicarbon-
ate or N-acetylcysteine could be recommended for clinical 
use to reduce the risk of contrast nephropathy. Dopamine 
has been proven an ineffective agent to prevent contrast 
nephropathy. Fenoldopam, a D1-receptor agonist, has 
been tested in several clinical trials and does not appear to 
reduce the incidence of contrast nephropathy. Although 
several small clinical studies have suggested a clinical ben-
efit to the use of N-acetylcysteine, a meta-analysis has been 
inconclusive, and the medication should be administered 
well in advance of the procedure. Sodium bicarbonate 
begun within 1 hour of the procedure has shown a signifi-
cant benefit in a single-center, randomized controlled trial. 
Due to the time limitations, and based on the evidence, 
only sodium bicarbonate would be helpful in this patient.
  9.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 11) Chronic kidney disease is classified by glomeru-
lar filtration rate. In stage 0 patients, GFR is greater than 
90 mL/min per 1.73 m2, stage 2 GFR is 60–89 mL/min 
per 1.73 m2, stage 3 GFR is 30–59 mL/min per 1.73 m2, 
and stage 4 GFR is 15–29 mL/min per 1.73 m2. Stage 5 
GFR is less than 15 mL/min per 1.73 m2.
10.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 11) The leading cause of morbidity and mortality in 
patients with chronic kidney disease regardless of stage is car-
diovascular disease. The presence of chronic kidney disease 
is a major risk factor for ischemic heart disease; in addition to 
traditional cardiovascular risk factors, patients with chronic 
kidney disease have additional risk factors including anemia, 
hyperphosphatemia, hyperparathyroidism, sleep apnea, and 
systemic inflammation. Left ventricular hypertrophy and 
dilated cardiomyopathy are also frequently present in those 
with chronic kidney disease and are strongly associated with 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
11.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 11) Anemia is a common consequence of chronic 
kidney disease and may be multifactorial, with etiolo-
gies including relative erythropoietin deficiency, iron 
deficiency, chronic inflammation, diminished red cell 
survival, and bleeding diathesis. Several trials of erythro-
poietin supplementation in patients with chronic kidney 
disease have failed to show improved cardiovascular out-
comes with this therapy. Indeed, these trials have shown 
a higher incidence of thromboembolic events, stroke in 
Type 2 diabetics, and potentially faster progression to 
need for dialysis. Because of these concerning findings, 
erythropoietin use has been altered from prior recom-
mendations, and current practice is to target a hemoglo-
bin concentration of 100–115 g/L.
12.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 12) The commonly accepted criteria for initiating 
patients on maintenance dialysis include the presence of 
uremic symptoms, the presence of hyperkalemia unrespon-
sive to conservative management, persistent extracellular 
volume expansion despite diuretics, acidosis refractory to 
medical therapy, bleeding diathesis, or a creatinine clearance 
or estimated GFR below 10 mL/min per 1.73 m2. BUN 
or creatinine values alone are inadequate to initiate dialysis.
13.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 12) Hypotension is the most common complica-
tion of hemodialysis. There are many potential etiologies 
of hypotension including antihypertensive use, excessive 
ultrafiltration, impaired vasoactive or autonomic responses, 
impaired cardiac reserve, and osmolar shifts. Less com-
mon causes include dialyzer reactions and high-output 
heart failure related to large arteriovenous (AV) fistulae. 
Manipulation of buffer for dialysate, alterations of timing 
of ultrafiltration, and midodrine may be used to improve 
hemodynamic tolerance to hemodialysis. Patients with 
unexpected or new hypotension during stable dialysis 
should also be evaluated for graft infection and bacteremia.
Review and Self-Assessment
307
14.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 12) The major complication of peritoneal dialysis 
therapy is peritonitis, though other complications include 
catheter-associated non-peritonitis infections, weight gain, 
metabolic derangements, and residual uremia. Peritonitis 
is usually a result from a failure of sterile technique during 
the exchange procedure. Transvisceral infection from the 
bowel is much less common. Because of the high dextrose 
used in dialysate, the environment is conducive for the 
development of bacterial infection. This can be diagnosed 
by the presence of more than 100/mm3 leukocytes with 
more than 50% polymorphonuclear cells on microscopy. 
Cloudy dialysate and abdominal pain are the most com-
mon symptoms. The most commonly isolated bacteria 
are skin flora such as Staphylococcus. Gram-negative organ-
isms, fungi, and mycobacteria have also been described. A 
recent Cochrane review (Wiggins KJ et al: Treatment for 
peritoneal dialysis-associated peritonitis. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD005284. 
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005284.pub2) concluded that 
intraperitoneal administration of antibiotics was more 
effective than intravenous administration, and that adjunc-
tive treatment with urokinase or peritoneal lavage offers 
no advantage. Intraperitoneal vancomycin is common ini-
tial empiric therapy.
15.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 12) The most common cause of mortality in 
patients with end-stage renal disease is cardiovascular dis-
ease (stroke and myocardial infarction). Although the 
underlying mechanisms driving this association are under 
active investigation, the shared risk factors of diabetes, 
hypertension, and dyslipidemia in addition to specific risks 
such as increased inflammation, hyperhomocysteinemia, 
anemia, and altered vascular function are thought to play 
an important role. Inefficient or inadequate dialysis is a risk 
for patients with difficult vascular access or poor adher-
ence to therapy. Patients receiving hemodialysis are at risk 
and often develop neurologic, hematologic, and infectious 
complications. Nevertheless, the biggest risk to survival in 
these patients is also the most common cause of death in the 
general population.
16.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 12) Although the dose is currently defined as a 
derivation of the fractional urea clearance, factors that are 
also important include patient size, residual kidney func-
tion, dietary protein intake, comorbid conditions, and the 
degree of anabolism/catabolism. The efficiency of dialysis 
depends on the counter-current flow rate of the dialysate. 
The number of hours/sessions prescribed for a patient is 
derived from the dialysis dose and is individualized.
17.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 12) The potassium concentration of dialysate is 
usually 2.5 meq/L but may be varied depending on the 
predialysis serum potassium. This patient may need a lower 
dialysate potassium concentration. Sodium modeling is an 
adjustment of the dialysate sodium that may lessen the 
incidence of hypotension at the end of a dialysis session. 
Aldosterone defects, if present, are not likely to play a role 
in this patient since his kidneys are not being perfused. 
Therefore, nephrectomy is not likely to control his potas-
sium. Similarly, since the patient is likely anuric, there is 
no efficacy in utilizing loop diuretics to effect kaluresis. 
This patient has no approved indications for implantation 
of a defibrillator.
18.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 13) Both deceased and living donor kidney trans-
plantations are highly successful. When compared to 
hemodialysis there are substantial cost-benefit advantages 
to individuals and society related to decreased morbidity, 
subsequent hospitalizations, and mortality. When first- 
degree relatives are donors, the graft survival rates 
are higher than those of deceased donors by 5–7% at 
1 year. This difference persists for up to 10 years. There are 
few reported complications for donors, particularly in the 
absence of hypertension or diabetes mellitus. For deceased 
donors, older age, the presence of preexisting renal dam-
age, or prolonged ischemia decreases the longevity of the 
graft.
19.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 15) There are a wide variety of diseases that can 
cause glomerular injury to the kidney, ranging from 
genetic conditions such as TRPC6 mutation causing 
cation channel dysfunction and associated focal segmen-
tal glomerulosclerosis to glomerular stress from systemic 
hypertension and/or diabetes mellitus. Inflammatory dis-
ease such as lupus nephritis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, and 
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis may also cause glo-
merular disease. Fanconi’s syndrome is a classic disease of 
tubular dysfunction with associated aminoaciduria, type 2 
renal tubular acidosis, and rickets, not glomerular disease.
20.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 15) The hallmark of glomerular renal disease is 
microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. IgA nephropa-
thy and sickle cell disease are the exception to this when 
gross hematuria may be present. Proteinuria may be heavy 
(>3 g/24 hours) or lower quantity with microalbumin-
uria (30–300 mg/24 hours) depending on the underlying 
disease or site of the immune lesion. Patients with post-
streptococcal glomerulonephritis often have pyuria, but 
cultures are not expected to be positive as the infection is 
usually skin or mucosal, and it is the immune reaction that 
drives the renal lesion.
21.	The answer is B. 
(Chap. 15) The characteristic pattern of focal (not all glom-
eruli) and segmental (not the entire glomerulus) glomerular 
Review and Self-Assessment
308
scarring is shown. The history and laboratory features are 
also consistent with this lesion: some associated hyperten-
sion, diminution in creatinine clearance, and a relatively 
inactive urine sediment. The “nephropathy of obesity” may 
be associated with this lesion secondary to hyperfiltration; 
this condition may be more likely to occur in obese patients 
with hypoxemia, obstructive sleep apnea, and right-sided 
heart failure. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis exhibits more 
prominent vascular changes and patchy, ischemic, totally 
sclerosed glomeruli. In addition, nephrosclerosis seldom 
is associated with nephrotic-range proteinuria. Minimal-
change disease usually is associated with symptomatic edema 
and normal-appearing glomeruli, as demonstrated on light 
microscopy. This patient’s presentation is consistent with 
that of membranous nephropathy, but the biopsy is not. 
With membranous glomerular nephritis all glomeruli are 
uniformly involved with subepithelial dense deposits. There 
are no features of crescentic glomerulonephritis present.
22.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 16) Autosomal polycystic kidney disease is a com-
mon genetic disorder accounting for up to 4% of end-stage 
renal disease cases in the United States. Although the most 
common manifestations of this condition are renal cysts, 
hematuria, urinary tract infection, and occasionally nephro-
lithiasis, there are several common extrarenal manifestations 
including intracranial aneurysm, aortic root and annulus dil-
atation, valvular heart disease including aortic regurgitation 
and mitral valve prolapse, hepatic cysts, hernias, and colonic 
diverticulae with a high propensity to perforate.
23.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) The patient presents with hypokalemia and 
hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis in the absence of 
hypertension. This is most commonly due to surrepti-
tious vomiting or diuretic abuse, but in this case the urine 
diuretic screen was negative. In patients with surreptitious 
vomiting, urine chloride levels are low to preserve intra-
vascular volume and this was not present in this patient. 
Those with Bartter’s syndrome and Gitelman’s syndrome 
have hypokalemia and hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis 
with inappropriately elevated urine chloride levels. Gitel-
man’s syndrome is less severe and presents later in life than 
Bartter’s, which is commonly found in childhood due to 
failure to thrive. Additionally, those with Gitelman’s syn-
drome have more prominent fatigue and muscle cramping. 
Most forms of Bartter’s syndrome also include associated 
hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria. Those with type 1 
pseudohypoaldosteronism have severe renal salt wasting 
and hyperkalemia. Liddle’s syndrome presents with appar-
ent aldosterone excess with severe hypertension, hypoka-
lemia, and metabolic alkalosis.
24.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 16) Patients with autosomal dominant polycystic 
kidney disease have a two- to fourfold increased risk of 
subarachnoid or cerebral hemorrhage compared to the 
general population. Hemorrhage tends to occur before age 
50 in patients with a family history of intracranial hemor-
rhage, patients with a personal history of intracranial hem-
orrhage, aneurysms larger than 10 mm, or patients with 
uncontrolled hypertension.
25.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 16) This patient has a normal anion gap metabolic 
acidosis (anion gap = 12). The calculated urine anion gap 
(Na+ + K+ − Cl−) is +3; thus the acidosis is unlikely to be 
due to gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss. In this patient the 
diagnosis is type I renal tubular acidosis, or distal RTA. 
This is a disorder in which the distal nephron does not 
lower pH normally. It is associated with a urine pH greater 
than 5.5, hypokalemia, and lack of bicarbonaturia. This 
condition may be associated with calcium phosphate 
stones and nephrocalcinosis. Type II RTA, or proximal 
RTA, includes a pH less than 5.5, hypokalemia, a posi-
tive urine anion gap, bicarbonaturia, hypophosphatemia, 
and hypercalciuria. This condition results from the defec-
tive resorption of bicarbonate. Type III RTA is rare and 
most commonly is seen in children. Type IV RTA is also 
referred to as hyperkalemic distal RTA. Hyporeninemic 
hypoaldosteronism is the most common cause of type IV 
RTA and is usually associated with diabetic nephropathy.
26.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 16) In any patient with hypokalemia the use of 
diuretics must be excluded. This patient has multiple 
warning signs for the use of agents to alter her weight, 
including her age, gender, and participation in competi-
tive sports. Her BMI is low, and the oral examination 
may suggest chronic vomiting. Chronic vomiting may be 
associated with a low urine chloride level. Once diuretic 
use and vomiting are excluded, the differential diagnosis 
of hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis includes magne-
sium deficiency, Liddle’s syndrome, Bartter’s syndrome, 
and Gitelman’s syndrome. Liddle’s syndrome is associated 
with hypertension and undetectable aldosterone and renin 
levels. It is a rare autosomal dominant disorder. Classic 
Bartter’s syndrome has a presentation similar to that of this 
patient. It may also include polyuria and nocturia because 
of hypokalemia-induced diabetes insipidus. Gitelman’s 
syndrome can be distinguished from Bartter’s syndrome 
by hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria.
27.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 17) Acute interstitial nephritis is a common cause of 
both acute and chronic kidney dysfunction. Many causes 
of interstitial nephritis are successfully treated with gluco-
corticoids with improved rates of long-term renal recovery 
including Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, adults with tubulointerstitial nephritis with 
uveitis, and idiopathic or other granulomatous interstitial 
nephritis. In patients with gradually progressive disease or 
Review and Self-Assessment
309
fibrosis on biopsy, the benefit is less clear. Additionally, 
allergic interstitial nephritis recovery may be accelerated 
with glucocorticoid therapy, but long-term renal recovery 
has not been proven to improve. Postinfectious interstitial 
nephritis has been associated with many bacterial and viral 
pathogens, but generally resolves with treatment of the 
underlying condition.
28.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) Allergic interstitial nephritis is a common cause 
of unexplained acute renal failure. This is generally a clini-
cal diagnosis with acute renal failure in the context of 
exposure to a potential offending agent (often NSAIDs, 
antibiotics, anticonvulsants, or proton pump inhibitors) 
and improvement in renal function with withdrawal of 
the agent. Peripheral blood eosinophilia supports the diag-
nosis, but is rarely found. Urine microscopy often shows 
white blood cell casts and hematuria, but these are not spe-
cific findings. Urine eosinophils are neither sensitive nor 
specific for allergic interstitial nephritis. A renal biopsy is 
generally not required but may show extensive tubuloin-
terstitial infiltration of white cells including eosinophils.
29.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 18) The patient presents with the classic pentad for 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), including 
fever, neurologic findings, renal failure, hemolytic anemia, 
and thrombocytopenia. This condition is more common 
in women than men, and in black than white patients, and 
may be triggered by a number of factors including preg-
nancy, infection, surgery, and pancreatitis. Several drugs 
have been implicated in the pathogenesis of TTP such as 
immunosuppressive agents, chemotherapeutic agents, and 
antiplatelet drugs. TTP may be differentiated from hemo-
lytic uremic syndrome (HUS) by the demographics, with 
HUS typically affecting young children and TTP being 
more common in middle-aged persons. Additionally, HUS 
is generally triggered by a diarrheal illness, which is much 
less common in TTP. On a molecular level, the metal-
loprotease ADAMTS13 specific for von Willebrand factor 
(vWF) is generally low if not absent in activity in TTP. 
The development of HUS is likely driven by bacterial tox-
ins such as shiga toxin or shiga-like toxin, often from E. coli 
0157:H7. Because TTP is associated with low protein lev-
els that may be driven by autoantibodies, plasma exchange 
serves the dual purpose of removing the aberrant antibody 
and repleting protein levels. With appropriate therapy, 
1-month mortality is approximately 20%. Untreated mor-
tality nears 90%, primarily from microvascular thrombosis 
and multiorgan failure.
30.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 18) Renal vein thrombosis occurs in 10–15% of 
patients with nephrotic syndrome accompanying membra-
nous glomerulopathy and oncologic disease. The clinical 
manifestations can be variable but may be characterized 
by fever, lumbar tenderness, leukocytosis, and hematuria. 
Magnetic resonance venography is the most sensitive and 
specific noninvasive form of imaging to make the diag-
nosis of renal vein thrombosis. Ultrasound with Doppler 
is operator dependent and therefore may be less sensitive. 
Contrast venography is the gold standard for diagnosis, 
but it exposes the patient to a more invasive procedure 
and contrast load. Nuclear medicine screening is not per-
formed to make this diagnosis.
31.	The answer is A. 
(Chap. 9) Calcium stones account for 75–85% of all kid-
ney stones. Although they are most commonly caused by 
idiopathic hypercalciuria, hypocitraturia, hyperuricosuria, 
and primary hyperparathyroidism are also causes. Uric acid 
stones are the next most common stone, followed by cys-
teine and struvite. Oxalic acid does not form stones with-
out complexing with a positive cation, such as calcium. 
Struvite stones are precipitated by bacterial infections, such 
as Proteus, that promote conversion of urea to ammonium 
and raise urinary pH. General management for calcium 
stones includes increasing consumption of water, low pro-
tein, and low calcium. If this is ineffective, thiazide diuret-
ics may be used.
32.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 21) Urinary tract obstruction is an important and 
potentially reversible cause of kidney failure. This patient 
is at risk for urinary obstruction based on her history of 
colon cancer. Although recent NSAID use may be con-
tributing to the rapidity of her kidney damage, routine 
dosing is less likely to cause acute kidney injury in the 
absence of preexisting renal dysfunction. Ultrasound of the 
kidneys is the best screening test for obstruction. Hydro-
ureter and/or hydronephrosis may be found and suggest 
the presence of obstruction. Although obstruction may be 
unilateral, it rarely causes clinically significant renal fail-
ure in the absence of underlying renal disease. CT of the 
abdomen is useful after ultrasound to evaluate the site and 
etiology of obstruction. Post-void residual is useful if func-
tional causes of obstruction are suspected, such as urinary 
retention. After the obstruction site is located, retrograde 
urography with stent placement may be indicated, but 
only after defining the presence or absence of obstruction.
33 and 34.  The answers are E and D, respectively. 
(Chap. 21) The patient has relief of recent urinary obstruc-
tion and is now making an inappropriately large amount of 
urine. This is likely due to postobstructive diuresis, which 
results from release of obstruction, increase in GFR over 
the course of days, decreased tubule pressure, and increased 
solute load per nephron, resulting in increased urine out-
put. Decreased medullary osmolarity is a feature of chronic 
obstruction and persistent obstruction. The patient has not 
had recent head trauma or neurosurgical procedure and is 
unlikely to have cerebral salt wasting. Increased activation 
Review and Self-Assessment
310
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is associated 
with chronic, unrelieved obstruction. Patients with posto-
bstructive diuresis are at risk for volume depletion with 
possible development of prerenal azotemia and resultant 
acute kidney injury, as well as electrolyte imbalance, par-
ticularly due to losses of Na, K, PO4, Mg, and free water. 
Erythrocytosis may be seen in patients with obstruction, 
but is a rare feature and is not associated with postobstruc-
tive diuresis. Systemic hypotension is more common than 
hypertension due to volume depletion.
35.	The answer is C. 
(Chap. 21) In acute urinary tract obstruction, pain is due 
to distention of the collecting system or renal capsule. 
Acutely, there is a compensatory increase in renal blood 
flow when kidney function is impaired by obstruction, 
which further exacerbates capsular stretch. Eventually, 
vasodilatory prostaglandins act to preserve renal function 
when glomerular filtration rate has decreased. Medul-
lary blood flow decreases as the pressure of the obstruc-
tion further inhibits the renal parenchyma from perfusing; 
however, the ensuing chronic renal destruction may occur 
without substantial pain. When an obstruction has been 
relieved, there is a postobstructive diuresis that is medi-
ated by relief of tubular pressure, increased solute load (per 
nephron), and natriuretic factors. There can be an extreme 
amount of diuresis, but this is not painful.
36.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 21) The level of obstruction is important when 
considering urinary tract obstruction. Bilateral hydrone-
phrosis and hydroureter suggest either a systemic process or 
mechanical obstruction at or below the level of the uretero- 
vesical junctions. While retroperitoneal fibrosis can cause 
such a picture, it is most common among middle-aged 
men. In patients of reproductive age, genital tract infec-
tions can cause meatal stenosis if left untreated or if infec-
tions are recurrent. Retroperitoneal lymphomas can cause 
bilateral hydroureter, as can more distal obstructions like 
phimosis. In the developing world, one may also consider 
schistosomiasis and genitourinary tuberculosis.
37.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 14) Ultimately, solid organ transplant patients are 
at highest risk for infection because of T-cell immuno-
deficiency from antirejection medicines. As a result, they 
are also at risk for reactivation of many of the viruses from 
the herpes virus family, most notably cytomegalovirus, 
varicella-zoster virus, and Epstein-Barr virus. However, 
immediately after transplant, these deficits have not yet 
developed in full. Neutropenia is not common after solid 
organ transplantation as in bone marrow transplantation. 
In fact, patients are most at risk of infections typical for all 
hospitalized patients, including wound infections, urinary 
tract infection, pneumonia, Clostridium difficile infection, and 
line-associated infection. Therefore, a standard evaluation 
of a febrile patient in the first weeks after a solid organ 
transplant should include a detailed physical examination, 
blood and urine cultures, urinalysis, chest radiography, and 
C. difficile stool antigen or toxin studies if warranted, in 
addition to a transplant-specific evaluation.
38.	The answer is E. 
(Chap. 14) The patient presents with symptoms sugges-
tive of infection in the middle period after transplantation 
(1–4 months). In patients with prior cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) exposure or receipt of CMV-positive organ trans-
plant, this is a period of time when CMV infection is most 
common. The patient presented here has classic signs of 
CMV disease with generalized symptoms in addition to 
dysfunction of her transplanted organ (kidney). Often 
bone marrow suppression is present, demonstrated here by 
lymphopenia. Because CMV infection is linked with graft 
dysfunction and rejection, prophylaxis is frequently used, 
including valganciclovir. Trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole 
is used for Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis, acyclovir gen-
erally is used for varicella-zoster virus prophylaxis, itracon-
azole may be considered in patients considered at risk for 
histoplasmosis reactivation, and isoniazid is used for indi-
viduals with recent purified protein derivative conversion 
or positive chest imaging and no prior treatment.
39.	The answer is D. 
(Chap. 22) Bladder cancer is the fourth most common can-
cer in men and the thirteenth most common cancer in 
women. Cigarette smoking has a strong association with 
bladder cancer, particularly in men. The increased risk per-
sists for at least 10 years after quitting. Bladder cancer is an 
infrequent cause of cancer deaths because most detected 
cases are superficial with an excellent prognosis. Most cases 
of bladder cancer come to medical attention by the pres-
ence of gross hematuria emanating from exophytic lesions. 
Microscopic hematuria is more likely caused by prostate 
cancer than bladder cancer. Cystoscopy under anesthe-
sia is indicated to evaluate for bladder cancer. In cases of 
superficial disease, bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is an 
effective adjuvant to decrease recurrence or treat unresect-
able superficial disease. In the United States, cystectomy is 
generally recommended for invasive disease. Even inva-
sive cancer with nodal involvement has a greater than 40% 
10-year survival after surgery and adjuvant therapy.
40 and 41.  The answers are C and E, respectively. 
(Chap. 22) The incidence of renal cell carcinoma contin-
ues to rise and is now nearly 58,000 cases annually in the 
United States, resulting in 13,000 deaths. The male-to-
female ratio is 2 to 1. Incidence peaks between the ages 
of 50 and 70 years, although this malignancy may be diag-
nosed at any age. Many environmental factors have been 
investigated as possible contributing causes; the strongest 
association is with cigarette smoking. Risk is also increased 
for patients who have acquired cystic disease of the kidney 
Review and Self-Assessment
311
associated with end-stage renal disease and for those with 
tuberous sclerosis. Most renal cell carcinomas are clear cell 
tumors (60%) with papillary and chromophobic tumors 
being less common. Clear cell tumors account for more than 
80% of patients who develop metastases. The classic triad 
of hematuria, flank pain, and a palpable mass is only pres-
ent in 10% to 20% of patients initially. Most cases currently 
are found as incidental findings on computed tomogra-
phy or ultrasonography done for different reasons. The 
increasing number of incidentally discovered low-stage 
tumors has contributed to an improved 5-year survival. 
The paraneoplastic phenomenon of erythrocytosis caused 
by increased production of erythropoietin is only found 
in 3% of cases; anemia caused by advanced disease is far 
more common. Stage 1 and 2 tumors are confined to the 
kidney and have a greater than 80% survival after radical 
nephrectomy. Stage 4 tumors with distant metastases have 
a 50-year survival of 10%. Renal cell carcinoma is notably 
resistant to traditional chemotherapeutic agents. Cytokine 
therapy with interleukin-2 or interferon-gamma produces 
regression in 10% to 20% of patients with metastatic dis-
ease. Recently, the advent of antiangiogenic medications 
has changed the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. 
Sunitinib was demonstrated to be superior to interferon-
gamma, and it (or sorafenib) is now first-line therapy for 
patients with advanced metastatic disease.
This page intentionally left blank 
Bold page number indicates the start of the main discussion of the topic; page numbers with “f” and “t” refer to figures and tables, respectively.
313
AAP (alanine aminopeptidase), in AKI, 117t
ABI (ankle-brachial index), 235
ACE. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Acetaminophen, 47
Acetazolamide
action of, 8
adverse effects of, 59
for metabolic alkalosis, 53
for salicylate-induced acidosis, 48
for uric acid nephrolithiasis, 93
for uric acid nephropathy, 93
Acetoacetate, 47
Acetohydroxamic acid, 101
N-Acetyl-β-(d)glucosaminidase (NAG), 117t
Acid-base disorders, 43
anion gap in, 45–46
approach to the patient, 45–46, 45t
in CKD, 18
mixed, 44–45, 45t
simple, 43–44
Acid-base homeostasis, 43
Acid-base nomogram, 43, 44f
Acromegaly, hypertension in, 236t, 241
Active transport, 6
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN), 205
allergic, 111, 205–206, 207f, 303, 309
azotemia in, 26
clinical features of, 23t, 40f, 112t, 113t, 206
corticosteroids for, 207f
in crystal deposition disorders, 209
diagnosis of, 23t, 112t, 113t, 206
etiology of, 206t, 308–309
granulomatous, 208
hyperkalemia in, 77
hypovolemia in, 59
idiopathic, 208
IgG4-related, 208
infection-associated, 209
in light chain cast nephropathy, 37f, 209–210, 
209f
in lymphomatous infiltration of the kidney, 210
mechanisms of, 14–15
in obstructive tubulopathies, 209
renal biopsy in, 40f
in Sjögren’s syndrome, 207
in SLE. See Lupus nephritis
treatment of, 207f
tubulointerstitial nephritis with uveitis,  
207–208, 208f
Acute kidney injury (AKI)
approach to the patient, 24f
clinical features of, 23t, 112t, 113–114
complications of, 116
bleeding, 119
cardiac, 119
hyperkalemia, 77, 119
hyperphosphatemia, 115, 119
hypervolemia, 119
hypocalcemia, 119
hyponatremia, 61, 119
hypovolemia, 59, 119
infections, 119
malnutrition, 119
uremia, 116
diagnosis of
biomarkers, 116, 117–118t
blood laboratory findings, 26t, 111, 112t, 
113, 115
history and physical examination, 113–114
imaging, 115
renal biopsy, 40f, 116
renal failure indices, 115–116
urine findings, 26t, 112t, 114–115, 114f
epidemiology of, 104
etiology and pathophysiology of, 299, 305
intrinsic, 26–27, 105f, 107, 107f, 112t
ischemia-associated, 26–27, 108–109, 108f, 
112t
nephrotoxin-associated, 26–27, 109–111, 
112t
postoperative, 299, 305
postrenal, 26, 105f, 111, 111f, 113t, 299, 305
prerenal azotemia, 25–26, 26t, 104–107, 
105f, 106f, 112t
sepsis-associated, 107–108, 112t
global considerations, 104
in malaria, 188
prevention of, 119
prognosis of, 122
in transplant recipient, 154
treatment of
in cirrhosis and hepatorenal syndrome, 120
dialysis indications and modalities, 121–122
intrinsic, 120–121, 120t
postrenal, 121
prerenal azotemia, 120
supportive measures, 121, 299–300, 305–306
Acute nephritic syndromes, 169
ANCA small vessel vasculitis, 174
antiglomerular basement membrane disease, 
36f, 172–173
clinical features of, 166, 167t
endocarditis-associated glomerulonephritis, 
170–171
immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, 29, 34f, 
173–174, 173f
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, 34f, 
175–176, 175f, 175t
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 33f, 
169–170, 170f
renal biopsy in, 32–36f
Acute pancreatitis
AKI in, 109
hypovolemia in, 59
Acute renal failure. See Acute kidney injury (AKI)
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN). See Acute kidney 
injury (AKI)
Acute urate nephropathy, 209
Acyclovir, 110, 159t
ADAMTS13, 186, 223, 281t, 309
Addison’s disease, hyperkalemia in, 76
Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) 
deficiency, 94, 94t
Adenocarcinoma, bladder, 272. See also Bladder 
cancer
Adenoma, aldosterone-producing, 72
Adenosine, as vasoconstrictor, 4
Adenosine deaminase deficiency, 94t
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency, 94, 94t
Adrenal cancer, aldosteronism in, 239
Adrenalectomy, for adenoma, 239
Adrenal hyperplasia, 72, 239
Adrenal insufficiency
hyperkalemia in, 76
hyponatremia in, 61
Adrenal tumor, 239
Adrenergic crisis, 250t, 251
Afferent arteriole, 3, 4f
AIN. See Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN)
AKI. See Acute kidney injury (AKI)
Alanine aminopeptidase (AAP), in AKI, 117t
Albumin
serum, in hypercalcemia, 82
urinary, 27–28, 125
Albuterol, for hyperkalemia, 79
Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism), 
hypertension and, 244, 244t
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
clinical features of, 47–48
hyponatremia in, 61
pathophysiology of, 47–48
treatment of, 48
Alcohol withdrawal syndrome, hypokalemia in, 71
Aldosterone
action of, 5f, 10, 58, 71–72
excess of, glucocorticoid-remediable, 240, 241t
plasma aldosterone to plasma renin activity, 239
in potassium regulation, 70
in renal disease progression, 19
in sodium regulation, 13
Aldosterone antagonists, for hypertension, 246t, 
247
Aldosterone escape, 13
Alemtuzumab, for immunosuppression, 153–154
ALG (antilymphocyte globulin), for 
immunosuppression, 153
Alkaline phosphatase (AP), in AKI, 117t
Alkali therapy
adverse effects of, 52
for uremic acidosis, 49
Allergic interstitial nephritis. See Acute interstitial 
nephritis (AIN), allergic
Allopurinol
adverse effects of, 91
drug interactions of, 91
for gout, 91
for uric acid nephrolithiasis, 93
for uric acid nephropathy, 93
α-Adrenergic antagonists
for hypertension, 246t, 247
for nephrolithiasis, 98
α-Adrenergic receptors, 230
Alport’s syndrome, 38f, 184
Aluminum toxicity, 49
Amiloride
action of, 5f, 10
adverse effects of, 77
for hypertension, 245, 246t
for Liddle’s syndrome, 73
for lithium-associated diabetes insipidus, 68, 69
INDEX
Index
314
Amino acid(s)
hyperkalemia and, 76
renal transport of, 5f, 9
ε-Aminocaproic acid, adverse effects of, 76
Aminoglycosides
hypokalemia and, 71
nephrotoxicity of, 110
Aminophylline, 55
Ammonia/ammonium, urinary, 50
Ammoniagenesis, 9, 18, 50, 267
Amphotericin B
for fungal infections in transplant recipient, 156
hypokalemia and, 71
nephrotoxicity of, 110
Amyloidosis
AA, 167t, 181–182
AL, 167t, 181–182
proteinuria in, 28
renal, 36f, 181–182
Analgesics, adverse effects of, 212, 212f
Anaphylactic reactions, to dialyzer, 145
Anaphylaxis, respiratory acidosis in, 54
ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies), in 
vasculitis, 167t, 174
Anemia
in AKI, 115, 121
in CKD, 133–134, 133t, 300, 306
after kidney transplantation, 157
lactic acidosis in, 47
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
in glomerular filtration rate regulation, 4, 4f
in sodium absorption, 13
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
adverse effects of, 245
acid-base disorders, 50
angioedema, 245
cough, 245
hyperkalemia, 77
renal, 25–26, 105, 106f, 128, 245
for hypertension, 245, 246t, 248
in CKD, 132, 138
for hyponatremia, 66
for renal artery stenosis, 237
for systemic sclerosis, 226
Angiotensin II
in blood pressure regulation, 231–232
in CKD, 15, 17, 19
in glomerular filtration rate regulation, 4, 4f, 
105
in sodium reabsorption, 13, 58
Angiotensinogen, 231–232
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
adverse effects of, 245
hyperkalemia, 77
renal, 25–26, 105, 106f, 128
for hypertension, 245, 246t, 248
in CKD, 132, 138
for renal artery stenosis, 237
Aniline dyes, 272
Anion gap, 45–46
Ankle-brachial index (ABI), 235
Anorexiants, adverse effects of, 236t
ANP. See Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
Antacids, adverse effects of, 52
Antegrade uropathy, 268
Antiglomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) 
disease, 36f, 172–173
Antilymphocyte globulin (ALG), for 
immunosuppression, 153
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), 
in vasculitis, 167t, 174
Antiphospholipid antibody(ies), testing for, 281t
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 226
Antiporter, 6
Anuria, 27
Anxiety, in respiratory acidosis, 53
Aortic dissection, treatment of, 250t
AP (alkaline phosphatase), in AKI, 117t
APOL1 gene, 19, 124
Apolipoprotein E, 185
APRT (adenine phosphoribosyltransferase) 
deficiency, 94, 94t
Aquaporins, 12, 57, 68, 267
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
action of, 5f, 12f
synthesis of, 56
in water balance regulation, 56f, 57, 58f
Aristolochic acid, 110, 212
Arsenic exposure/poisoning, reference range, 294t
Arterial blood gases
abnormal, approach to, 45
reference values, 285t
Arterial thrombosis, renal, 221–222, 222f
Arterionephrosclerosis, renal biopsy in, 39f
Arteriovenous fistula, for dialysis access, 143–144
Arthritis, crystal-induced. See Gout
Aspergillus infections, in transplant recipient, 160
Aspirin, nephropathy and, 212
Asthma, respiratory acidosis in, 54
Asymptomatic bacteriuria
clinical features of, 257, 259f
definition of, 254
diagnosis of, 261
treatment of, 263
Atenolol, for hypertension, 246t
Atheroembolism, renal, 113t, 220–221
Atherosclerosis
hypertension and, 233
renal, 185, 218–220, 219f
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
action of, 5f, 11, 12f
in hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, 77
Autonomic nervous system, in blood pressure 
regulation, 230–231
AVP. See Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
Azathioprine
action of, 153t
adverse effects of, 152, 153t, 154
drug interactions of, 152
for immunosuppression, 152, 153t
Azotemia, 22. See also Acute kidney injury (AKI)
approach to the patient, 24f, 25–27
glomerular filtration rate in, 22–25
Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), for bladder 
cancer, 274
Balkan nephropathy, 110, 212, 276
Bariatric surgery, hyperoxaluria following, 99
Baroreceptors, 12, 231
Baroreflex, 231
Bartter’s syndrome
alkalosis in, 52
antenatal, 72
classic, 72
clinical features of, 9, 72, 192t, 198–199, 308
diagnosis of, 199
differential diagnosis of, 52
genetic factors in, 7t, 9, 72, 192t, 197
hypokalemia in, 52, 72
pathogenesis of, 197–198, 198f
polyuria in, 30
with sensorineural deafness, 7t
subtypes of, 7t, 192t, 197
treatment of, 199
Basement membrane syndromes, 183
antiglomerular basement membrane disease, 
172–173
clinical features of, 166, 167t
nail-patella syndrome, 184–185
thin basement membrane disease, 29, 184
Basiliximab, 153
B-cell chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL)/small 
lymphocytic lymphoma, 210
Beer potomania, 62, 66
Bellini duct tumors, 276–277, 276t
Bence Jones proteins, 28, 296t
Benzbromarone, for gout, 91
β-Adrenergic agonists
adverse effects of, 71, 79
for hyperkalemia, 79
β-Adrenergic antagonists (beta blockers)
for hypertension, 246t, 247
for respiratory alkalosis, 55
β-Adrenergic receptors, 230
β-Lactam antibiotics, for cystitis, 262, 262t
Bevacizumab, nephrotoxicity of, 110
Bicarbonate, renal transport of, 5f, 8
Bicarbonate therapy
for hyperkalemia, 79
for hypovolemia, 60
for lactic acidosis, 47
for metabolic acidosis, 46
for renal tubular acidosis, 202
for salicylate intoxication, 48
for uremic acidosis, 49
for uric acid lithiasis, 100
Bicarbonaturia, 71
Biguanides, 47
Bioincompatibility, 143
Biologic therapy, for immunosuppression, 
153–154
Birth weight, low, 19
Bisphosphonates, for hypercalcemia, 83
BK virus infection, in transplant recipient, 156, 
159, 160
Bladder cancer, 272
adenocarcinoma, 272
chemotherapy-related, 272
clinical features of, 273–274
diagnosis of, 273–274
epidemiology of, 272, 310
invasive, 274–275, 276t
metastatic, 275, 276t
pathogenesis of, 272–273
pathology of, 272
prognosis of, 275t
risk factors for, 272
staging of, 272, 273–274, 273f
superficial, 274, 276t
transitional cell, 272
treatment of, 274–275, 276t, 310
Bladder neck obstruction, 111
Blastomyces spp. infections, transplant recipient, 159t
Bleeding
in AKI, 119
in CKD, 134
Blood, laboratory evaluation of, 281–284t
Blood pressure. See also Hypertension
age-related changes in, 228
goals for, 248–249
measurement of, 235, 243
regulation of
autonomic nervous system in, 230–231
intravascular volume in, 229–230
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in, 
231–232, 231f
vascular mechanisms, 233
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
in hyponatremia, 65
in hypovolemia, 60
in prerenal azotemia, 60
Index
315
gastrointestinal and nutritional abnormalities in, 
134–135
genetic factors in, 7–8t, 124
global considerations, 140, 141, 147
glomerular filtration rate in, 22, 124–125, 125t
hematologic abnormalities in
abnormal hemostasis, 134
anemia, 133–134
neuropathy in, 134
pathophysiology of, 123, 124f
nephron hyperfunction, 14
tubular function, 17
uremic syndrome, 126
urinary dilution and concentration, 16
in pregnancy, 135
progression of, 14
epithelial/endothelial-mesenchymal 
transition activation and, 16
glomerular proteinuria and, 15
mechanisms of, 14–17, 16f
modifiers influencing, 19, 19t
renal injury and, 14–17, 15f
response to nephron loss and, 17, 124f
risk factors for, 123–124
skin manifestations of, 135
in SLE. See Lupus nephritis
stage 5 (end-stage renal disease)
cardiovascular disease and, 145, 300, 306, 
307
hypertension in, 185. See also Hypertension
incidence of, 141
treatment of, 141–142. See also Hemodialysis; 
Kidney transplantation; Peritoneal 
dialysis
uremic syndrome in, 126
treatment of
antihypertensive therapy, 138
clinical action plan, 137, 137t
diabetic nephropathy. See Diabetic 
nephropathy
medication dose adjustment, 139
patient education, 140
preparation for renal replacement therapy, 
139–140. See also Hemodialysis; Kidney 
transplantation; Peritoneal dialysis
slowing disease progression, 138
Churg-Strauss syndrome, 175
Chvostek’s sign, 84
Cidofovir, 110
Cimetidine, action of, 8
Ciprofloxacin, for pyelonephritis, 262
Circulatory integrity, maintenance of, 57–59, 58f
Cirrhosis
AKI and, 106, 120
hepatorenal syndrome and, 106–107, 120
hyponatremia in, 62
Cisplatin
adverse effects of
electrolyte disturbances, 71
nephrotoxicity, 110
for bladder cancer, 275
CKD. See Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Claudication, intermittent, 235
Claudin 16, 200
CLCN5 gene, 9
CLDCN16 gene, 200
Clinical laboratory tests, reference values
cholesterol, 295t
clinical chemistry and immunology, 284–291t
hematology and coagulation, 281–284t
toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring, 
292–294t
urine analysis and renal function, 296–297t
vitamins and trace minerals, 294t
Catecholamine(s), in cardiovascular regulation, 
230–231
Catheter, for hemodialysis access, 143–144
Catheter-related urinary tract infections, 263–264
Cation-exchange resin, for hyperkalemia, 79
CCBs (calcium channel blockers), for 
hypertension, 138, 246t, 247
CD4+ T cells, in transplant rejection, 151, 152f
CD8+ T cells, in transplant rejection, 151, 152f
Central pontine myelinolysis, 64
Cerebral blood flow, autoregulation of, 234, 250
Cerebral edema, in hyponatremia, 63–64
Cerebral salt wasting, 62
Chelation therapy, for cystinuria, 203
Chinese herbal nephropathy, 110, 212
Chloramphenicol, therapeutic monitoring of, 292t
Chloride, renal transport of, 5f, 8
Chlornaphazine, 272
Chloroquine, for hypercalcemia, 83
Chlorpropamide, adverse effects of, 138
Chlorthalidone, for hypertension, 246t
Cholesterol embolism, in kidney, 39f, 185–186, 
220–221, 299, 305
Chondrocalcinosis, 72
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), 123
anemia in, 133–134, 133t, 300, 306
approach to the patient
establishment of diagnosis and etiology,  
137
history and physical examination, 135–136
imaging, 136
laboratory studies, 124–125, 125t, 136, 
296–297t
renal biopsy, 136
staging, 124–125, 300, 306
calcium and phosphate metabolism disorders in
bone manifestations of, 129
calciphylaxis, 129–130, 130f
cardiovascular manifestations of, 129
pathophysiology of, 18
secondary hyperparathyroidism, 129
treatment of, 130
cardiovascular disorders in
epidemiology of, 130, 131f
heart failure, 131
hypertension, 131–132, 236t. See also 
Hypertension
ischemic vascular disease, 130–131
left ventricular hypertrophy, 131–132
pericardial disease, 132
risk factors for, 145, 307
treatment of, 132–133
classification of, 123, 123t
clinical features of, 23t, 126, 127t
diagnosis of, 23t
diet restriction and, 19
endocrine-metabolic disturbances in, 135
epidemiology of, 125–126
etiology of, 125–126, 125t
diabetes mellitus. See Diabetic nephropathy
glomerulonephritis. See Glomerulonephritis
fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders in
acid-base regulation, 18
hypercalcemia, 129
hyperkalemia, 76–77, 128
hyperphosphatemia, 129
hypokalemia, 72, 128
hyponatremia, 62, 127
lactic acidosis, 47
metabolic acidosis, 18, 49, 128
potassium regulation, 18, 127–128
sodium regulation, 17, 126–127
treatment of, 49, 128
water regulation, 126–127
Blood volume, regulation of, 12–13, 12f
Body fluids, composition of, 56–59
Bohr effect, 55
Bone disease, in CKD, 129
Bowman’s capsule, 2
Brescia-Cimino fistula, 143
Broad casts, urinary, 30
Brown tumor, 129
Brush border, 6
Bufadienolide, 76
Bufo marinus (cane toad), 76
Bulimia nervosa, hypokalemia in, 72
Bumetanide, 52
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Burn patient
AKI in, 109
azotemia in, 25
hypocalcemia in, 84
hypovolemia in, 59
respiratory acidosis in, 54
Cadmium exposure/poisoning, 213, 294t
Caffeine, 71, 212
Calciphylaxis, 129–130, 130f
Calcitriol
for hypocalcemia, 84
for secondary hyperparathyroidism, 130
Calcium
in CKD, 18, 18f, 129–130
deficiency of. See Hypocalcemia
excess of. See Hypercalcemia
extracellular, 81, 81f
renal transport of, 5f, 9–10
supplements, for hypocalcemia, 84
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs), for 
hypertension, 138, 246t, 247
Calcium gluconate
for hyperkalemia, 79
for hypocalcemia, 84
Calcium oxalate deposition disease, 209
Calcium oxylate crystals, renal damage from,  
40f
Calcium-sensing receptors, 81, 99, 197
Calcium stones, renal, 95, 96t, 98–99, 309
Candesartan, for hypertension, 246t
Candida spp. infections, urinary, 264
Cane toad, 76
CAPD. See Continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis (CAPD)
Captopril
for hypertension, 246t
for hypertensive emergencies, 250
Captopril renography, 219, 220t
Carbenicillin, adverse effects of, 52, 71
Carbenoxolone, 72
Carbon dioxide, in arterial blood gases, 43
Carbonic anhydrase, 5f, 8
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 47
Carboplatin, 110
Carcinoma in situ, bladder, 272
Cardiac arrhythmias
in AKI, 119
in hyperkalemia, 77
hypertension and, 233
in hypokalemia, 73
in respiratory alkalosis, 55
Cardiogenic shock, azotemia in, 25
Cardiopulmonary bypass, AKI and, 109
l-Carnitine therapy, for cystinosis, 203
Caroli’s disease/syndrome, 194
Carrier, 6
cART (combination antiretroviral therapy), 47
Carvedilol, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Cast(s), urinary, 29–30, 41–42f
Index
316
Dextrose
for hypernatremia, 69
for hypokalemia, 79
for hypovolemia, 60
Diabetes insipidus (DI)
adipsic, 67
central
diagnosis of, 31
etiology of, 30f
hypovolemia in, 59
pathophysiology of, 31
polyuria in, 30–31
treatment of, 68, 69
gestational, 68
nephrogenic
clinical features of, 59, 68, 192t, 201
diagnosis of, 31, 201
etiology of, 30f, 67–68
genetic factors in, 8t, 67–68, 192t, 200–201
pathogenesis of, 198f, 201
treatment of, 68–69, 201
Diabetes mellitus (DM)
genitourinary disease in, 255
lactic acidosis in, 47
polyuria in, 30
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
hypokalemia in, 70–71
hyponatremia in, 61
pathophysiology of, 47
treatment of, 47
Diabetic nephropathy
epidemiology of, 180
microalbuminuria in, 180
natural history of, 180
pathogenesis of, 125, 163, 180
progression of, 15f, 180–181
renal biopsy in, 38f, 180
treatment of, 138–139, 181
in type 1 vs. type 2 diabetes mellitus, 180
Dialysate, 143
Dialysis. See Hemodialysis; Peritoneal dialysis
Dialysis access, 143–144
Dialyzer, 142–143, 145
Diarrhea
azotemia in, 25
hypernatremia in, 67
hypokalemia in, 71
hyponatremia in, 61
hypovolemia in, 59
metabolic acidosis in, 50, 60
osmotic, 67
secretory, 67
Diastolic blood pressure, 228, 235t
Diastolic dysfunction, 233–234
Diclofenac, for gout, 90
Dicloxacillin, adverse effects of, 71
Digoxin, adverse effects of
hyperkalemia, 76
hypokalemia, 73
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D
action of, 81, 81f
overproduction of, 81–82, 82t, 83
Dilated cardiomyopathy, in CKD, 131–132
Diltiazem, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Distal convoluted tubule
disorders involving, 7–8t
functions of, 5f, 9–10
Diuretics
abuse of, 72, 302, 308
action of, 59
adverse effects of
acid-base disorders, 52
hypokalemia, 72
hyponatremia, 61
Cryptococcus spp. infections, in transplant recipient, 
160
Crystal(s)
arthritis induced by, 89–90, 89t
renal tubular obstruction by, 209
urinary, pathogenesis of, 97
Cushing’s syndrome
hypertension in, 236t, 240
hypokalemia in, 72
CXCR1 receptor, 257
Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors, 
hyperkalemia and, 77
Cyclophosphamide, bladder cancer and, 272
Cyclosporine
action of, 152, 153t
adverse effects of, 153t
hyperkalemia, 77
hypertension, 236t
renal, 152, 154, 213
thrombocytopenia, 224
for immunosuppression, 152, 153t
therapeutic monitoring of, 292t
Cystatin C
in AKI, 117t
as indicator of glomerular filtration rate, 25
Cystectomy, for bladder cancer, 274–275, 276t
Cysteine-rich protein (CYR-61), 118t
Cystine stones, 95, 96t. See also Nephrolithiasis
Cystinosis, 193t, 203
Cystinuria
clinical features of, 193t, 202–203
diagnosis of, 100
genetic factors in, 7t, 9, 100–101, 193t, 203
non-type I, 7t, 101
pathophysiology of, 100–101, 198f
treatment of, 101, 203
type I, 7t, 101
Cystitis. See also Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
clinical features of, 254, 257
definition of, 254
diagnosis of, 258–260, 259f
epidemiology of, 254
hematuria in, 29
in men, 261
prognosis of, 264
recurrent, 264
risk factors for, 254
treatment of, 261–262, 262t
Cytokine therapy, for renal cell carcinoma,  
279
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections, in transplant 
recipient, 156, 158–159, 159t, 160, 310
Daclizumab, for immunosuppression, 153
Darbepoetin alfa, for anemia, 133
DASH diet, 244, 244t
Decongestants, adverse effects of, 236t
Dehydration, 11, 12f, 96t
Demeclocycline
adverse effects of, 66
for SIAD, 66
Dense deposit disease, 34f, 175
Dent’s disease
clinical features of, 9, 98, 193t, 203
genetic factors in, 7t, 9, 193t
pathophysiology of, 98
treatment of, 203
Desmopressin (DDAVP)
for central diabetes insipidus, 68, 69
for coagulation disorders in CKD, 134
for gestational diabetes insipidus, 68
for hypernatremia, 67, 69
for nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 68, 69
Developmental plasticity, 19
Clonidine
for hypertension, 246t
for hypertensive emergencies, 250
Clopidogrel, 224
Clusterin, 118t
CMV (cytomegalovirus infections), in transplant 
recipient, 156, 158–159, 159t, 160, 310
Coagulation disorders
in CKD, 134
laboratory evaluation of, 281–284t
Coarctation of the aorta, 240–241
Cobalamin (vitamin B12), reference range for, 
294t
Cocaine, hypertension and, 236t
Coccidioides spp. infections, in transplant recipient, 
159t
Cockcroft-Gault equation, 25, 125t
Cognitive dysfunction, hypertension-related,  
234
Colchicine
drug interactions of, 91
for gout, 90, 91
Collecting duct
disorders involving, 7–8t
functions of, 5f, 10–11
Colonic pseudo-obstruction, 71
Combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), 47
Computed tomography (CT)
adrenal, 239
in nephrolithiasis, 95
in polycystic kidney disease, 190f
Computed tomography (CT) angiography, renal, 
220t
Concentration gradient, 6
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypokalemia in, 
71
Conivaptan, for SIAD, 66
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis 
(CAPD)
for AKI, 122
for CKD, 145–146
for hyperkalemia, 80
peritonitis in, 146–147
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), for 
sleep apnea, 240
Continuous renal replacement therapy, for AKI, 
122
Contrast agents
adverse effects of
cutaneous, 135
nephropathy, 109–110, 112t, 115, 120t, 136, 
299, 305
diuresis from, 30
precautionary measures for, 136, 300, 306
Copper, reference values, 294t
Coronary artery disease (CAD), hypertension 
and, 233
Cotransporter, 6
Countercurrent multiplication, 9
C-reactive protein (CRP)
in CKD, 131
reference values, 286t
Creatine kinase, CK-MB, reference values, 286t
Creatinine
serum, 26t
in CKD, 19, 111
in hypovolemia, 60
reference values, 296t
as surrogate for glomerular filtration rate, 
24–25, 124–125, 125t
urine, 26t
Creatinine clearance, 24–25
Cryoprecipitate, for coagulation disorders,  
134
Index
317
Gemcitabine
adverse effects of, 224
for bladder cancer, 275
Gestational diabetes insipidus, 68
GFR. See Glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
Gitelman’s syndrome
clinical features of, 72, 192t, 199, 302, 308
diagnosis of, 72, 199
differential diagnosis of, 52
genetic factors in, 7t, 10, 72, 192t, 197–198
pathogenesis of, 97–198, 198f
treatment of, 199
Global health
acute and chronic interstitial nephritis, 214–215
AKI, 104
CKD, 140, 141, 147
Glomerular diseases
acute nephritic syndromes. See Acute nephritic 
syndromes
approach to the patient, 166–169, 166t
basement membrane syndromes. See Basement 
membrane syndromes
clinical syndromes, 166–168, 167–168t, 
307–308
glomerular-vascular syndromes, 166–168, 
167–168t, 185–186
hematuria in, 166, 307
infectious disease-associated syndromes, 168, 
168t, 187–188
microalbuminuria in, 166t
nephrotic syndromes. See Nephrotic syndromes
pathogenesis of, 162–165, 164f, 301, 307
progression of, 165
proteinuria in, 166, 166t, 307
pulmonary-renal syndromes, 166, 167t, 183
pyuria in, 166
renal biopsy in, 32–36f, 169
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
assessment of, 22–25, 124–125, 125t
in kidney disease, 22–25, 124–125
reduced, 24–25
regulation of, 3, 105, 106f
serum creatinine and, 24–25, 124–125, 125t
single nephron, 15
Glomerulonephritis
acute, 112t, 168
chronic, 168
classification of, 168
endocarditis-associated, 170–171
hematuria in, 29, 166
membranoproliferative, 34f, 175–176, 175f, 175t
membranous, 34f, 178–180, 179f, 179t
mesangioproliferative, 176
poststreptococcal, 33f, 169–170, 170f
renal biopsy in, 32–36f, 169
tubulointerstitial abnormalities with, 212
Glomerulosclerosis
age-related, 169
focal segmental, 32f, 33f, 177–178, 177t, 178f, 
186
Glomerulotubular balance, 6, 14, 17
Glomerulus (glomeruli)
anatomy of, 124f, 162, 162f
embryologic development of, 2
histology of, 124f
Glucocorticoid(s)
actions of, 153t
for acute interstitial nephritis, 207t
adverse effects of, 160
for gout, 90–91
for hypercalcemia, 83
for immunosuppression, 152, 153t
Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA), 
240, 241t
Etidronate, for hypercalcemia, 83
Everolimus, 279
Exercise, for hypertension, 244, 244t
Exosomal fetuin-A, 118t
Extended daily dialysis (EDD), 122
Extracellular blood volume, 12, 12f
Extracellular fluid, 56
Extracorporeal lithotripsy, 98
Extravascular space, 56
Fabry disease
carriers of, 182
clinical features of, 167t, 182
genetic factors in, 182
pathogenesis of, 182
renal biopsy in, 37f, 182
treatment of, 182–183
Facilitated diffusion, 6
Factor V, screening assays, 282t
Factor VII, screening assays, 282t
Factor VIII, screening assays, 282t
Fall(s), hyponatremia and, 64
Familial Mediterranean fever, amyloidosis in, 182
Fanconi-Bickel syndrome (type XI glycogenosis), 
7t
Fanconi syndrome, 50
Febuxostat
for gout, 91
for uric acid nephrolithiasis, 93
FeNA (fractional excretion of sodium), 115–116
Fetal programming, 19
Fibrillary-immunotactoid glomerulopathy, 182
Fibrocystin (polyductin), 194
Fibromuscular dysplasia, 237
Fluconazole, for urinary tract candidiasis, 264
Fluid therapy
for alcoholic ketoacidosis, 48
for diabetic ketoacidosis, 47
for hypercalcemia, 83
for hypovolemia, 60
for prerenal azotemia, 120
Fluoride, toxicity of, 76
Fluoroquinolones
for cystitis, 262t
for pyelonephritis, 262
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
clinical features of, 167t, 178
pathogenesis of, 162, 177–178, 178f, 186
renal biopsy in, 32f, 33f
secondary causes of, 177t
Folate, reference values, 294t
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), reference 
values, 287t
Fomepizole
for ethylene glycol poisoning, 49
for methanol poisoning, 49
Foscarnet, adverse effects of
electrolyte disturbances, 71
nephrotoxicity, 110
Fosfomycin, for urinary tract infections, 261, 262t
Foxglove, 76
Fractional excretion of sodium (FeNA), 115–116
Fracture(s), hyponatremia and, 64
Fungal infections, in transplant recipient, 156
Furosemide
adverse effects of, 52
for AKI, 121
for hypertension, 246t
for SIAD, 66
Gadolinium contrast, adverse effects of, 135
Gastric lavage, for salicylate-induced acidosis, 48
Gastrointestinal bleeding, azotemia in, 25
GC regimen, for bladder cancer, 275
hypovolemia, 59
renal, 25
for hyperkalemia, 80
for hypertension, 245, 246t
for hypertensive emergencies, 250t
for hypervolemia in AKI, 121
for rhabdomyolysis, 121
DKA. See Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
DM. See Diabetes mellitus (DM)
Dopamine, in cardiovascular regulation, 230–231
Doxazosin, for hypertension, 246t
Doxorubicin, for bladder cancer, 275
Drospirenone, 77
Drug(s), therapeutic monitoring, 292–294t
Dyspnea, in respiratory acidosis, 53
Eating disorders, hypokalemia in, 72
EBV (Epstein-Barr virus) infections, in transplant 
recipient, 159, 159t
Eclampsia, 250t
Ecstasy (MDMA), 64
EDD (extended daily dialysis), 122
Edema, 12f, 29
Effective osmoles, 11
Efferent arteriole, 3, 4f
Elderly, hypernatremia in, 67
Electrochemical potential, 6
Electrogenic transport, 6
Electroneutral transport, 6
Embryonic development, of kidney, 2, 3f, 14
Enalaprilat, for hypertensive emergencies, 250t
Encephalitis, hyponatremia in, 62
Encephalopathy
hypertensive, 234, 250, 250t
hyponatremic, 63–64
Endocarditis. See Infective endocarditis
Endothelin(s), in CKD, 17
Endothelin antagonists, for resistant hypertension, 
233
Endothelium, in modulation of vascular tone, 233
End-stage renal disease (ESRD). See Chronic 
kidney disease (CKD), stage 5
Ephedrine, 71
Epinephrine, in cardiovascular regulation, 
230–231
Epithelial cells/epithelium
high-resistance, 10
permeability of, 5–6
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition, 15, 16f
Eplerenone, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infections, in transplant 
recipient, 159, 159t
Erectile dysfunction, after cystectomy, 274
Erythropoietin therapy, for anemia in CKD, 133
Escherichia coli
adherence of, 257
antibiotic resistance in, 255–256
pili of, 257
virulence factors of, 257
Escherichia coli infections
intestinal, hemolytic-uremic syndrome and, 
223–224
urinary tract, 255–256
Esmolol, for hypertensive emergencies, 250t
Estrogen therapy, adverse effects of, 236t
Ethacrynic acid
adverse effects of, 52
for hypertension, 246t
Ethanol, for ethylene glycol poisoning, 49
Ethylene glycol poisoning
acidosis in, 46t, 48–49
AKI in, 110
diagnosis of, 115
treatment of, 49
Index
318
Hydralazine
adverse effects of, 248
for hypertension, 246t, 248
for hypertensive emergencies, 250t
Hydrocephalus, adipsic diabetes insipidus in, 67
Hydrochloric acid therapy, for metabolic alkalosis, 
53
Hydrochlorothiazide, for hypertension, 245,  
246t
Hydrocortisone, for hypercalcemia, 83
Hydronephrosis, 265
Hydroureter, 265
β-Hydroxybutyrate, 47
Hydroxychloroquine, for hypercalcemia, 83
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency
clinical features of, 241t, 242
genetic factors in, 241t
hypertension in, 236t
hypokalemia in, 71
pathophysiology of, 242f
17α-Hydroxylase deficiency
clinical features of, 241t, 242
genetics of, 241t
hypertension in, 236t, 242
hypokalemia in, 71
pathophysiology of, 242f
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2, 72
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, 
241t, 242, 242f
Hyperacute rejection, 151
Hyperaldosteronism
diagnosis of, 73, 238–239
familial, 72–73
genetic factors in, 73
glucocorticoid-remediable, 240, 241t
hyperreninemic, secondary, 52–53
hypertension in, 232, 236t, 238–239
hypokalemia in, 72–73
idiopathic, 72
metabolic acidosis in, 50
primary, 72–73, 232, 239–240
secondary, 72, 232
Hypercalcemia, 81
chronic, 214
in CKD, 129
clinical features of, 82
diagnosis of, 82–83
etiology of, 81–82, 82t
familial hypocalciuric, 81
hypertension in, 236t
after kidney transplantation, 157
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in, 68
renal effects of, 214
treatment of, 83
Hypercalciuria
hematuria and, 29
nephrolithiasis in, 96t, 98
treatment of, 96t, 98
Hypercapnia, 43
metabolic alkalosis following, 53
permissive, 54
in respiratory acidosis, 54
Hyperfiltration, glomerular, 14–17, 16f
Hyperfiltration hypothesis, 14–17, 16f
Hyperglycemia
β-agonists and, 79
hypernatremia in, 67
hyponatremia in, 65
in renal disease progression, 19
Hyperkalemia, 75
after adrenalectomy, 239
in AKI, 77, 119
in CKD, 128, 301, 307
clinical features of, 77
Hematuria, 27, 29
in AKI, 114
approach to the patient, 27f
in bladder cancer, 273
in glomerular disease, 166
gross, 29
isolated, 29
microscopic, 29
in polycystic kidney disease, 190
Hemiacidrin, 101
Hemodialysis
for AKI, 121–122
for CKD
access for, 143–144
cardiovascular disease and, 131
complications of, 144–145
components of, 142–143, 142f
dose of, 144, 301, 307
goals of, 144
patient education, 140
principles of, 142, 300, 306
for drug- and toxin-induced acidosis, 48
for hyperkalemia, 17, 80, 307
for metabolic alkalosis, 53
Hemoglobin, normal, 283–284t
Hemolytic anemia, microangiopathic, 223
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)
AKI in, 113t
clinical features of, 223–224
E. coli infections and, 186, 223–224
familial (atypical), 224
genetic factors in, 186, 224
after infectious diarrhea, 223–224
pathogenesis of, 186, 223–224
renal biopsy in, 39f, 186
vs. thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,  
224
treatment of, 186, 225
variants of, 224
Hemorrhage, hypovolemia in, 59
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 43
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
clinical features of, 167t
vs. IgA nephropathy, 173
Hensin, 11
Heparin, monitoring treatment with, 282t
Hepatic cysts, in polycystic kidney disease, 190, 
190f
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, chronic
after kidney transplantation, 157
renal involvement in, 187
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, chronic, 187
Herbal medicines/supplements, nephrotoxicity 
of, 212
Hereditary nephritis, 29
Hereditary xanthinuria, 94, 94t
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections, in 
transplant recipient, 159, 159t
HIV infection
hyperkalemia in, 76
kidney disease in, 32f, 187
renal complications of, 225
HPRT (hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase) 
deficiency, 87, 93–94, 94t
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), reference 
values, 288t
Human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) infection, in 
transplant recipient, 159
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex, in 
transplantation, 149, 150t
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections, in 
transplant recipient, 160
HUS. See Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)
Hyaline cast, 41f
Glucose
for hyperkalemia, 79
renal transport of, 5f, 8
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency, 282t
Glucose transporter 2 deficiency  
(Fanconi-Bickel syndrome), 7t
Glucose transporter 9, 88
γ-Glutamyl transpeptidase, 117t
α-Glutathione-S-transferase, in AKI, 117t
Glycogen storage diseases, hyperuricemia in, 87
Glycosuria
hyponatremia in, 62
isolated renal, 7t
Glycyrrhetinic acid, 72
Glycyrrhizinic acid, 72
Goodpasture’s syndrome
clinical features of, 172
diagnosis of, 172
pathogenesis of, 163
prognosis of, 173
treatment of, 173
Gordon’s syndrome (pseudohyperaldosteronism 
type II). See Pseudohypoaldosteronism 
type II (Gordon’s syndrome)
Gout, 89
arthritis and, 89–90
diagnosis of, 90, 90f
renal stone formation in, 96t
treatment of, 90–91
G protein(s), 230
GRA (glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism), 
240, 241t
Granular casts, 41f
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
clinical features of, 174
diagnosis of, 36f, 174
Granulomatous interstitial nephritis, 208
GTC regimen, for bladder cancer, 275
Guanfacine, for hypertension, 246t
Half-isotonic saline, for hypernatremia, 69
Half-normal saline, for hypovolemia, 60
Hallucinations, in respiratory acidosis, 53
Hamartin, 196
Hartnup disease
clinical features of, 193t, 203
genetic factors in, 203
pathophysiology of, 198f, 203
Headache
hypertensive, 242–243
in respiratory acidosis, 53
Head injury
hypokalemia in, 71
hyponatremia in, 62
respiratory acidosis in, 53
Heart failure (HF)
in CKD, 131
hypertension and, 233–234, 245, 248
hypokalemia in, 72
hyponatremia in, 62
Heart sounds, in hypertension, 243
Heavy metal poisoning, 212
HELLP syndrome, 226–227
Hemangioblastoma, spinal cord, renal cell 
carcinoma and, 276
Hemangioma, retinal, renal cell carcinoma and, 
276
Hematocrit, normal, 283t
Hematologic disease, reference values,  
281–284t
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, 
microangiopathic kidney injury 
following, 225, 225t
Index
319
clinical features of, 73
diagnosis of, 73, 74f
ECG in, 73
etiology of, 70, 70t
magnesium deficiency and, 72
nonrenal, 71
redistribution, 70–71
renal, 71–72
magnesium deficiency and, 72
pathophysiology of, 69–70
renal effects of, 214
treatment of, 73–75
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoKPP),  
71
Hypomagnesemia
hereditary, 192t, 199–200
with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis, 192t, 
199–200
hypocalcemia and, 7t, 10
hypokalemia and, 70, 71, 72, 73
in metabolic acidosis, 52
primary, 7t
with secondary hypocalcemia, 192t, 200
treatment of, 74
Hyponatremia, 12f, 60
in AKI, 61, 119
in CKD, 127
clinical features of, 63–64
diagnosis of, 61f, 64–65
etiology of, 64t
euvolemic, 62
exercise-associated, 64
hypervolemic, 62
hypovolemic, 61–62
after subarachnoid hemorrhage, 62
treatment of, 65–67
Hypoparathyroidism
etiology of, 83t
hypocalcemia and, 83t, 84
Hypotension
in hemodialysis, 144–145, 300, 306
in hypovolemia, 60
Hypothyroidism
hypertension in, 236t, 241
hyponatremia in, 62, 65
Hypotonicity, 12f
Hypouricemia, 7t, 93
Hypoventilation, respiratory acidosis in, 53–54
Hypovolemia, 59
in AKI, 119
diagnosis of, 60
etiology of, 59
treatment of, 60
Hypovolemic shock, 60
Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) 
deficiency, 87, 93–94, 94t
Ibuprofen, for gout, 90
Icodextrin, 146
Ifosfamide, adverse effects of
hypokalemia, 71
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 68
nephrotoxicity, 110
IgA nephropathy, 29, 34f, 173–174, 173f
Ileus, hypokalemia and, 72
Immune response/immune system, reference 
values for laboratory tests, 284–291t
Immunoglobulin(s), reference values, 288t
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, 29, 34f, 
173–174, 173f
Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related systemic 
disease, 208
Indomethacin, for gout, 90
Ineffective osmoles, 56
racial differences in complications of, 228
renal parenchymal disease and, 237–238
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in, 
231–232
resistant, 249
retinopathy in, 243
risk factors for, 228–229
secondary causes of, 236t
sleep apnea and, 240
sodium intake and, 228
stroke and, 234, 250
systolic with wide pulse pressure, 235
in thyroid disease, 241
treatment of
ACE inhibitors, 245, 246t, 248
aldosterone antagonists, 246t, 247
ARBs, 245, 246t, 248
beta blockers, 246t, 247
blood pressure goals in, 248–249
calcium channel blockers, 246t, 247
in CKD, 132, 138
comparisons of antihypertensives,  
247–248
diuretics, 245, 246t, 248
lifestyle modifications, 244, 244t
sympatholytics, 246t, 247
vasodilators, 246t, 247
white coat, 235
Hypertensive crisis, 249
Hypertensive emergency, 249–251, 250t
Hypertensive nephrosclerosis, 185, 223
Hypertensive urgency, 249
Hyperthyroidism
hypertension in, 236t, 241
hypokalemia in, 71
Hypertonicity, 12f
Hypertonic saline, for hyponatremia, 66–67
Hyperuricemia, 87
asymptomatic, 92–93
complications of, 91
etiology of
combined mechanism, 87t
decreased uric acid excretion, 87–89,  
87t
increased urate production, 87, 87t
evaluation of, 89
metabolic syndrome and, 92
renal effects of, 214
symptomatic, 93
treatment of, 93
Hyperuricosuria, 29, 96t, 99
Hyperventilation, in respiratory alkalosis, 55
Hypervolemia, in AKI, 119
Hypoalbuminemia, 29, 59
Hypoaldosteronism
hyperkalemia in, 76
hyponatremia in, 61
hyporeninemic
acid-base disorders in, 50
clinical features of, 76
etiology of, 75t
hyperkalemia in, 76
Hypocalcemia
in AKI, 119
clinical features of, 84
diagnosis of, 84
etiology of, 83–84, 83t
inherited disorders, 7t, 10
treatment of, 84
Hypocapnia, 43, 55
Hypocitraturia, 100
Hypokalemia, 70
in aldosteronism, 238–239
in CKD, 128
diagnosis of, 78–79, 78f
ECG in, 77, 79
etiology of, 70, 75t
excess potassium intake, 76
hypoaldosteronism, 76
medication-associated, 77
redistribution, 75t, 76
renal disease, 76–77
in HIV infection, 76
pathophysiology of, 69–70
treatment of, 79–80
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HyperKPP), 77
Hypernatremia, 67
clinical features of, 68
diagnosis of, 67f, 68–69
etiology of, 67–68
treatment of, 66t, 69
Hyperoxaluria, 96t, 99
Hyperparathyroidism
primary, nephrolithiasis in, 96t, 99
secondary
in CKD, 18, 129
etiology of, 83t
hypocalcemia and, 83t
Hyperphosphatemia
in AKI, 115, 119, 121
in CKD, 129
Hypertension, 228
in acromegaly, 241
in aldosteronism, 232, 239–240
approach to the patient, 242–244
clinical disorders of, 235
clinical features of, 23t
in coarctation of the aorta, 240–241
cognitive function and, 234
in Cushing’s syndrome, 240
definition of, 235, 235t
diagnosis of, 243–244, 244t
drug-induced, 236t
encephalopathy and, 234, 250, 250t
epidemiology of, 228–229
essential, 236
genetic factors in, 229, 241t
headache in, 242–243
heart failure and, 233–234, 248
heart sounds in, 243
history in, 242–243, 243t
hypokalemia and, 73, 238–239
intermittent claudication and, 235
intraglomerular, 19
isolated systolic, 235, 235t
after kidney transplantation, 157
laboratory evaluation of, 243–244, 244t
left ventricular hypertrophy and, 233–234
malignant. See Malignant hypertension
mechanisms of
autonomic nervous system, 230–231
intravascular volume, 229–230
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 
231–232, 231f
vascular, 233
in metabolic syndrome, 236–237
mineralocorticoid-mediated, 232
monogenic, 241–242, 241t, 242f
nephrosclerosis and, 39f, 185, 223
obesity and, 228
in paraganglioma, 240
pathologic consequences of, 233–235
peripheral artery disease and, 234–235
in pheochromocytoma, 231, 240
physical examination in, 243
postoperative, 250t
in pregnancy, 241t, 242
progression of, 131–132
Index
320
early, 158, 158t
late, 158t, 160
middle-period, 158–160, 158t
prophylactic regimens for, 159t
malignancy, 156
postoperative care, 154
rejection episode, 154
recipient selection, 139–140, 149
rejection in, 151, 152f
results of, 148, 149t, 301, 307
tissue typing and immunogenetics in, 150–151, 
150t, 152f
KIM-1 (kidney injury molecule-1), 116, 117t
Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules, 38f, 180
Korotkoff sounds, 243
Kussmaul respiration, 46
Labetalol
for hypertension, 246t, 247
for hypertensive emergencies, 250, 250t
Lactic acidosis
approach to the patient, 47
etiology of, 47
treatment of, 47, 52
Laxatives
abuse of, 71, 73
adverse effects of, 73
Lead poisoning
nephropathy in, 212
reference range for, 294t
Left ventricular dysfunction, treatment of, 250t
Left ventricular hypertrophy
in CKD, 131–132
hypertension and, 233
Legionella spp. infections, 158
Leprosy, renal involvement in, 188
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, 93–94, 96t, 100
Leukemia, azotemia in, 26
Leukocyte esterase test, 260
L-FABP (liver fatty acid–binding protein), 118t
Licorice, 72, 73
Liddle’s syndrome
clinical features of, 10, 53, 192t, 241t, 308
diagnosis of, 73
genetic factors in, 7t, 72, 192t, 241t
hypokalemia in, 72
pathophysiology of, 10, 200, 252
treatment of, 73, 200
Lifestyle modifications, for hypertension, 244, 244t
Light chain deposition disease, 37f, 181, 209–210, 
209f
Lipoprotein disorders, screening for, 295t
Lipoprotein glomerulopathy, 185
Lisinopril, for hypertension, 246t
Listeria monocytogenes infection, in transplant 
recipient, 160
Lithium, adverse effects of
acid-base disorders, 46
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 68
nephropathy, 212
Liver disease/failure
lactic acidosis in, 47
respiratory alkalosis in, 55
Liver fatty acid–binding protein (L-FABP), 118t
Loop diuretics
action of, 5f, 9, 61
adverse effects of, 71
for CKD, 127
for hyperkalemia, 80
for hyponatremia, 67
Loop of Henle, 3
disorders involving, 7t
functions of, 5f, 9
in water absorption/excretion, 57, 57f
Bartter’s syndrome. See Bartter’s syndrome
channels, transporters, and enzymes in, 198f
clinical features of, 192–193t
cystinosis, 193t, 203
cystinuria. See Cystinuria
Dent’s disease. See Dent’s disease
genetic factors in, 7–8t, 192–193t
Gitelman’s syndrome. See Gitelman’s 
syndrome
Hartnup disease, 193t, 198f, 203
Liddle’s syndrome. See Liddle’s syndrome
magnesium wasting disorders, 198f, 199–200
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. See Diabetes 
insipidus (DI), nephrogenic
nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate 
diuresis, 193t, 201
pseudohypoaldosteronism type I, 192t, 198f, 
199
pseudohypoaldosteronism type II. See 
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II 
(Gordon’s syndrome)
renal phosphate wasting, 204
renal tubular acidosis. See Renal tubular 
acidosis (RTA)
vitamin D–dependent rickets, 193t, 204
nephrolithiasis. See Nephrolithiasis
tubulointerstitial diseases, 205, 206t
acute interstitial nephritis. See Acute 
interstitial nephritis (AIN)
chronic, 210
analgesic nephropathy, 212
calcineurin-inhibitor nephropathy, 213
Chinese herbal and Balkan nephropathy, 
212
in glomerulonephritis, 212
heavy metal nephropathy, 213
lithium-associated nephropathy, 213
sickle cell nephropathy. See Sickle cell 
anemia
vesicoureteral reflux, 210, 211f
global considerations, 214–215
metabolic, 214
vascular
atheroembolic, 113t, 220–221
hypertension-related. See Hypertension
renal artery stenosis. See Renal artery stenosis
renal vein thrombosis, 227
thromboembolic, 221–222, 222f
thrombotic microangiopathic. See 
Thrombotic microangiopathy, renal
Kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), 116, 117t
Kidney stones. See Nephrolithiasis
Kidney transplantation
donor selection
after cardiac death, 149t
expanded criteria for, 148, 149t
living volunteer, 150–151
graft survival rates after, 148, 149t
HLA typing in, 149, 150t
hyperacute rejection in, 151
immunosuppressive treatment for
drugs, 152–153, 153t
lymphocyte antibodies, 153–154
mortality rates after, 148, 149t
presensitization in, 151
recipient management
algorithm for, 155f
anemia, 157
cardiovascular disease, 157
chronic lesions of graft, 156
hepatitis, 157
hypercalcemia, 157
hypertension, 157
infections, 155–156, 156t, 304, 310
Infective endocarditis
glomerulonephritis associated with, 170–171
subacute, 170–171
Inflammasome(s), diseases associated with, 182
Insulin
for hyperkalemia, 79
hypokalemia and, 70–71
Intact nephron hypothesis, 14
Intercalated cells, 5f, 10
Interferon-α (IFN-α), for renal cell carcinoma, 
279
Interleukin-2 (IL-2), antibodies to, 153
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) therapy, for renal cell 
carcinoma, 279
Interleukin-18 (IL-18), in AKI, 118t
Interstitial space, 56
Intestinal obstruction, lactic acidosis in, 47
Intracellular fluid, 56
Intraglomerular capillary pressure, 15
Intravascular space, 56
Intravascular volume, effect on blood pressure, 
229–230
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), adverse 
effects of, 76
Intravesical therapy, for bladder cancer, 274
Ischemic heart disease, CKD and, 130–131, 131f
Isoniazid
adverse effects of, 47
for tuberculosis prophylaxis in transplant 
recipient, 159t
Isopropyl alcohol poisoning, 48
Isosthenuria, 25
Isotonic saline
for hyponatremia, 65–66
for hypovolemia, 60
JC virus infection, in transplant recipient, 
159–160
Jugular venous pressure, in hypovolemia, 60
Juxtaglomerular apparatus, 4, 4f
Kaposi’s sarcoma, in transplant recipient, 159
Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome, 94
Ketoconazole
adverse effects of, 77
for hypercalcemia, 83
Kidney. See also Nephron(s)
concentrating mechanism of, 57f
disease/failure. See Kidney disease/failure
embryological development of, 2, 3f, 14
potassium absorption/excretion by, 5f, 9–10, 
69–70
renin-secreting tumors of, 232
sodium absorption/excretion by, 5f, 9–10, 
57–59, 58f
vasculature of, 3, 4f, 218–220, 219f, 220t
water absorption/excretion by, 5f, 6–12, 57, 
57f
Kidney disease/failure
acute. See Acute kidney injury (AKI)
atheroembolic, 220–221
chronic. See Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
glomerular diseases. See Glomerular diseases
inherited cystic diseases
medullary cystic kidney disease, 191t, 195
medullary sponge kidney, 97, 191t, 196, 197f
nephronophthisis, 191t, 195
polycystic kidney disease. See Polycystic 
kidney disease
renal glucosuria, 193t, 204
tuberous sclerosis. See Tuberous sclerosis
von Hippel-Lindau disease. See von Hippel-
Lindau disease
inherited tubular disorders
Index
321
mTOR inhibitors, 196
Muckle-Wells syndrome, 182
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), 
pheochromocytoma in, 241t
Multiple myeloma
proteinuria in, 28
renal biopsy in, 37f
renal complications of
AKI, 110, 112t
light chain cast nephropathy, 37f, 209–210, 
209f
Muscle cramps, in hemodialysis, 145
M-VAC regimen, for bladder cancer, 275
MWS (Muckle-Wells syndrome), 182
Mycobacterium marinum infection, in transplant 
recipient, 160
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, in transplant 
recipient, 159t, 160
Mycophenolate mofetil
action of, 153t
adverse effects of, 153t
for immunosuppression, 152, 153t
Myeloma kidney, 37f, 209, 209f
Myeloma light chains, 110, 209
MYH9 gene, 223
Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency, 94, 94t
Myocardial infarction (MI)
circadian variations in, 235
in kidney transplant recipients, 157
Myogenic reflex, 4, 105
Myoglobin, 110
N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase (NAG), 117t
Na+-Cl- cotransporter, thiazide-sensitive, 9–10, 
58
Nafamostat, adverse effects of, 77
Nafcillin, adverse effects of, 71
NAG (N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase), 117t
Nail-patella syndrome, 184–185
Na+-K+-2Cl- cotransporter, 9, 58, 72
Na+/K+-ATPase, 9, 57
Naproxen, for gout, 90
Nasogastric suctioning, metabolic alkalosis in,  
52
Neobladder, orthotopic, 275
Nephrectomy, for renal cell carcinoma, 277
Nephritis. See Acute interstitial nephritis 
(AIN); Acute kidney injury (AKI); 
Glomerulonephritis; Lupus nephritis; 
Pyelonephritis
Nephrocalcinosis, 97
Nephrogenesis, renal, 2–3, 3f
Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy, 135
Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate diuresis, 
193t, 201
Nephrolithiasis
calcium stones in, 95, 96t, 98–99, 303, 309
clinical features of, 23t, 95–97
cystine stones in, 95, 96t. See also Cystinuria
diagnosis of, 23t, 95, 96t, 98
in hypercalciuria, 96t, 98
in hyperoxaluria, 96t, 99
in hyperparathyroidism, 96t, 99
hyperuricemia and, 92
in hyperuricosuria, 96t, 99
in hypocitraturia, 96t, 100
inherited, 7t
pathogenesis of, 97
in renal tubular acidosis, 96t, 99
stone types in, 95, 96t
struvite stones in, 96t, 101
treatment of, 93, 96t, 97–98
uric acid stones in, 92, 95, 96t, 100
Nephrolithotomy, percutaneous, 98, 101
in mixed acid-base disorders, 44–45, 45t
non–anion gap, 49–51, 50t
treatment of, 46–47
Metabolic alkalosis, 51
acid-base nomogram, 44f
clinical features of, 52–53
compensatory responses in, 44t
differential diagnosis of, 51–52
drug-induced, 52
with ECFV contraction, 51t, 52
with ECFV expansion, 51t, 53
etiology of, 50, 51, 51t
gastrointestinal origins of, 51t, 52
hypokalemia in, 73
mixed acid-base disorders, 45t
in mixed acid-base disorders, 44–45
pathogenesis of, 49
pathophysiology of, 51
renal origins of, 51t, 52–53
treatment of, 53
Metabolic syndrome
hypertension in, 236–237
hyperuricemia/uric acid stones in, 92, 96t, 100
Metastatic disease
in bladder cancer, 275
in renal cell carcinoma, 277–279
Metformin, adverse effects of, 138
Methanol poisoning
acidosis in, 46t, 49
treatment of, 49
Methotrexate
for bladder cancer, 275
therapeutic monitoring of, 293t
α-Methyldopa, for hypertension, 246t
Methylprednisolone
for gout, 91
for transplant rejection, 152, 154
Methylxanthines, adverse effects of, 55
Metoprolol, for hypertension, 246t
MI. See Myocardial infarction (MI)
Microalbuminuria
in AKI, 117t
in CKD, 125
in diabetic nephropathy, 138–139, 180
in glomerular disease, 166t
in hypertension, 234
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, 223
α1-Microglobulin, 117t
β2-Microglobulin
in AKI, 117t
urinary, 28
Microscopic polyangiitis, 175
Midodrine, for hepatorenal syndrome, 120
Milk-alkali syndrome, 82
Mineral(s), reference ranges, 294t
Mineralocorticoid excess, hypovolemia in, 59
Minimal change disease
clinical features of, 167t, 177
pathogenesis of, 176–177, 176f
proteinuria in, 28, 114, 177
renal biopsy in, 32f, 176
treatment of, 177
Minoxidil
adverse effects of, 248
for hypertension, 246t
Mitomycin C
adverse effects of, 224
for bladder cancer, 275
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) 
equation, 25, 125t
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), adverse 
effects of, 236t
MRA (magnetic resonance angiography), renal, 
154, 220t
Losartan, for hypertension, 246t
Lung cancer, small cell, 62
Lung disease, respiratory acidosis in, 54
Lupus nephritis
classification of, 171–172, 171t
clinical features of, 171–172, 208
pathophysiology of, 171
renal biopsy in, 34f
treatment of, 172
Luteinizing hormone (LH), reference values, 289t
Lymphoid malignancies
azotemia in, 26
proteinuria in, 29
Lysinuric protein intolerance, 7t
Macroalbuminuria, 234
Macula densa, 4, 4f, 12f
Magnesium
deficiency of. See Hypomagnesemia
renal transport of, 9
renal tubular transport of, 5f
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), renal, 
154, 220t
Malaria
acidosis in, 47
renal failure in, 188
Malignant hypertension
cerebral effects, 234
global considerations, 223
pathophysiology of, 222–223
renal effects, 163, 185, 234
treatment of, 223, 249–251, 250t
Malnutrition
in AKI, 119, 121
in CKD, 134–135
Maltese cross formation, 42f
Mannitol, adverse effects of
hyperkalemia, 76
osmotic diuresis, 59, 67
solute diuresis, 30
MAOIs (monoamine oxidase inhibitors), adverse 
effects of, 236t
MDMA (ecstasy), 64
MDRD (Modification of Diet in Renal Disease) 
equation, 25, 125t
Mechanical ventilation
for respiratory acidosis, 54
respiratory acidosis in, 53–54
Medullary cystic kidney disease, 191t, 195
Medullary interstitium, hypertonic, 9
Medullary sponge kidney, 97, 191t, 196, 197f
Megestrol, adverse effects of, 76
Melamine, 110
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, 34f, 
175–176, 175f, 175t
Membranous glomerulonephritis, 34f, 178–180, 
179f, 179t
Meningitis, hyponatremia in, 62
Mercury exposure/poisoning, reference range, 
294t
Merkel cell carcinoma, in transplant recipient, 160
Mesangial cells, 2
Mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis, 176
Metabolic acidosis, 46
acid-base nomogram, 44f
in AKI, 119, 121
approach to the patient, 46
in CKD, 18, 128
clinical features of, 46, 308
compensatory responses in, 44t
drug- or toxin-induced, 48
etiology of, 50t
high–anion gap, 46t, 47
hyperkalemia in, 77
Index
322
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
action of, 81–82, 81f
deficiency of, 84
ectopic production of, 83
excess of, 81
suppression of, 81–82
Parenteral nutrition
hypercalcemia in, 82
metabolic alkalosis in, 52
Passive transport, 6
Pegloticase, for gout, 91
D-Penicillamine, for cystinuria, 101
Penicillin(s), adverse effects of
acid-base disorders, 52
hypokalemia, 71
Pentamidine
action of, 10
adverse effects of
acid-base disorders, 50
hyperkalemia, 77
hypovolemia, 59
nephrotoxicity, 110
Percutaneous interventions
nephrolithotomy, 98, 101
transluminal renal angioplasty, 238
Pericarditis
in AKI, 119
in CKD, 132–133
Periodic paralysis
hyperkalemic, 77
hypokalemic, 71
thyrotoxic, 71
Peripheral artery disease, hypertension and, 
234–235
Peripheral neuropathy, in CKD, 134
Peritoneal dialysis
access for, 146
complications of, 146–147, 300–301, 307
continuous ambulatory, 80, 122, 145–146
continuous cyclic, 146
dose for, 146
principles of, 145
solutions for, 146
Peritoneal equilibrium test, 146
Peritonitis
azotemia in, 25
hypovolemia in, 59
in peritoneal dialysis, 146–147, 300–301, 307
Peritubular capillaries, 4, 4f
pH, arterial, 43
Phenacetin, 212, 272, 276
Phenazopyridine, 262
Phenoxybenzamine, for hypertension, 246t
Phentolamine
for adrenergic crisis, 251
for hypertensive emergencies, 250t
Phenytoin, therapeutic monitoring of, 293t
Pheochromocytoma
clinical features of, 230, 240, 241t
genetic factors in, 240, 241t
hypertension in, 231, 236t, 240
renal cell carcinoma and, 276
Phosphate crystals, in urine, 42f
Phosphate/phosphorus
for calcium stone prevention, 100
in CKD, 18, 18f
renal tubular transport of, 5f
Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) synthetase, 
87, 88f, 94, 94t
Pioglitazone, adverse effects of, 138
Pivmecillinam, for cystitis, 262t
PKD-1 gene, 189
PKD-2 gene, 189
PKHD1 gene, 194
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, renal involvement 
in, 210
Nonoliguria, 27
Nonoxynol 9, 256
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
adverse effects of
hyperkalemia, 77
hypertension, 236t
renal, 25–26, 105, 106f, 139, 212, 300, 306
for Bartter’s syndrome, 199
for gout, 90–91
for nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 69
Norepinephrine, in cardiovascular regulation, 
230–231
Normal saline
for hyponatremia, 65–66
for hypovolemia, 60
Nutritional support/therapy
for CKD, 19
for hypertension, 244, 244t
OATs (organic anion transporters), 86, 86f
Obesity
hypertension and, 228
kidney disease and, 19, 301, 307–308
Obstructive sleep apnea
hypertension and, 236t, 240
treatment of, 240
Octreotide, for hepatorenal syndrome, 120
Ogilvie’s syndrome, 71
OKT3 therapy, for rejection, 154
Oliguria
in AKI, 114
definition of, 27
Organic acid(s), renal transport of, 8
Organic anion transporters (OATs), 86, 86f
Orthostatic hypotension
in hypovolemia, 60
in pheochromocytoma, 230
Orthostatic tachycardia, in hypovolemia, 60
Osler maneuver, 249
Osmolality, 56
Osmolar gap, 48
Osmolytes, 64
Osmoreceptors, 12f, 56
Osmoregulation, 11, 12f
Osmotic demyelination syndrome, 64
Osmotic diarrhea, 67
Osmotic diuresis, 59
Osmotic equilibrium, 56
Osmotic gradients, 8
Osteitis fibrosa cystica, 129
Osteomalacia, in CKD, 129
Osteopontin, 118t
Oxacillin, adverse effects of, 71
Oxalate crystals, urine, 47, 49
Oxalosis, renal biopsy in, 40f
Oxygen therapy
for hyponatremia, 67
for respiratory acidosis, 54
Paclitaxel, for bladder cancer, 275
Pamidronate, for hypercalcemia, 83
Pancreatitis
AKI in, 109
azotemia in, 25
hypocalcemia in, 84
Papillary necrosis, 211, 212t
Paracellular transport, 5
Paraganglioma, hypertension in, 240
Paraneoplastic syndromes, in renal cell carcinoma, 
277
Parasitic infections, renal involvement in, 188
Parathyroid disease, hypercalcemia in, 81–82
Nephron(s)
cortical, 3
functions of, 5
cellular transport, 5
in collecting duct, 5f, 10–11
in distal convoluted tubule, 5f, 9–10
epithelial solute transport, 5–6, 5f
in loop of Henle, 5f, 9
membrane transport, 5f, 6
paracellular transport, 5–6
in proximal tubule, 5f, 6, 8–9
hyperfunction in CKD, 14–15
inherited disorders involving, 7–8t
juxtamedullary, 3
loss of, response to, 17
Nephronophthisis, 191t, 195
Nephropathy
analgesic, 212, 212f
atherosclerotic, 185
Balkan, 212, 276
calcineurin-inhibitor, 154, 213
Chinese herbal, 212
contrast-induced, 112t, 136
diabetic. See Diabetic nephropathy
heavy metal, 213
HIV-associated, 32f, 187
hypercalcemic, 214
hypokalemic, 214
IgA, 29, 34f, 173–174, 173f
light chain cast, 37f, 209–210, 209f
lithium-associated, 213
phosphate, 41f, 209
radiation-induced, 225
reflux, 210, 211f
sickle cell, 211, 227
urate, 92, 209
uric acid. See Uric acid nephropathy
Nephrosclerosis, 185, 223, 237
Nephrosis, urate, 92
Nephrotic syndromes, 176
acid-base disorders in, 46
clinical features of, 23t, 29, 167t, 176
diabetic nephropathy. See Diabetic nephropathy
diagnosis of, 23t
in Fabry disease. See Fabry disease
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. See Focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis
glomerular deposition diseases, 181–182
hyponatremia in, 62
membranous glomerulonephritis, 178–180, 
179f, 179t
minimal change disease. See Minimal change 
disease
proteinuria in, 29
Nephroureterectomy, 276
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
clinical features of, 241t
genetic factors in, 241t
Neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin 
(NGAL), 116, 118t
Nicardipine, for hypertensive emergencies, 250, 
250t
Nifedipine, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Nitrofurantoin, for cystitis, 261, 262t
Nitroglycerin, for hypertensive emergencies, 250t
Nitroprusside
for adrenergic crisis, 251
for hypertensive emergencies, 250, 250t
therapeutic monitoring of, 293t
Nitroprusside ketone reaction, 48
Nocardia spp. infections, in transplant recipient, 160
Nocturia
in CKD, 17
in urinary tract obstruction, 267
Index
323
Rejection, in kidney transplantation, 151l
Renal amyloidosis, 36f, 181–182
Renal artery stenosis
azotemia in, 26
diagnosis of, 238
epidemiology of, 218
hyperaldosteronism and, 71
imaging, 220t
macrovascular, 218–220
microvascular, 218, 219f
pathophysiology of, 218–220, 219f
treatment of, 219–220, 221t, 238
Renal artery thrombosis, 27
Renal biopsy
in acute interstitial nephritis, 40f
in acute nephritic syndromes, 32–36f
in AKI, 40f, 116
in Alport’s syndrome, 38f, 184
in arterionephrosclerosis, 39f
in CKD, 136
in diabetic nephropathy, 38f, 167t, 180
in Fabry disease, 37f, 182
in glomerular diseases, 32–36f, 169
in glomerulonephritis, 32–36f, 169
in granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 36f, 174
in hemolytic-uremic syndrome, 39f, 186
in lupus nephritis, 34f
in minimal change disease, 32f, 176
in multiple myeloma, 37f
in oxalosis, 40f
in poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 169
in pyelonephritis, 40f
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC), 276
advanced disease, 277–279
chromophobic, 276, 276t
clear cell, 276–277, 276t, 311
clinical features of, 277
collecting duct tumors, 276, 276t
epidemiology of, 276, 310–311
genetic factors in, 276–277
localized tumors, 277
metastatic, 277–279
oncocytic, 276, 276t
papillary, 276, 276t
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 277
pathology of, 276–277, 276t
prognosis of, 277, 278f, 279
staging of, 277, 278f, 311
treatment of, 277–279, 311
tuberous sclerosis and, 196, 276
von Hippel-Lindau disease and, 196, 277
Renal colic, 267
Renal glucosuria, 193t, 204
Renal hypertrophy, compensatory, 14
Renal natriuretic peptide. See Atrial natriuretic 
peptide (ANP)
Renal osteodystrophy, 25
Renal pelvis, carcinoma of, 276
Renal phosphate wasting, 204
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
distal (type I)
clinical features of, 99, 201, 302, 308
diagnosis of, 201
genetic factors in, 193t, 201–202
hypokalemia in, 72
metabolic acidosis in, 50
nephrocalcinosis in, 97
nephrolithiasis in, 96t, 99
pathophysiology of, 99, 198f, 202
treatment of, 99, 202
in urinary tract obstruction, 267
inherited disorders, 7–8t
proximal (type II), 7t, 50, 193t, 198f, 202, 308
type 4, 18, 50
Principal cells, 5f, 10
Probenecid
action of, 8
for gout, 91
Progesterone, adverse effects of, 55
Propranolol
for hypertension, 246t
for hypokalemic paralysis, 71, 74
Propylene glycol poisoning, 46t, 47
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA), reference values, 
290t
Prostatitis, clinical features of, 257–258
Protein C, reference values, 283t
Protein S, reference values, 283t
Proteinuria, 27
in AKI, 114
approach to the patient, 27–29, 28f
in diabetic nephropathy, 180
in glomerular disease, 166, 166t
in kidney disease progression, 15, 16f
pathophysiology of, 28–29, 166
Proteus spp. infections, urinary tract, 101
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
adverse effects of, 206
for metabolic alkalosis, 53
Prototheca wickerhamii infection, in transplant 
recipient, 160
Proximal tubule
disorders involving, 7t
functions of, 5f, 6, 8–9
PRPP (phosphoribosylpyrophosphate) synthetase, 
87, 88f, 94, 94t
Pseudoephedrine, 71
Pseudohyperkalemia, 75t, 76
Pseudohypertension, 249
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I, 192t, 198f, 199
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (Gordon’s 
syndrome)
clinical features of, 192t, 200, 241t
genetic factors in, 8t, 10, 192t, 200, 241t
Pseudohypokalemia, 70
Pseudohyponatremia, 65
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
PTH-related peptide, 81–82
Pulse pressure, 228
Purine metabolism, 87, 88f
Purine metabolism disorders, 87, 93, 93–94, 94t
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency, 94t
Pyelonephritis
clinical features of, 257
definition of, 254
emphysematous, 257, 258f
epidemiology of, 255
prognosis of, 264
renal biopsy in, 40f
risk factors for, 255
treatment of, 262–263
xanthogranulomatous, 257, 258f
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
for alcohol-induced acidosis, 49
for hyperoxaluria, 100
reference range for, 294t
Pyroglutamic acidemia, 46t, 47
Pyuria, 29–30, 166
QT interval, prolonged, 84
Quinine, adverse effects of, 224
Radiation therapy, for bladder cancer, 274
Ramipril, for hypertension, 246t
Randall’s plaques, 97
RB (retinoblastoma) gene, in bladder cancer, 273
Red blood cell(s), urinary casts, 41f
Reflux nephropathy, 210, 211f
Plasma cell disorders
acid-base disorders in, 46
proteinuria in, 28
Plasma exchange
for hemolytic-uremic syndrome, 225
for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, 225
Plasma vasopressin, in diabetes insipidus, 31
Platelet(s), reference values, 283t
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PcP), in transplant 
recipient, 156, 159t, 160
Poisoning/drug overdose, laboratory evaluation 
in, 292–294t
Polarized cells, 5
Polychronotropism, 272
Polycystic kidney disease
autosomal dominant
clinical features of, 190–191, 190f, 241t, 
302, 308
diagnosis of, 190f, 191–193
etiology of, 189
genetic factors in, 189, 191t, 241t
intracranial hemorrhage in, 302, 308
pathogenesis of, 189
physical examination in, 243
treatment of, 194
autosomal recessive
clinical features of, 194
diagnosis of, 194
genetic factors in, 191t, 194
treatment of, 194
Polycystin-2, 189
Polydipsia, 30–31, 30f, 65
Polyuria, 30
approach to the patient, 30, 30f
etiology of, 30–31
pathophysiology of, 30–31
treatment of, 69
in urinary tract obstruction, 267
Postoperative period, AKI in, 108–109
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 33f,  
169–170, 170f
Potassium
depletion of, 52. See also Hypokalemia
excess intake of, 76. See also Hyperkalemia
renal transport of, 5f, 9–10
transport and reabsorption of, 57–59, 58f, 69–70
Potassium balance, 18, 69, 127–128
Potassium bicarbonate, for hypokalemia, 74
Potassium-binding resin, for hyperkalemia, 128
Potassium chloride, for hypokalemia, 74
Potassium citrate
for hypercalciuria, 98
for hyperoxaluria, 100
for hypokalemia, 74
for uric acid nephrolithiasis, 93
Potassium-sparing diuretics, 10, 128, 132
Prazosin, for hypertension, 246t
Prednisone
for gout, 90–91
for hypercalcemia, 83
for immunosuppression, 152
for transplant rejection, 152
Preeclampsia, treatment of, 250t
Pregnancy
asymptomatic bacteriuria in, 255
CKD in, 135
diabetes insipidus in, 68
HELLP syndrome in, 226–227
hypertension in, 241t, 252
respiratory alkalosis in, 55
UTIs in, 263
Prehypertension, 235, 235t, 244
Prerenal azotemia. See Acute kidney injury (AKI)
Pressure-natriuresis phenomenon, 230
Index
324
Staghorn calculi, 95. See also Nephrolithiasis
Staphylococcus aureus infections, in transplant 
recipient, 160
Staphylococcus saprophyticus infections, urinary tract, 
255
Status epilepticus, hyperuricemia and, 87
Stauffer syndrome, 277
Stent(s), for renal artery stenosis, 238
Streptococcal infections, glomerulonephritis 
following, 169–170, 170f
Stroke
circadian variations in, 235
hypertension and, 233, 250
hypokalemia and progression of, 73
treatment of, 250, 250t
Struvite stones, 95, 96t, 101, 309. See also 
Nephrolithiasis
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction 
(STEMI), 250t
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
hyponatremia in, 62
in polycystic kidney disease, 190
Succinylcholine, adverse effects of, 76
Sunitinib
adverse effects of, 279
for renal cell carcinoma, 279, 311
Supersaturation, 97
Sweat
potassium loss in, 71
sodium loss in, 59, 61
Sympatholytic agents, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Symporter, 6
Syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess 
(SAME), 72, 73
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD)
vs. cerebral salt wasting, 62
etiology of, 62, 63t
hyponatremia in, 62
nephrogenic, 192t, 201
subtypes of, 62
Syphilis, renal involvement in, 188
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), renal 
manifestations of. See Lupus nephritis
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
renal involvement in, 39f, 226
treatment of, 226
Systolic blood pressure, 228, 235t, 243
Tachyarrhythmias, in hypovolemia, 60
Tacrolimus
action of, 153t
adverse effects of, 153, 153t
hyperkalemia, 77
renal, 154, 213
thrombocytopenic purpura, 224
for immunosuppression, 153, 153t
therapeutic monitoring of, 293t
TAL transporters, 197
Tamm-Horsfall protein, 28, 110
TCAs (tricyclic antidepressants), adverse effects 
of, 236t
Temsirolimus, for renal cell carcinoma, 279
Terazosin, for hypertension, 246t
Terlipressin, for hepatorenal syndrome, 120
TGB-β (transforming growth factor-β), in CKD, 123
Theophylline
adverse effects of
acid-base disorders, 55
hypokalemia, 71
therapeutic monitoring of, 294t
Thiamine (vitamin B1)
deficiency of, 47
reference range, 294t
supplements, or alcohol-induced acidosis, 49
hypercalcemia in, 82
hypocalcemia in, 84
Schistosomiasis
bladder cancer and, 272
renal involvement in, 188
Scintigraphy, adrenal, 239
Secretory diarrhea, 67
Seizure(s), lactic acidosis in, 47
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
adverse effects of, 62
Selenium, reference range, 294t
Senior-Loken syndrome, 195
Sepsis/septic shock
AKI in, 107–108, 112t
hypovolemia in, 59
Septicemia, respiratory alkalosis in, 55
Shock, lactic acidosis in, 47
Shohl’s solution
for metabolic acidosis, 46
for uremic acidosis, 49
Short bowel syndrome, lactic acidosis in, 47
SIAD. See Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis 
(SIAD)
Sickle cell anemia
hyperkalemia in, 77
renal involvement in, 186, 211, 227
Sirolimus
action of, 153, 153t
adverse effects of, 153t
for immunosuppression, 153, 153t
therapeutic monitoring of, 293t
Sjögren’s syndrome, renal manifestations of, 207
SLC3A1 gene, 9
SLC7A9 gene, 9
Slow low-efficiency dialysis (SLED), 122
Smoking
bladder cancer and, 272
kidney disease and, 19
renal cell carcinoma and, 276
Smooth muscle, vascular, 233
Sodium
blood pressure regulation and, 230
excretion of, 57–59
fractional excretion of, 26t
intake, hypertension and, 228
renal transport of, 5f, 10–11, 230
transport and reabsorption of, 57–59, 58f
urine levels, in AKI, 26, 26t
Sodium balance
in CKD, 17, 126–127
hormonal regulation of, 12–13, 12f
Sodium bicarbonate
for hyperkalemia, 79
for rhabdomyolysis, 121
for uric acid nephrolithiasis, 93
for uric acid nephropathy, 93
Sodium/hydrogen exchanger isoform, 118t
Sodium modeling, in dialysis, 143
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate
adverse effects of, 79
for hyperkalemia, 79
Sodium restriction, for hypertension, 244, 244t
Solute diuresis, 30
Sorafenib, for renal cell carcinoma, 279
Spironolactone
action of, 10
adverse effects of, 132, 247
for hypertension, 232, 246t, 247
for syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess, 73
Squamous cell carcinoma, bladder, 272. See also 
Bladder cancer
SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), 
adverse effects of, 62
Renal tubular defects, 23t
Renal vein, renin ratio, 238
Renal vein thrombosis, 27, 227, 303, 309
Renin
plasma aldosterone to plasma renin activity, 239
renal vein renin ratio, 238
synthesis and secretion of, 231–232
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) system
in blood pressure regulation, 231–232, 231f
in CKD, 17
in glomerular filtration rate regulation, 4, 4f
in potassium regulation, 69
in sodium regulation, 13
Renovascular hypertension, 236t, 237–238
Reserpine, for hypertension, 246t
Respiratory acidosis, 53
acid-base nomogram, 44f
clinical features of, 53–54
compensatory responses in, 44t
drug-induced, 53
etiology of, 53–54, 54t
in mixed acid-base disorders, 44–45, 45t
treatment of, 54
Respiratory alkalosis, 55
acid-base nomogram, 44f
clinical features of, 55
compensatory responses in, 44t
etiology of, 54t, 55
in mixed acid-base disorders, 44–45, 45t
treatment of, 55
Respiratory failure, in hyponatremia, 64
Restless legs syndrome, 134
Retinitis pigmentosa, 195
Retinoblastoma (RB) gene, in bladder cancer, 
273
Retinol-binding protein, in AKI, 117t
Retinopathy, hypertensive, 243
Retrograde uropathy, 268
Rhabdomyolysis
AKI in, 25, 110, 112t, 121
hyperkalemia in, 76
hypernatremic, 68
hyperphosphatemia in, 115
hypocalcemia in, 84
hypokalemia and, 72
treatment of, 121
Rhizopus spp. infections, in transplant recipient, 
160
Riboflavin (vitamin B2), reference range, 294t
Rickets
hypophosphatemic, 7t
vitamin D–dependent
type I, 193t, 204
type II, 204
X-linked recessive hypophosphatemic, 193t
Ritodrine, adverse effects of, 71
Rituximab, for kidney transplant rejection, 154
ROMK channel, 69
Rosiglitazone, adverse effects of, 138
RTA. See Renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
Salicylates, adverse effects of, 46t, 48, 55
Salmonella spp. infections, in transplant recipient, 
160
Salt intake, hypertension and, 228
Salt therapy, for metabolic alkalosis, 53
Salt-wasting disorders
blood pressure in, 230
polyuria in, 30
SAME (syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess), 72, 73
Sarcoidosis
azotemia in, 26
diagnosis of, 41f
Index
325
Urinary tract
bleeding from, 29
congenital malformations of, 265, 266t
Urinary tract infections (UTIs), 254
approach to the patient, 257–258
clinical features of, 257–258, 258f
complicated, 254, 258, 263
definitions in, 254
diagnosis of
algorithm for, 259f
history in, 258–260
laboratory evaluation in, 260
in men, 263
in women, 258–260
differential diagnosis of, 260
E. coli, 255–256
epidemiology of, 254–255
etiology of, 255
genetic factors in, 256–257
health care–associated, 263–264
after kidney transplantation, 158
K. pneumoniae, 255
pathogenesis of, 256, 256f
in polycystic kidney disease, 190
prevention of, 264
prognosis of, 264
recurrent, 255
risk factors for, 254–255
S. saprophyticus, 255
treatment of
acute cystitis in women, 261–262, 262t
asymptomatic bacteriuria, 263
Candida infection, 264
catheter-associated, 263–264
complicated infection, 263
drug resistance and, 255–256
in men, 263
in pregnancy, 263
pyelonephritis, 262–263
Urinary tract obstruction
AKI and, 26, 111, 111f
clinical features of, 23t, 265–267
CT in, 268
diagnosis of, 23t, 267–268, 268f, 303, 309
diuresis following, 269, 309–310
etiology of, 265, 266t, 309, 310
hyperkalemia in, 77
hypovolemia in, 59
pathophysiology of, 265–267, 266t, 309
prognosis of, 269
treatment of, 269
Urine
abnormalities of, 23t, 27
casts, 41–42f
crystals, 42f
in CKD, 16, 17
osmolality of, 26t, 30, 65
pH of, 85
sodium loss in, 61, 65
volume of, 27, 30
Urine dipstick test, in urinary tract infections, 260
Urochromes, 135
Urokinase, 28
Uteroscopy, 98
Uveitis, with tubulointerstitial nephritis, 207–208
Vagina, microbiota of, 256
Valganciclovir, for CMV infections, 156, 159
Valproate/valproic acid, therapeutic monitoring 
of, 294t
Valrubicin, for bladder cancer, 274
Valsartan, for hypertension, 246t
Valvular heart disease, in polycystic kidney 
disease, 190
Triamcinolone acetonide, for gout, 91
Triamterene
action of, 10
for hypertension, 245, 246t
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), adverse effects 
of, 236t
Trimethoprim
action of, 8, 10
adverse effects of, 50, 59, 77
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)
for cystitis, 261, 262t
for PcP, 156
prophylactic, in transplant recipient, 158
for pyelonephritis, 262
Troponins, in CKD, 131
Trousseau’s sign, 84
TTKG (transtubular K+ concentration gradient), 
73, 78–79
TTP. See Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(TTP)
Tuberin, 196
Tuberous sclerosis
clinical features of, 191t, 196
genetic factors in, 191t, 196
pathogenesis of, 196
renal cell carcinoma and, 196, 276
Tubuloglomerular feedback, 4, 12f, 14, 17, 105
Tubulointerstitial disease. See Kidney disease/
failure, tubulointerstitial diseases
Tubulointerstitial nephritis with uveitis (TINU), 
207–208, 208f
Tumor lysis syndrome
AKI in, 110, 112t
clinical features of, 110
hyperkalemia in, 76
hyperphosphatemia in, 115
hypocalcemia in, 84
Tunneled catheters, 144
Tunnel infections, 147
Turner syndrome, coarctation of the aorta in, 240
Ultrafiltration, 143
UMOD gene, 195
Uniporter, 6
Unstable angina/non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction (UA/NSTEMI),  
250t
Upshaw-Schulman syndrome, 224
Urate nephropathy, hyperuricemia and, 92
Urate nephrosis, 92
Urate oxidase, for uric acid nephropathy, 93
Urate transporter 1 (URAT1), 86, 86f
Uremia, in AKI, 116, 121
Uremic acidosis, 49
Uremic fetor, 134
Uremic syndrome, 123, 126, 127t
Ureteral cancer, 276
Ureteric bud, 2, 3f, 14
Urethritis, hematuria in, 29
Uric acid
decreased excretion of, 87–89, 87t
increased production of, 87, 87t, 88f
metabolism of, 85–87, 85f, 86t
Uric acid crystals, urine, 42f
Uric acid nephropathy
hyperuricemia and, 92, 214
pathophysiology of, 214
treatment of, 93, 214
Uric acid stones, renal, 92, 95, 96t, 100, 309.  
See also Nephrolithiasis
Urinalysis, 27
in AKI, 114–115, 114f
atlas of, 41–42f
reference ranges, 296–297t
Thiazide diuretics
action of, 10
adverse effects of
hypokalemia, 71, 98
hyponatremia, 61–62, 65
for CKD, 127
for hypercalciuria, 98
for hyperkalemia, 80
for hypertension, 245
for nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 69, 201
Thin basement membrane disease, 29, 184
Third spacing, 59
Thirst
activation of, 57
in elderly, 67
mechanism of, 11, 12f
Thromboembolic disease, renal, 221–222, 222f
Thrombotic microangiopathy, renal, 223
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 226
in HELLP syndrome, 226–227
in hemolytic-uremic syndrome. See Hemolytic-
uremic syndrome (HUS)
HIV-related, 225
radiation nephropathy, 225
in sickle cell disease, 227
in systemic sclerosis, 39f, 226
in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.  
See Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
transplantation-associated, 225, 225t
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
clinical features of, 303, 309
drug-induced, 224
genetic factors in, 186
vs. hemolytic-uremic syndrome, 224
idiopathic, 224
pathology and pathogenesis of, 186, 224
renal involvement in, 27, 113t, 186
risk factors for, 186, 309
treatment of, 186, 225
Thyroid disorders. See Hyperthyroidism; 
Hypothyroidism
Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, 71
Ticarcillin, adverse effects of, 71
Tight junction, 5
TINU (tubulointerstitial nephritis with uveitis), 
207–208, 208f
Tiopronin, for cystinuria, 101
TNM staging, of bladder cancer, 272, 273f
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), in renal disease 
progression, 15
Tolvaptan, 66
Tonicity, 11, 12f
Topiramate, 99
Torsemide, 52
Total body water, 11, 12f
Toxoplasma gondii infection
nephrotic syndrome in, 188
in transplant recipient, 159t, 160
Tracheal intubation, for respiratory acidosis,  
54
Trade-off hypothesis, 14, 18f
“Tram tracks” sign, in membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis, 34f, 35f, 175
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), in CKD, 
123
Transfusion(s)
massive, hyperkalemia in, 76
metabolic alkalosis in, 53
Transplant elbow, 160
Transplant recipient. See Kidney transplantation, 
recipient management
Transtubular K+ concentration gradient (TTKG), 
73, 78–79
Index
326
renal cell carcinoma in, 196, 276
treatment of, 196
Warfarin, adverse effects of, 130, 130f
Water, renal transport of, 5f, 6–12
Water balance, 57
in CKD, 126–127
hormonal regulation of, 11–12, 12f
Water deprivation, for hyponatremia, 66
Water deprivation test, 31
Water intoxication, 11, 12f
Water loss
insensible, 59
renal, 30
Waxy casts, urinary, 30
Weakness, in hypokalemia, 71
Weight loss, for hypertension, 244t
White blood cells, urinary casts, 42f
White coat hypertension, 235
Xanthine oxidase deficiency, 94, 94t
Xanthinuria, 94, 94t
Yellow oleander, 76
Zoledronate (zoledronic acid), for hypercalcemia, 83
Vitamin B1. See Thiamine (vitamin B1)
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin), reference range, 294t
Vitamin B6. See Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin), reference range for, 
294t
Vitamin C, reference range, 294t
Vitamin D
deficiency of
diagnosis of, 84
hypocalcemia and, 84
treatment of, 84
reference range for, 294t
resistance, 84
supplements, for hypocalcemia, 84
Vitamin E, reference range, 294t
Vitamin K, reference range, 294t
Voiding cystourethrography, 268
Volume depletion, 12f
Vomiting
hypokalemia in, 73
hyponatremia in, 61
hypovolemia in, 59
metabolic alkalosis in, 52
von Hippel-Lindau disease
clinical features of, 191t, 241t
genetic factors in, 191t, 196, 241t
Vancomycin
adverse effects of, 110
therapeutic monitoring of, 294t
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infections, in 
transplant recipient, 159, 159t
Vasa recta, 3
Vascular compliance, 233
Vascular remodeling, 233
Vascular tone, 233
Vascular volume, effect on blood pressure, 
229–230
Vasculitis, ANCA in, 170
Vasodilation, endothelium-dependent, 233
Vasodilators, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Vasopressin antagonists (vaptans), for 
hyponatremia, 66
Verapamil, for hypertension, 246t, 247
Vesicoureteral reflux, 210, 211f
VHL gene, 196, 277
Villous adenoma, hypokalemia in, 71
Vinblastine, for bladder cancer, 275
Viral infections, renal involvement in, 187–188
Vitamin(s), reference ranges, 294t
Vitamin A
reference range, 294t
supplements, for bladder cancer prevention, 272
booksmedicos.org
